                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DOES SAVING ANTICIPATE
                    DECLINING LABOR INCOME?
                   AN ALTERNATIVE TEST OF THE
                  PERMANENT INCOME HYPOTHESIS




                         John Y. Campbell




                     Working Paper No. 1805




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1986




I am grateful to Alan Blinder and Angus Deaton for generously
supplying me with data, to Peter Rathjens for assistance with the
data, and to Ben Bernanke, Alan Blinder, Angus Deaton, Doug
Holtz-Eakin, Robert Shiller and participants in seminars at the
University of Pennsylvania and the NBER Summer Institute workshop
on intertemporal asset pricing for helpful comments. I am respon-
sible for any remaining errors. I acknowledge support from the
National Science Foundation, grant SES-851107O. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #180 5
                                                 January 1986




           Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Incorre?
        An Alternative Test of the Permanent Incone Hypothesis



                               ABSTPACI'




     The permanent income hypothesis implies that people save because they
rationally expect their labor income to decline; they save tifor a rainy
day". It follows that saving should be at least as good a predictor of de-
clines in labor income as any other forecast that can be constructed from
publicly available information.
     The paper tests this hitherto ignored implication of the permanent in-
come hypothesis, using quarterly aggregate data for the period 1953-84 in
the U.S. A vector autoregression for saving and changes in labor income is
used to generate an unrestricted forecast of declines in labor income. In
the VAR, saving Granger causes labor income changes as one would expect if
the PIH is true. The mean of the unrestricted forecast is far from the
mean of saving, but the dynamics of the two series are quite similar.
     The paper presents both formal test statistics and an informal evalua-
tion of the "fit" of the permanent income hypothesis. By contrast with
most of the recent literature, the results here are valid when income is
nonstationary.




                                                 John Y. Cairpbell
                                                           of Economics
                                                 Departrrent
                                                 Dickinson Hall
                                                 Princeton University
                                                 Princeton, NJ 08544
              DOES SAVING ANTICIPATE DECLINING LABOR INCOME?

          AN ALTERNATIVE TEST OF THE PERMANENT INCOME HYPOTHESIS


I.   Introduction


     This paper reexamines the relationship between consumption and income

at the aggregate level. The starting point for the paper is the old debate

between the view that consumption is determined by current income in the

manner suggested by Keynes, and the view that consumption is related to

permanent income and is therefore smooth and noncyclical. Recently this

debate has been revitalized by the application of rational expectations

econometric techniques. Hall [1978] argued that the permanent income hy-

pothesis (PIH) under rational expectations implies approximate unpredict-

ability of consumption changes, since agents never plan to change consump-

tion and in fact change it only in response to news about future income.

Hall's idea has generated a large literature including papers by Flavin

[1981], Hayashi [1982], Muellbauer [1983], Bernanke [1985] and others.

     The papers which follow from Hall typically work with changes in con-

sumption and pursue two objectives: to test the rational expectations ver-

sion of the permanent income hypothesis, and if it is statistically reject-

ed, to characterize its failure in economic terms. The implication which

Hall drew from the PIH model is tested by regressing consumption changes on

lagged variables and testing for joint significance of the coefficients.

The same coefficients are used to characterize the failure of the model;

Flavin [1981], for example, describes significant coefficients on lagged

income as "excess sensitivity" of consumption to income. A few papers,

such as Bernanke [1985], also try to interpret the contemporaneous correla-




                                   —1—
tions of consumption changes with econometric estimates of innovations in

other variables, but this line of research is hampered by the fact that the

true innovations (to agents) are unobservable.

     In this paper I propose a new way to test the PIH model and character-

ize any failure. I start from the obvious point that random walk behavior

of consumption is only one implication of the PIH. A series can follow an

approximate random walk and yet not be determined by permanent income.

Tests which use only the random walk implication may not be powerful and

will not yield a precise characterization of the strengths and weaknesses

of the PIH model.

     The approach taken here is to construct an econometric framework in

which an alternative restriction of the PIH can be imposed and tested.

This requires a tight specification of the model, and I use Flavin's [1981]

formulation. However the basic intuition of the approach is almost as sim-

ple as that of Hall. If the PIH model is true, consumption is proportional

to permanent income; it thus tends to be above current income when current

income is relatively low and expected to rise, and below current income

when current income is expected to fall. Put another way, dissaving antic-

ipates rising income and saving anticipates falling income. People save

"for a rainy day".

    There are some subtle problems which arise in applying this idea.

First, it is important to distinguish between labor income and capital in-

come. When saving occurs, wealth is increased and future capital income

rises, partially offsetting the anticipated decline in labor income; this

is the mechanism by which the random walk path of consumption is main-

tained. Sargent [1978] ignored the endogeneity of capital income and test-




                                  -2-
ed an incorrect PIH formulation in which consumption does not follow a ran-

dom walk, as pointed out by Flavin [1981]. In this paper I distinguish la-

bor and capital income throughout.

     Secondly, valid statistical tests must be carried out on stationary

time series. The existing literature has often detrended the data on in-

come and consumption before proceeding to formal analysis (e.g.            Flavin

[1981]). However Mankiw and Shapiro [1984], followed by Deaton [1985] and

Nelson [1985], have recently pointed out that this may lead to spurious

!cyclica1!? behavior of the residual and rejection of the PIH model if in

fact income and consumption are stationary in first differences. In this

paper I maintain the assumption that labor income is stationary in first

differences.    I derive the time series properties of consumption and capi-

tal income which are implied by the PIll given this behavior of labor in-

come. It turns out that under the PIll, a linear combination of income and

consumption -   which can be thought of as saving -   is   stationary in its lev-

el even though neither income nor consumption are stationary. This obser-

vation can be used, along with the theory of "cointegrated" vectors in time

series analysis, to help construct a test of the model.

     The organization of the paper is as follows. In the next section I

discuss the formal structure of the PIH model and show how tests of differ-

ent implications are related to one another. In section 3 I summarize the

theory of cointegrated processes and its implications for vector autore-

gressive (VAR) tests of the PIH.     I also relate VAR tests to single-equa-

tion regression tests. In section 4 I describe the data and empirical re-

sults. The last section contains some conclusions.




                                     -3-
 II. The Permanent Income Hypothesis


        The three variables which are studied in this paper are real capital

 income yk, real labor income             and real consumption c. All of these

variables are measured as per capita aggregates. I will assume that yl is

 stationary in first differences, and use the restrictions of the PIH to

characterize the time series behavior of capital income and consumption.

        Capital income is defined as the Hicksian income generated by real

nonhuman wealth W. That is, capital income is the amount that can be con-

sumed each period out of nonhuman wealth without changing its expected real

value next period. The first assumption of the PIH model is that the ex-

pected real interest rate is constant at some level r.        If this is the case

Ykt =   rW,   wealth evolves according to W.     (l+r)Wti +         - c1   +
and capital income obeys



(1) Ykt -
              (l+r)ykt1
                          -
                              r[yl   1c i] =


where the error term          represents unanticipated capital gains and is un-
forecastable at time t-l.        In general the conditional variance of     will

be positively related (perhaps proportional) to the level of wealth

     Following Flavin [1981], I write the PIH model of consumption behavior

as




 The timing convention in equation (1) is that of Flavin [1981].  In each
 period, the timing of events is as follows. A shock i to wealth occurs,
 and then wealth for the period is measured. Interest on wealth is paid
 over the period; labor earnings are received and consumption chosen at
 the end of the period. No interest is paid between the consumption deci-
 sion and next period's wealth shock.

                                        -4-
                                   eQ
(2)   c =   [ykt   +   (r/(l+r))         (1/(l+r)) Etylt+.]
                                                         1
                                   i=o



Consumption is proportional to the Hicksian income generated by nonhuman
and human wealth; I will assume that the proportionality factor Zl. Ykt

is the Hicksian income from nonhuman wealth, and the second term in square

brackets is the Hicksian income from human wealth or r times the present

discounted value of expected labor income. An error term representing

"transitory consumption" may also be added to equation (2); the error is

omitted for expositional simplicity at this stage.

      The microfoundations of equation (2) are questionable, as has been

pointed out by Hayashi [1982], King [1983], Deaton [1985] and others. Ig-

noring difficulties with aggregation, it is clear that (2) can describe an

agent's behavior only if the agent is effectively infinitely lived. Even

then, (2) is the solution of an optimization problem only under very spe-

cial circumstances. First, if the variance of                 in equation (1) is con-

stant and unrelated to the level of wealth, and an agent has quadratic

utility with subjective rate of time discount equal to the riskfree market

interest rate, then (2) holds with            equal to unity.2 Secondly, if there is

no uncertainty about future capital or labor income, and an agent has con-

stant relative risk aversion utility, then (2) holds with              determined by

the relation between subjective time preference and market interest rates.

      Although the conditions for (2) to hold exactly are very restrictive,

it has often been used because it is a simple and tractable representation

of the forward-looking consumption behavior postulated by the PIH, and be-




2 If the subjective rate of time discount does not equal the riskfree mar-
  ket interest rate, then consumption follows a random walk with drift, but
  (2) does not hold.

                                            -5-
    cause it may approximate optimal consumption behavior under more general

    conditions. For example, Hayashi [1982] argues that (2) is a good approxi-

    mation to the solution of the maximization problem with constant relative

    risk aversion utility under uncertainty.3 Accordingly I treat the system of

    equations (1) and (2) as representing the PIH model, while recognizing its

    limitations.

        Rather than work directly with equation (2), I transform it as fol-

    lows. Define St =           -       where      =         +   or total disposable in-
                                                       Ykt
come. s is a measure of saving when l, and for simplicity it will be

referred to as saving throughout the rest of this paper.4 Equation (2) can

be rearranged so that it becomes a statement about saving.




    (3) St    -(r/(l+r))E (1/(1+r)) [Etyl+.-ylJ




             il (1/(l+r)) EtAyl÷.


where A denotes a standard backward difference.

        Equation (3) says that saving equals the expected present value of fu-

ture declines in labor income; this is the ttsaving for a rainy dayt feature

of the PIH model. It follows from (3) that


(4) s - Aylt       -
                       (l+r)s       =
                                        -r
     Hayashi favors the use of a different discount rate in equations (1) and
     (2), which I do not allow here.
"
     Even when 1, note that the change in real wealth W = s +             i.
                                                                     Unantici-
     pated capital gains are distinguished from saving in this framework; thus
     in empirical work a time series similar to NIPA saving is more appropri-
     ate than series of the sort discussed by Auerbach [1984], which attempt
     to measure the change in real wealth.

                                             -6-
where      =   (l/(l+r))         (l/(l+r))[Etylt+.Etiylt+.]
                           i=O


is the unforecastable revision from t-l to t            in   the expected value of human

wealth.

     Equations (1) and (4) neatly summarize the testable implications of

the PIH.       If we define a vector x =                      ce]', the equations state
                                                 [ykt
that two linear combinations of x. and x1 are unforecastable at time t-l.

However recent empirical work on the PIH has focused not on (1) and (4),

but on a linear combination of these equations. Subtracting (4) from (1)

and using the definition of s, we obtain the familiar result that consump-

tion follows a first-order Markov process, or a random walk when l:


               [1+r(1-fl]c         =
(5) ct/IT -
                                       r[T+ct]
     Equation (5) is an appealing implication of the PIH. It captures the

"consumption-smoothing" aspect of the model, which is likely to be a fea-

ture of optimal behavior even in circumstances where (1) and (2) fail. It

can also be tested without having data on all elements of the vector x.

However there are a number of reasons why it is worth going beyond exclu-

sive concentration on (5).

     First, the unpredictability of quasi-differenced consumption is only

one implication of the PIH model. A data series might be unpredictable in

quasi-differences yet not obey the model. This is particularly serious

since many economic time series follow first-order univariate Markov pro-

cesses with roots close to unity; obvious examples are stock prices and



                                           —7—
 long-term interest rates. By contrast, unpredictability of the left hand

 side of (4) guarantees that (2) holds. More generally, since equations

 (1), (4) and (5) are linearly dependent, unpredictability of the left hand

 sides of any two of them establishes that a vector x. obeys the PIH model.5

     Some researchers have noted the partial nature of a test of equation

 (5). But the typical response has been to estimate proxies for       and

from univariate or other limited-information forecasting equations for in-

come, and then to regress quasi-differenced consumption on these proxies.

Since the proxies measure . and        with error, the coefficients in the

second-stage regression are biased downwards; however if they are found to

be larger than the theoretical value of r, this is taken as evidence

against the model. Bernanke [1985] applies the above method to a model of

durables and nondurables consumption. The use of equations (1) and (4) is

an attractive alternative to Bernanke's approach, since one can test equal-

ity (zero) restrictions rather than merely inequality restrictions.

     A second reason why it is unsatisfactory to concentrate solely on (5)

is that an important time series property of the vector x is not revealed

by this equation. Consider the version of the PIH with l. I have as-

sumed that yl is stationary in first differences. Then equations (1), (3)

and (5) imply that Ykt and c. are also stationary in first differences, but

s = [1   1 l]x is stationary in its level.    Intuitively, this is because

saving is a discounted present value of expected changes in labor income;

these changes are stationary, so saving is also.



 This statement assumes that there are no vtbubblestl  so that difference
 equations like (4) can be solved forward to give expressions like (3).
 Unpredictability is meant here in a population sense, and with respect to
 the whole information set available to agents. In practice the model can
 be tested only with a limited information set and a finite sample, so it
 can not be directly verified.

                                   -8-
         A vector with the property that a linear combination of its elements

is stationary in its level, even though the elements themselves are sta-

tionary only in differences, is an example of a cointegrated vector. Such

vectors have a number of useful properties which are discussed in the next

section. 6


         A third problem with exclusive use of (5) is that it is hard to as-

sess the economic significance of a statistical rejection of unforecast-

ability in (5). Equation (3), by contrast, can be used to characterize the

"fit" of the PIH model. One can compare the historical movements of saving

with those of an unrestricted forecast of declines in labor income. This

is better done with saving than consumption, because saving is stationary

while consumption is not.




6
    If <l, s is still stationary, but yk and c are explosive rather than
    stationary in first differences. x no longer satisfies the formal defi-
    nition of cointegration, but has many of the same properties. Both cases
    are analyzed in the next section.

                                     -9-
 III. Cointegration and Vector Autoregressions


      In this section I summarize the theory of cointegrated processes, and

 show how it applies to the PIH model.         I devote most attention to the PIH

with l, discussing the case <l at the end of the section.


Definition (Granger and Engle [1985]). A vector x is said to be cointe-

grated of order d, b, denoted x CI(d,b), if (i) all components of           x are
integrated of order d (stationary in dtth differences), and (ii) there ex-

ists at least one vector a       such that z =               is integrated of order
                                                      atxt
d-b, b>O.


     As noted at the end of the previous section, if the PIH holds with l

and changes in labor income are stationary, then consumption, capital and

labor income are CI(1,1).    Variables in a CI(1,l) vector share a common

stochastic trend (a unit root), while diverging from one another in the

short run (the divergence is stationary). This sort of behavior has been

postulated for consumption and income by Davidson, Hendry, Srba and Yeo

[1978], Davidson and Hendry [1981], and Granger and Engle [1985]. However

these authors thought of cointegration as arising from disequilibrium ad-

justment of consumption to income, and used the idea to estimate relatively

unrestricted consumption functions rather than to test the tight restric-

tions of the PIH.

     Cointegrated systems have two important and unusual properties. These

concern the estimation of unknown elements of the vector a, and the exis-

tence of vector time series representations for the cointegrated variables.

Both properties turn out to be important in the context of the PIH.




                                  -   10   -
     The vector a is called the cointegrating vector; in the present exam-

pie it is unique up to a scalar normalization, and is proportional to [1 1

-1]'. Stock [1984] proves that if there is a single unknown element of a,

a variety of methods provide estimates with a standard error which goes to

zero at a rate proportional to the sample size T (rather than /T as in or-

dinary cases). The reason for this is that asymptotically all linear com-

binations of the elements of x other than a'x have infinite variance.

     The practical implication is that an unknown element of a may be esti-

mated in a first-stage regression and then treated as known in second-stage

procedures, whose asymptotic standard errors will still be correct. As the

PIH is stated above, if Z is known to equal 1 all elements of a are known a

priori. However in one of the empirical applications of section 4 I will

use data only on a subset of consumption c*t which is assumed to be a con-

stant fraction of c: c =               The scale factor X must be estimated and

Stock's theorem enables this to be done straightforwardly. It seems likely

that Stock's theorem can also be extended to cover the case where Z is un-

known, as discussed further below.

    The second important property of cointegrating vectors arises when we

consider a vector autoregressive (VAR) test of the PIH. An appealing way

to evaluate the PIH is to set up a VAR, using stationary variables, and

then to test cross-equation restrictions on the coefficients. Because

is cointegrated, the choice of stationary variables is critical. The most

obvious choice,      =          Ay AcJ', is a poor one for two reasons.
                         [Ayk
First, the full set of restrictions of the PIH cannot be imposed on

since the PIH has implications for the level of c, as well as its change.

Even more seriously, the cointegration of x implies that no invertible




                                   —   11 —
 vector moving average (VMA) representation, and therefore no finite VAR

 representation, exists for                     The reason is that if there were an inver-

 tible VMA representation, no linear combination of x could be stationary.

         More formally, write              =             =                            •••• Invertibility
                                                K(L)             + K1Et     1
                                                                                 +

requires that all roots of K(z) lie outside the unit circle, so K(l) =                                 I   +

K1
     +    ...   must be nonsingular. The variance-covariance matrix of
                                                                                                 E1,
must also be nonsingular. Now if the variance of a'x exists, it will be

given by

                        00

Var(cx'xt )     =       Z                                    I                  ...
                    .
                    1=0
                                11
                             a'C.QC. 'cx        where C. =
                                                         1
                                                                 + K
                                                                    1
                                                                        +             + K.,.
                                                                                         1


Since     the limit of C. as i-*oo         is   K(l), the terms in the summation above ap-

proach a nonzero limit and the variance of a'x will not be finite.

         The importance of the above discussion is that if an economic theory

imposes cointegration on a set of nonstationary variables, simple first

differencing of all the variables does not lead to a well-behaved system

for statistical modelling. This point is discussed further by Campbell and

Shiller [1985] in the context of the term structure of interest rates and

the work of Sargent [1979]. Fortunately, there is a simple solution to the

difficulty which is to include cx'x in a VAR along with a subset of the el-

ements of                    An equation which relates the change in an element of                x to
its own lags and lags of a'x is called an error-correction model for that

element of x.

     Error-correction models have been estimated for consumption by David-

son et al. [1978], Davidson and Hendry [1981] and Granger and Engle [1985].

Their equations predict changes in consumption using lagged changes in in-

come and consumption, and lagged deviations of consumption from income




                                                - 12 -
(roughly, lagged saving). Such a specification is motivated by a disequi-

librium view of consumption behavior. The PIH, by contrast, implies that

all coefficients should be zero in an equation predicting consumption

change; the nontrivial error-correction equation describes labor income

rather than consumption.

      The above analysis suggests the use of a VAR with s and Ayl includ-

ed. This system is well behaved in general, and all the restrictions of

equation (3) can be imposed on it. I now go on to discuss the implications

of the PIH for such a VAR.

      First consider estimating



                 =     a(L)                                    +
(6)                              b(L)       1t-l                        ult

            St         c(L)      d(L)         5t-l                      u2


where the polynomials in the lag operator a(L), b(L), c(L) and d(L) are all

of order p. (6) can be stacked into a first-order system



(7)                           l ....
                                        a   b1 .... b               1t-l         +
                                                                                     lt
                                   1                                                 0
       4t-p+l                                                        at-p
        s                     c .... c d ....d                      s
                                                                        t-l
                                                                                     u
        .                      1
                                      p 11    p                                      02t


                                                     1                               0
        5t-p+1                                                      5t-p



which can be written more succinctly as                  =
                                                             Az_1   +
                                                                        v.    The matrix A is

called the companion matrix of the VAR. For all i,



                                        - 13 -
E[zt+jH] =


where Ht is the information set {z,z1                        ).    I   assume that Ht is a sub-

set of agents' information set             thus the VAR projects onto a limited in-

formation set.

        It is straightforward to prove that under the PIH, s. must Granger

cause Ayl unless s is itself an exact linear function of current and

lagged                For suppose that s. does not Granger cause Aylt.                    Then

E{Aylt+jHt] =         E[Aylt÷.jAyl,              ..]   for    all i. We know from (3) that



E[ -    X
            (l/(l+r))Ayl. HtI             E[sIHJ


since       is a subset of I. Thus if s does not Granger cause

E[stjHt] =      E{stAyl,                         But s =                    so s is an exact
                             Ayltl, ...].                         E[StIH]
linear function of current and lagged Aylt.

       The intuitive explanation for this result is that s is an optimal

forecast of future declines in labor income, conditional on agents' full

information set. s will therefore have incremental explanatory power for

future labor income if agents have information useful for forecasting labor

income beyond the history of that variable. If agents do not have such in-

formation, they form s as an exact linear function of current and lagged

labor income.

       Equation (3) can be projected onto the information set H, and written

as a set of restrictions on the VAR companion matrix A:


                 -
                 Z
                               i      I
(8) g' =    —
                      (l/(l+r)) h'A
                i=l




                                          - 14   -
where g' and h' are row vectors with 2p elements, all of which are zero

except for the p+l'st element of g' and the 1st element of ht.

       The restrictions of equation (8) appear to be highly nonlinear cross-

equation restrictions of the type described by Hansen and Sargent [1981] as

the tthallmarkfl of rational expectations models. However it turns out that

equation (8) can be simplified so that its restrictions are linear and eas-

ily interpreted. The infinite sum on the right hand side of (8) is just



-h'(l/(l+r))A [I-(l/(l+r))A],

and postmultiplying (8) by [I-(1/(1+r))A], we obtain



(9) gt[I-(1/(1+r))A} =         -ht(l/(1+r))A


       Using the structure of the matrix A, laid out in equation (7), we can

write out the restrictions of (9) on individual coefficients: a1c1, ...,

a
 pp d11
      -b (l+r), b =d ,
    c ,
                 22                  . .., bpp
                                             =d .       There is exactly one restriction
for each column of A. To interpret these restrictions, we subtract the

          equation       of the VAR from the s equation to get s-yl =

(ci-a1)Ayl1          +   ... + (c   -a )Lyl    +
                                                        (d1.-b1)sti + (d2-b2)s2   +   ... +
(d-b)s_ + u2u1.                 The restrictions just state that st_b&ylt_(l+r)st_1

is unpredictable given lagged Y'I and s, which follows from equation (4).

Thus a single-equation regression test of (4), with lagged                    and s as

explanatory variables, is equivalent to the test of restrictions on the

VAR.

       The analysis can easily be extended to the case where there is a

tttransitory consumptiont' error in equation (2), so long as this error is




                                           - 15     -
 assumed to be orthogonal to all lagged information (including its own

 lagged values). This is a natural identifying assumption for transitory

 consumption. Then, although (3) and (8) no longer hold, we have



 (3)' Etst+1 =
                 il    (l/(l+r)) Eyl+1÷.


since the expectation of next period's transitory consumption is zero.

 (3)' can be tested by regressing 5t_Aylt(l+r)st_i on information lagged

two periods, or by testing the VAR restrictions


                            i       i+l
(8)' g1A = - X      (l/(l+r)) h'A
             i= 1




Comparing (8) and (8)', it is clear that (8)' can hold when (8) does not,

only if the matrix A is singular (since otherwise (8)' can be postmulti-

plied by the inverse of A to yield (8)).

     The discussion above needs some modification if the PIH holds with

Z<l. Then from equations (1) and (5), both ykt and c are explosive rather

than stationary in first differences. The vector x no longer satisfies

the formal definition of cointegration.

     However x. still possesses the key property that a linear combination

of its elements is stationary, when none of these elements is individually

stationary. It seems likely that that linear combination can still be es-

timated precisely since it is still true that it is the only linear combi-

nation with asymptotically finite variance. In fact, one might expect an

estimate of a to converge even faster in the explosive case.




                                      -   16   -
     The variables      and s are still stationary when <l. Thus one can

test equation (4), or estimate the VAR system (6), and obtain well-behaved

coefficient estimates and test statistics. However           and Lykt are not

stationary, and inclusion of these variables in a VAR would jeopardize sta-

tistical inference.

     As the PIH is written in section 2, the parameter Z can be estimated

from the cointegrating vector, and then used to obtain stationary quasi-

differences of c and yk. However in one of the applications in the next

section, I observe only a subset of consumption c* such that cXc*,
                                                      1.               C   C

With data only on c*t, the cointegrating vector identifies X/' rather than
L s can still be constructed from this information, but the stationary

quasi-differences of c and ykt cannot. Accordingly in the next section I

confine my attention to the variables s and           which are known to be

stationary whether =l or <l. I conduct a single-equation regression test

of equation (4), and then use the VAR representation (6) to conduct an in-

formal comparison of s with the optimal unrestricted forecast of declines

in labor income.

     Both of these procedures require that the expected real interest rate

r be known or estimated.     For simplicity I treat r as known, setting

l/(l+r)0.99 or r4.04% on an annual basis. By inspection of (4), or the

restrictions of (9) on individual coefficients, one can see that the test

procedure is not very sensitive to a small error in the choice of r.

     An important preliminary step is to decide on the appropriate order p

for the vector autoregression.    I use the Akaike Information Criterion

(AIC) to choose p, that is I pick p to minimize [   - in   likelihood + number

of parameters] in the vector autoregression. Sawa {1978] has argued that




                                  — 17   -
the AIC tends to choose models of higher order than the true model, but

states that the bias is small when p <    ThU   as it is here.

     One final technical point concerns the estimation of the variance-co-

variance matrix of the coefficient estimates in the VAR. The usual formula

for this is

            —l
E   (X'X)

where E is the variance-covariance matrix of the equation residuals. When

there is conditional heteroskedasticity, this estimate is no longer consis-

tent and should be replaced by

     —l            -l
(X'X) XtVX (X'X)

where V is a diagonal matrix with squared residuals on the diagonal (White

[1984]). In this paper the variables are defined in levels rather than in

logs so heteroskedasticity is potentially important and I report White

standard errors throughout.   In practice these are little different from

the conventional standard errors, indicating that the equation error vari-

ances are not highly correlated with s or Ayl.




                                 -   18   -
 IV. Data and Empirical Results


     The data used in this paper are taken from Blinder and Deaton [1985].

All data are seasonally adjusted quarterly series for the period

1953:2-1984:4, and are ultimately taken from the National Income and Prod-

uct Accounts (NIPA). However Blinder and Deaton make several adjustments

to NIPA definitions and also break down real disposable income into capital

and labor components. Blinder and Deaton describe their transformations in

detail; here I merely provide a brief summary.

     1) The series constructed are disposable total income, disposable la-

bor income, total consumption and consumption of nondurables and services.

Disposable capital income is simply the difference between the first two of

these.

     2) Blinder and Deaton remove the 1975 tax rebate from the disposable

income series. This can be justified on the grounds that the rebate was

unanticipated and was not generated by the same stochastic process as the

rest of the data. If the rebate is included, it tends to distort estimates

of the time series process for income.

     3) Consumer interest payments to business are subtracted from NIPA

disposable income, thus treating these payments symmetrically with business

interest payments to consumers.

     4) Personal nontax payments to state and local governments are treated

as part of both disposable income and consumption, since they include such

things as state college tuition and state hospital payments.

     5) Expenditures on clothing and shoes are treated as expenditures on

durables.




                                  -   19 -
     6) The breakdown of disposable income into capital and labor compo-

nents is carried out by completing the NIPA breakdown. Proprietors' income

and personal income taxes, which are not broken down in NIPA, are attribut-

ed to labor and capital according to their overall factor shares, and so-

cial insurance contributions are deducted from labor income.

     7) All series are on a real per-capita basis, divided by total popula-

tion and a consumer spending deflator which is adjusted from NIPA in the

same manner as consumption.

     8) In this paper, all series are in units of thousand dollars.

     The remainder of this section presents an analysis of the Blinder-Dea-

ton data, using the methods described in the previous section. All exer-

cises are repeated twice: once for consumption of nondurables and services,

which will be written c*, and once for total consumption c. Most previ-

ous work on the PIH has used nondurables and services consumption, on the

ground that this series is most likely to obey the random walk restriction

of the model. However in the present context the c*t measure has the dis-

advantage that it is only a component of consumption; to use it, one must

postulate that total consumption is unobservable and related to c* as

         where X is estimated from the cointegrating vector.7 In order to

ensure that empirical results are not sensitive to this procedure, total

consumption is also used in this paper.




 Blinder and Deaton report that the share of nondurables and services in
 total consumption expenditure has displayed a secular decline over the
 sample period. This casts some doubt on the practice of using nondura-
 bles and services consumption as a proxy for the total; nevertheless I
 follow this tradition and estimate a constant scale factor.

                                  -   20   -
         I begin in Table 1 by running two preliminary regressions for each

    consumption measure. These are designed as alternative ways to estimate

    the cointegrating vector, that is the parameter X/ for nondurables and

    services consumption and l/ for total consumption.

        Both Table 1 regressions are analyzed in Stock [1984]; they provide

estimates of the cointegrating vector which can be treated as known in fur-

ther analysis. The first regression is simply of total income         on c*t or

       while the second is an "error-correction" regression of the change in

      on lagged changes in and levels of        and c*t or c.8 In the first re-

gression, the coefficient on consumption is the parameter estimate, while

in the second regression one takes the ratio of the coefficient on lagged

income to that on lagged consumption.

        Granger and Engle [1985] show how the residual from the first type of

regression can be used to conduct tests of the hypothesis that two series

are not cointegrated. They recommend the use of an "Augmented Dickey-Full-

er" regression (Dickey and Fuller [1981]) in which the change in the resi-

dual is regressed on one lagged level of the residual, and one or more

lagged changes.     The t statistic on the level variable is biased upwards

relative to the t distribution, but Granger and Engle provide significance

levels based on a Monte Carlo study.9 If the t statistic is higher than

2.84, the hypothesis of no cointegration can be rejected at the 10% level,




°
     Granger and Engle [1985] also run a variant of this second regression in
     which the change in consumption is the dependent variable. As already
     noted, this is not a good way to identify the cointegrating vector, since
     under the PIH with l all coefficients should be zero.

     The Monte Carlo results are based on 10,000 replications of 100 observa-
     tions of independent random walks, with 4 lagged residual changes includ-
     ed in the test. This setup is close to the one here, so Granger and En-
     gle's significance levels should be fairly accurate.

                                     - 21   -
while if it is higher than 3.17, the hypothesis is rejected at the 5%

level.

       The results of Table 1 can be summarized as follows. When nondurables

and services consumption is used, the parameter X/ is estimated at 1.495

by the levels regression and 1.517 by the error-correction regression.

When total consumption is used, the parameter l/' is estimated at 1.062 by

the levels regression and 1.083 by the error-correction regression. This

reflects the fairly constant U.S. savings rate of a little over 6% in the

sample period. If one is willing to combine the two sets of estimates, the

implied share of nondurables and services consumption in the total is 71%.

The hypothesis of no cointegration is rejected at the 10% level but not at

the 5% level for both consumption series.

       It is encouraging that the two types of regression in Table 1 give

such similar estimates of the cointegrating vector. In the results which

follow, I use the estimate from the levels regression, but the choice makes

no difference to any of the statistical inference.'0

       The next step in the analysis is to construct a saving series as

s*t(yt_l.062c*t) or s(y_l.49Sc), and to include this with the change

in labor income in a single-equation regression test. The Akaike Informa-

tion Criterion gives very similar results for choice of lag length in both

cases, but these results are rather ambiguous. The value of the criterion

is almost identical for a 1-lag model and for a 5-lag model, with much

larger values for all other specifications. This reflects the fact that


10
     Stock [1984] recommends the estimate from the error-correction regres-
     sion, but Granger and Engle [1985] argue for the levels regression.   I
     use the levels regression because it delivers an estimate under both the
     null (consumption change unpredictable, income change predictable), and
     an important alternative (income change unpredictable, disequilibrium
     error-correction behavior of consumption).

                                    -   22 -
the fifth lags of both income change and saving help to predict the change

in labor income, whereas second, third and fourth lags do not contribute.

Blinder and Deaton [1985] argue for a first-order representation of these

data, and this has obvious appeal. It is parsimonious and has more plausi-

ble dynamics than a model with large first and last lags and insignificant

lags in between. However for completeness I conduct tests in both a first-

order and a fifth-order model; the results are sensitive to this choice.''

      Table 2 presents a single-equation regression test of the PIH. The

"saving    for     a   rainy   day"       hypothesis   is   tested by    forming

s*t_ylt_(l+r)s*t1 or s_yl_(l+r)s1, and regressing this variable on 1

or 5 lags of s* or s and                  Under the PIll, all coefficients should

equal zero. Two test statistics are calculated for each model; the first

restricts all coefficients including the intercept (equivalently, the mean

of s*t or sr), while the second leaves the intercept free and restricts the

other coefficients. Table 2 also shows individual coefficient values for

the 1-lag model.

      It is clear from the table that the PIll can be rejected at extremely

high levels of confidence if it is taken to restrict the mean level of sav-

ing as well as the dynamics of saving. All the test statistics which re-

strict the mean are significant at the 0.001% level. Under the PIH, the

mean of s*t and s should be -(l/r) times the mean of                 The mean of

     is indeed negative, while the mean of Ayl is positive, but the ratio

is too small; mean s* is -0.310 and the mean change in labor income is




'   One might suspect that the effect of the fifth lag is due to seasonality
    which remains in the "deseasonalized" NIPA data. However when I includ-
    ed seasonal dummies in the estimated system the estimated coefficients
    and test statistics were almost unchanged; those results are therefore
    not reported.

                                      -   23   -
0.014. For s, the problem is even worse because its mean is positive at

0.040.

       The PIH fares somewhat better if the intercept restriction is dropped.

In the 1-lag version, the PIH is rejected at the 1.2% level for s and at

the 0.1% level for s. The rejection is stronger, at the 0.1% and less

than 0.001% levels respectively, in the 5-lag version of the PIH.

       The coefficients from the 1-lag regression give some indication of the

quantitative importance of this statistical rejection. The coefficients

are small, particularly on lagged s* and s at -0.013 and -0.035 respec-

tively. Even the lagged Ay coefficients are only -0.203 and -0.324. This

suggests that it is worth examining informal measures of the ttfitlt of the

model as well as formal statistical tests.

       In Table 3 the single-equation regression tests are repeated, allowing

for transitory consumption. The same dependent variable as in Table 2 is

regressed on s*t or       and      lagged twice rather than once. The extra

lag makes almost no difference if the intercept restriction is included, or

in the fifth-order model. However the dynamic restrictions of the PIH with

transitory consumption cannot be rejected at even the 10% level in the

first-order model.

       Table 4 presents estimates of a demeaned VAR system like equation (6).

Coefficient estimates are reported for the 1-lag model, and summary statis-

tics for both the 1-lag and 5-lag models. Although the VAR estimates yield

exactly the same test statistics as are reported in Table 2, they can be

used to characterize the data and the fit of the permanent income hypothe-

sis.




                                    -   24   -
     A striking result for all models is that saving Granger causes changes

in labor income at standard significance levels, and the first coefficient

is negative. This negative effect is what one would expect if the PIH

cross-equation restrictions hold, and the own coefficient of lagged saving

on current saving is less than (l+r).           Intuitively, the PIH claims that

saving occurs because labor income is expected to decline in the future,

and indeed a labor income decline follows in the next quarter. Own lags

are also significant for saving and labor income changes, but labor income

changes Granger cause only s* and not

     The restrictions of the PIH on the estimated VAR are that all coeffi-

cients in the first equation equal the corresponding coefficients in the

second equation, except for the coefficients on once lagged saving, which

must differ by (l+r).   The deviations of the estimated coefficients from

these restrictions are just the coefficients reported in the regression

test of Table 2.

     The VARs can be used to construct the optimal unrestricted forecast of

declines in labor income, conditional on the information set Ht. Table 4

also presents the standard deviation of this forecast, the standard devia-

tion of saving, and the correlation between the two.         If the PIH is cor-

rect, the standard deviations should be the same and the correlation should

be unity.   It is clear from the table that the standard deviations are

quite close (although saving tends to vary a little less than the optimal

forecast). The correlations are extremely high for the 1-lag model, at

0.995 for s*t and 0.960 for s. In the 5-lag model, however, the correla-

tion falls to 0.449 for s* and is actually negative at -0.480 for
                                                                       s.


12 Note that the PIH allows but does not require saving to be Granger
   caused by labor income changes.

                                     -   25 -
        One can get a good feel for the fit of the PIH by plotting saving and

the optimal unrestricted forecast of labor income declines against time.

Four plots of this sort follow Table 4, for the 1-lag and 5-lag models and

the variables s* and             The 1-lag fit is extremely impressive; the PIH

may be rejected statistically in this framework, but it appears to describe

almost all of the variation in the data. The 5-lag plots are much less

favorable to the model, but even here the two series move together at in-

termediate business cycle frequencies.             In the plot for s, the optimal

forecast appears to lead s by a few quarters, giving rise to the negative

contemporaneous correlation between the two variables.

        These results have some bearing on the common idea that consumption

displays excess sensitivity to income, relative to the predictions of the

PIll.    As previously noted, tiexcess sensitivityt' is usually inferred from

correlation between consumption changes and lagged changes in disposable

income, or from large regression coefficients of consumption changes on

proxies for income innovations. Another interpretation of the phrase, how-

ever, would be that consumption displays excess sensitivity if it moves too

closely with income -     that   is, if the difference between consumption and

income, or saving, varies less than the optimal forecast of discounted de-

clines in labor income.

        The results of this paper give mild support to the idea that there is

excess sensitivity in this sense.         The variance of saving is always less

than the variance of the optimal unrestricted forecast.13 However, excess

sensitivity is not the most striking feature of the time series plots fol-



13 The fact that the transitory consumption model cannot be rejected in the
   first-order case is not inconsistent with excess sensitivity since tran-
   sitory consumption may have negative contemporaneous correlation with
   permanent income consumption.
                                      -   26   -
lowing Table 4, which in the 1-lag version are dominated by the high corre-

lation of saving with the optimal forecast of declines in labor income.




                                 -   27 -
V.      Conclusions


        The permanent income hypothesis implies that people save because they

rationally expect their labor income to decline; they save "for a rainy

day".     It follows that saving should be at least as good a predictor of

rainy weather, or discounted declines in labor income, as any other fore-

cast that can be constructed from publicly available information. Surpris-

ingly, this implication of the model seems to have been ignored in previous

empirical work on consumption.

        This paper tests the predictive power of saving for declines in labor

income, using quarterly aggregate data for the period 1953-1984 in the U.S.

Saving is measured in two alternative ways, both of which use Blinder and

Deaton's [1985] adjustments to NIPA consumption data. The first savings

measure is derived from consumption of nondurables and services, as is con-

ventional in the literature on the PIH, while the second measure is derived

from total consumption.

     The paper compares these measures of saving with an unrestricted fore-

cast of labor income declines based on a vector autoregression for lagged

saving and changes in labor income. The comparison is made both formally,

by calculating test statistics for the hypothesis that the two series are

the same, and informally, by plotting the series together and presenting

their sample moments.

     The unrestricted forecast differs from saving most strongly in its

mean, placing considerable weight on a constant term which captures the up-

ward drift in labor income. The dynamics of the unrestricted forecast de-

pend quite sensitively on the number of lags included in the vector autore-

gression. The Akaike Information Criterion suggested that one or five lags



                                    -   28   -
should be used. The forecast from a first-order VAR moves very closely

with saving, having a correlation of more than 0.95 for both saving meas-

ures; the formal test of the PIH is unable to reject in this case if a

transitory error is allowed in the consumption function. The forecast from

a fifth-order VAR moves much less closely with saving, and the PIH is more

strongly rejected in this case. Even here, however, saving and the unres-

tricted forecast seem to move together at intermediate business cycle fre-

quencies.

     There are a number of objections that might be raised to the empirical

work of this paper.   I test a very tight formulation of the PIH model which

ignores aggregation and many other difficulties, and I treat as known a key

parameter (the discount rate) which should properly be estimated.          Of

course, these shortcomings of the model make it even more remarkable that

it fits the movements of the first-order unrestricted forecast so closely.

However this is probably due in part to the limited information set used in

the first-order vector autoregression.

     The results of this paper do suggest that the permanent income hy-

pothesis is worth taking seriously as a description of the broad outlines

of aggregate consumption behavior.       More generally, models which are

strongly rejected statistically may be good first approximations to the be-

havior of economic variables. Devices such as the time series plots pre-

sented here can be used to evaluate the performance of a model.

     A natural next step is to apply the methods of this paper to larger

and disaggregated data sets, and this is a priority for future research.




                                  - 29 -
                                              TABLE 1

                         ESTIMATION OF THE COINTEGRATING VECTOR
                              AND TEST FOR COINTEGRATION


Nondurables and services consumption

1)     = -0.309           + 1.495 c*.                       R2 = 0.996
               (0.023)       (0.009)                        Estimate of A/ = 1.495




2)         =    -0.056 + 0.165                 + 0.638
                (0.020)      (0.098)               (0.213)


           -     0.174          +      0.265 c*1            R2 = 0.272
                (0.051)             (0.077)                 Estimate of X/ = 1.517


Test of no cointegration from (1):
Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test with 1 lag 3.764
                                   5 lags 3.010


Total consumption

3)     =       0.040      + 1.062 c.                        R2   0.997
               (0.014)      (0.005)                         Estimate of 1/ 1.062




4)      =       0.007     + 0.086 t-l + 0.350
               (0.010)      (0.108)                (0.120)


        -       0.168 y_ + 0.182 ct_i                       R2 = 0.242
               (0.072)              (0.077)                 Estimate of l/ = 1.083


Test of no cointegration from (3):
Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test with 1 lag 3.265
                                   5 lags 3.078

Critical values (Granger and Engle [1985]): 10% 2.84, 5% 3.17.

Notes: y = total disposable real income per capita in thousands of dollars.
c' = real consumption of nondurables and services per capita in thousands
of dollars. c = total real consumption per capita in thousands of dollars.
All data are quarterly from 1953:2 to 1984:4. Heteroskedasticity-consis-
tent standard errors in parentheses.

                                               -   30   -
                                            TABLE 2

                               REGRESSION TESTS OF THE PIH
                               (NO TRANSITORY CONSUMPTION)


Nondurables and services consumption

1-lag model:

                                   =
s*t -   Ayl
                -
                     (l+r)sti          -0.004
                                       (0.013)
                                                     -   0.203
                                                         (0.069)
                                                                           -     0.013
                                                                                (0.041)
                                                                                          s*ti

                                                                   R2 =   0.074
Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(3) =                      44.166, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(2) =                       8.783, P-value = 1.2%

5-lag model:

Test that all coefficients    0: Chi-square(ll) =                    76.074, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:    Chi-square(lO) =                    29.819, P-value = 0.1%

Total consumption

1-lag model:

            -                  =   -0.009
s -   Ayl           (l+r)sti       (0.004)
                                                 -   0.324
                                                     (0.089)
                                                               1t-l -          0.035
                                                                          (0.071)
                                                                                       st_i

                                                                   R2 = 0.098

Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(3)                        68.714, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(2) =                      13.213, P-value = 0.1%

5-lag model:

Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(ll)   117.255, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(lO) = 54.191, P-value < 0.001%


Notes: y   total disposable real income per capita in thousands of dollars.
s* = saving estimated from real consumption of nondurables and services per
capita in thousands of dollars. s = saving estimated from total real con-
sumption per capita in thousands of dollars. All data are quarterly from
1953:2 to 1984:4. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in paren-
theses.




                                             - 31 -
                                                TABLE 3

                                   REGRESSION TESTS OF THE PIH
                                  (WITH TRANSITORY CONSUMPTION)


Nondurables and services consumption

1-lag model:

                                       =   -0.006                 0.127   t-2 -      0.012
s* -   Ayl
                 -
                      (l+r)s*ti            (0.013)
                                                         -

                                                              (0.065)               (0.041)
                                                                                              s*t2

                                                                          R2 = 0.028

Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(3) =                             41.189, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(2) =                              3.802, P-value = 14.9%

5-lag model:

Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(ll) =                            74.722, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(lO) =                            28.731, P-value = 0.1%

Total consumption

1-lag model:

s -          -
                     (l+r)s        =   -0.012        -       0.194   4t-2 -       0.013
      Ayl                     1
                                       (0.004)           (0.111)                  (0.078)
                                                                                            s2
                                                                          R2 =   0.033
Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(3) =                             39.027, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(2) =                              3.047, P-value = 21.8%
5-lag model:

Test that all coefficients = 0: Chi-square(ll) =                            94.014, P-value < 0.001%
Test excluding the intercept:   Chi-square(lO) =                            39.791, P-value   0.002%


Notes: y = total disposable real income per capita in thousands of dollars.
s*   saving estimated from real consumption of nondurables and services per
capita in thousands of dollars. s = saving estimated from total real con-
sumption per capita in thousands of dollars. All data are quarterly from
1953:2 to 1984:4. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in paren-
theses.




                                                 - 32         -
                                   TABLE 4


                        MEASURING THE FIT OF THE PIH:
                 ESTIMATED VAR SYSTEM AND SUMMARY STATISTICS



Nondurables and services consumption


1-lag model:


        =   0.478          - 0.179 s*1                 R2 = 0.292
            (0.072)           (0.047)

  s* Granger causes          at 0.01% level.


  s*t = 0.275             +    0.844                   R2 = 0.751
            (0.092)           (0.042)
                                      s*_
       Granger causes s* at 0.3% level.


Summary statistics: 0(5*)                               = 0.048
                    c(unrestricted optimal forecast)    =    0.063
                    p(s*, unrestricted forecast)        =    0.995



5-lag model:

       equation R2 = 0.426
  s* Granger causes          at <0.005% level.

  s* equation R2 = 0.766,
       Granger causes s* at 1.9% level.


Summary statistics: (unrestricted optimal forecast)      =   0.052
                    p(s*, unrestricted forecast)         =   0.449




                                        -   33   -
                                  TABLE 4

                                (CONTINUED)



Total consumption


1-lag model:


        =    0.442       -   0.140                     R2 = 0.241
                                       st_i
             (0.078)         (0.064)

  s Granger causes       at 2.8% level.


        =    0.118       +   0.835                     R2 = 0.703
  St                                   St_i
             (0.067)         (0.050)

  '4 Granger causes s at 7.7% level.


Summary statistics: a(s)                                =   0.041
                    o(unrestricted optimal forecast)    =   0.053
                    p(s, unrestricted forecast)         =   0.960



5-lag model:

       equation R2 = 0.357
  St ,ranger causes      at 0.3% level.

  St equation R2 = 0.721
       Granger causes s. at 19.0% level.


Summary statistics: o(unrestricted optimal forecast) = 0.051
                   p(s, unrestricted forecast)       = -0.480



Notes: y =   total
                 disposable real income per capita in thousands of dollars.
s = saving  estimated from real consumption of nondurabies and services per
capita in thousands of dollars. s = saving estimated from total real con-
sumption per capita in thousands of dollars. All data are quarterly from
1953:2 to 1984:4. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in paren-
theses.




                                       -   34   -
                                                                                            1   r   aa          1i   a oa                                a           -
                aI      a               a                       aI            aI                a
                                                                                                -              a
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a               a                   a

                1111        I   I   I           I   I   I   I   I         I             I       I   I   I                I   I       I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I
                                                                                                             11.11               I                                                                                   I   I   I       I   I   I   I   I
           a           II               I                                     III II

JJ                                                                                                      V.


I-         a-                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                     .
P1                                                                   V.
                                            V   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
           a-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            z
                                        -V-V.-
                                                                              -.:

                                                                                                               V-V

a          0)
                                                                                                                     V
J3    C    a-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            z
P1                                                      --V.
C)    JJ
                                                .-..r..
(1)   P1
                                                                                                               ....                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CD
                                           uujjrrnco           nc         DZCQI—
                                                           a                  c   a   a   a   a   a           a

               I   I   I           I   I   I   i   I   I        I         I       I   I               I   I
          0•               I
rn        a-
Cl
rn
                                                           -
0         Ri
                                                                     --
                                                               ...

          0-                                                                                                      z
                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                  Cl




     C
          D                    .
T1
     —4

                                                                .:.
                                                              U) J)        ]) r          C) D   1 C)   U) C) 2: D (/) CCI 1   -
                       I     I                                 I
                 C)    C)    C)               C)              CD                   0            C)       Q         C)             0        C)           C)    CJ       CJ


C)               (fl   RJ    Q                -J              Cu                   1\)          C)       RI        Cl                      C            RI    (fl      -J
IT)              C)    (fl   C)               Ci]             C)                   Ui           C)       (Il       CJ             01       C)           (fl   C)       Cl
2:                     I          I   I   I         I   I I            I   I       I                                I                  I        I   I   I
C)         D



           RI.
I-
P1




                                                                                                                                                                            2:


                                                                                                                                                                            —1
-n                                                                                                                                                                 -
Q     cj   C)
JJ c                                                                                                                                                                        z
rllD
C)    D
 D    -                                                                                                                                                                          C)
—     1J
                                                                   -           .
                                                                                    (J1JJJIDD                                 11C)              UiDZDU1001-I
            I                   I                                                                                              I
        a                       a                    aI            aI               aI                   aI                   a                     aI                   a                    a                a                    a                    a                    a
                                -J
                                                     -
                                                     Ui            P3
                                                                                    -                                         a                     0                    0                    o                0                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -3                                        P3
        0                                                                           C)                                        (ii                   P3                   C)                   P3               Ui                                        C)
                                                                                                         0-
                                Ui                   C)            Ui               a                    Ui                   C)                    Ui                   0                    Ui               a                    Ui                   C)                   Ui
        I       I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I     I                            I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I
                                                                                                                                        I   I   I   I    I   I
    —




I

                                                                                                                                                                                              II
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY


      Auerbach, Alan J., "Saving in the U.S.: Some Conceptual Issues", in
 Patric R. Hendershott ed., The Level and Composition of Household Saving,
 Balliner 1984.

     Baillie, Richard T., Robert E. Lippens and Patrick C. McMahon, "Test-
ing Rational Expectations and Efficiency in the Foreign Exchange Market",
Econometrica Vol. 51 No. 3 pp. 353-564, May 1983.

     Bernanke, Ben S., "Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate Consump-
tion", Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 15 No. 1, January 1985.

     Blinder, Alan S. and Angus S. Deaton, "The Time Series Consumption
Function Revisited", paper for presentation at Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity, September 1985.
     Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "Cointegration and Tests of
Present Value Models", paper in preparation, 1985.
     Davidson, J.E.H., D.F.Hendry, F.Srba and S.Yeo, "Econometric Modelling
of the Aggregate Time-Series Relationship between Consumers' Expenditure
and Income in the U.K.", Economic Journal pp. 661-693, 1978.

     Davidson, J.E.H. and D.F.Hendry, "Interpreting Econometric Evidence:
The Behavior of Consumer Expenditure in the U.K.", European Economic Review
pp. 177—192, 1981.

     Deaton, Angus S., "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence
Consistent with the Theory?", paper for presentation at World Congress of
the Econometric Society, August 1985.

     Flavin, Marjorie A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expec-
tations about Future Income", Journal of Political Economy Vol. 89 No. 5
pp. 974-1009, October 1981.

     Granger, Clive W.J. and Robert F. Engle, "Dynamic Model Specification
with Equilibrium Constraints: Cointegration and Error-Correction", Univer-
sity of California at San Diego Discussion Paper 85-18, May 1985.

     Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent
Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Political Economy Vol.
86 No. 5 pp. 971-987, October 1978.

     Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent, "Linear Rational Expecta-
tions Models for Dynamically Interrelated Variables", in Robert E. Lucas
Jr. and Thomas J. Sargent eds., Rational Expectations and Econometric
tice, Minnesota, 1981.

     Hayashi, Fumio, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Test-
ing by Instrumental Variables", Journal of Political Economy Vol. 90 No. 5
pp. 895-916, October 1982.


                                  - 35   -
        King, Mervyn A., "The Economics of Saving", NBER Working Paper No.
1247, December 1983.

     Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew D. Shapiro, "Trends, Random Walks, and
Tests of the Permanent Income Hypothesis", Cowles Foundation Discussion Pa-
per, Yale University, 1984.

        Muellbauer, John, "Surprises in the Consumption Function", Economic
Journal pp. 34-50, 1983.

        Nelson, Charles R., "A Reappraisal of Recent Tests of the Permanent
Income Hypothesis", NBER Working Paper No. 1687, August 1985.

     Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity,
and Consumption", Journal of Political Economy Vol. 86 No. 4 pp. 673-700,
August 1978.

        ccr     Thmc T             , M4mn, 14                       ,- 4-h,.
Rational Expectations Model of the Term Structure", Journal of Monetary Ec-
onomics Vol. 5 pp. 133-143, January 1979.

     Sawa, Takamitsu, "Information Criteria for Discriminating Among Alter-
native Regression Models", Econometrica Vol. 46 No. 6 pp. 1273-1291, Novem-
ber 1978.

     Stock, James H., "Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimates of
Cointegrating Vectors", unpublished paper, Harvard University, November
1984.

        White, Halbert, yc Theory for Econometricians, Academic Press,
1984.




                                   -   36   -
