                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH INSURANCE CONSTRAIN LABOR
    SUPPLY ADJUSTMENTS TO HEALTH SHOCKS? NEW EVIDENCE ON WOMEN
                   DIAGNOSED WITH BREAST CANCER

                                         Cathy J. Bradley
                                         David Neumark
                                         Scott Barkowski

                                       Working Paper 18060
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18060


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




Bradley, Neumark, and Barkowski’s research was supported by NCI grant number R01-CA122145,
“Health, Health Insurance, and Labor Supply.” The authors are grateful to Myra Owens, Ph.D. and
Mirna Hernandez for project coordination, Meryl Motika for programming support, the interviewers
and medical record auditors that collected the data, and the many subjects who generously donated
their time to the project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Scott Barkowski. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Employer-Provided Health Insurance Constrain Labor Supply Adjustments to Health
Shocks? New Evidence on Women Diagnosed with Breast Cancer
Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Scott Barkowski
NBER Working Paper No. 18060
May 2012
JEL No. I13,J2

                                             ABSTRACT

Employment-contingent health insurance creates incentives for ill workers to remain employed at
a sufficient level (usually full-time) to maintain access to health insurance coverage. We study employed
married women, newly diagnosed with breast cancer, comparing labor supply responses to breast cancer
diagnoses between women dependent on their own employment for health insurance and women with
access to health insurance through their spouse’s employer. We find evidence that women more dependent
on their own job for health insurance reduce their labor supply by less after a diagnosis of breast cancer
– the estimate difference is about 5.5 to 7 percent. Women’s subjective responses to questions about
working more to maintain health insurance are consistent with the conclusions from observed behavior.


Cathy J. Bradley                                    Scott Barkowski
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research        Department of Economics
Virginia Commonwealth University                    University of California at Irvine
830 E. Main Street                                  3151 Social Science Plaza
Richmond, VA 23219                                  Irvine, CA 92697
cjbradley@vcu.edu                                   scott.barkowski@uci.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
1. Introduction

        Provision of health insurance through an employer complicates workers’ decisions when

they are faced with serious health conditions that require expensive treatment and long periods of

recovery. Although workers may want to invest in their health by taking time away from work

for treatment and recovery, their demand for health insurance rises with increased risk of health

care expenses. Employer-provided health insurance is often only offered to or taken up by full-

time employees, in which case ill workers must not only remain employed, but must work

enough hours to be considered full-time to qualify for health insurance benefits. As a

consequence, the opportunity cost of forgoing work for treatment (or recovery) could be

considerable since it could lead to loss of insurance coverage (or an increased cost of coverage if

health insurance is available for part-time workers at a greater cost to the worker). This is

potentially important because there may be adverse health consequences of remaining employed

at a level sufficient to keep health insurance; work could conflict with recovery, or it could

influence treatment decisions or adherence with a treatment plan.

        For an ill employee, losing access to insurance through one’s employer leaves few

options to obtain health insurance. One possibility is continuing coverage through the

Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1985. However, former

employees pay the full cost of group coverage, and the policy is usually limited to 18 to 36

months – making continuation of coverage via COBRA a prohibitively expensive option for

many and only a temporary measure even for those who can afford it.1

        The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 allows

employees to add to their insurance policy a spouse or other dependents who lose job-related

1
  The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 provided a premium reduction (to 35% of
premiums) for continuation coverage for eligible individuals who were terminated involuntarily from employment
through May 31, 2010. Individuals who qualified paid reduced premiums for up to 15 months, as long as they were
not eligible for another group health plan or Medicare (U.S. Department of Labor, 2011).


                                                       1
coverage, which is another avenue by which a worker who becomes ill may secure health

insurance coverage without remaining employed. However, HIPAA offers no protection to many

ill workers, including those who are unmarried, those whose spouses are not employed, and

those with employed spouses whose employer does not offer health insurance coverage for

family members.

        Lastly, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), passed in 2010, would

expand Medicaid coverage to very low-income workers who lose employer-provided coverage

and allow others without employer-provided coverage to purchase health insurance on exchange

markets.2 Nonetheless, ACA policy discussions mainly focus on the provision of health

insurance to the uninsured, leaving the employer-provided system largely intact.

        In prior research, Bradley et al. (2006) developed a theoretical framework showing that

when insurance is contingent on continued employment, an employee may forgo health care or

convalescence that requires extended time away from work and instead devote time towards

work to preserve health insurance coverage. The theoretical framework supports the paradox that

although health shocks with the greatest financial impacts may entail the greatest morbidity, the

incentive to maintain health insurance (which often requires keeping hours worked high to retain

insurance or prevent its cost from rising sharply) may counter the need for time away from work.

This tension between work and recovery potentially creates difficult choices for ill workers, and

those induced to choose more work rather than more time to recover may suffer worse health

outcomes.3


2
  The ACA would extend Medicaid to uninsured individuals below 138% of the Federal Poverty Line (Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2011).
3
  The Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) entitles eligible employees of covered employers to take unpaid, job-
protected leave for specified family and medical reasons with continuation of group health insurance coverage (U.S.
Department of Labor, 2012). However, not all workers are covered by FMLA, some workers may fear that using
FMLA will result in adverse consequences at work, and some workers may remain at their jobs or remain full-time
employees to ensure that they retain health insurance. Nonetheless, FMLA seems likely to mute the extent to which
people with health shocks are constrained to remain at work and not reduce their hours.


                                                         2
       This paper studies labor supply changes following health shocks, comparing married

women newly diagnosed with breast cancer and dependent on their own job for health insurance

to similar women who are insured through a spouse’s policy or with access to such insurance.

We survey women within a few months following a breast cancer diagnosis and within two

months of initiating treatment about their labor supply and job characteristics prior to diagnosis.

We then survey them again about nine months after treatment. The surveys cover three distinct

periods: prior to diagnosis (retrospectively), two months after initiation of treatment, and nine

months after initiation of treatment. By focusing on the time period immediately following

treatment initiation, we observe labor supply behavior when treatment demands are greatest and

decisions have to be made about maintaining hours of employment or even remaining employed

at all. We include a core set of analyses that replicate Bradley et al. (2006), but we use a sample

specifically constructed to address the relationship between labor supply and dependence on

one’s job for health insurance in a breast cancer context.

       We also present new analyses exploring in more detail responses of women who depend

on their jobs for health insurance, constructing comparisons with subsets of women who are less

dependent on their own employment for health insurance, but who are more likely to be similar

in terms of unobservables such as job characteristics and commitment to work, for which we

cannot fully control. For example, one comparison focuses only on those women offered health

insurance through their employer (which we term ECHI, for “employment-contingent health

insurance”), and distinguishes between those who enrolled and those who declined and instead

took insurance through their spouse’s employer. Women offered ECHI may have similar jobs,

whereas a comparison between women with and without ECHI may be driven largely by the

differences between women offered and not offered ECHI, whose jobs likely differ on other

dimensions. Thus, among those offered ECHI, the difference between those who do and do not



                                                 3
enroll more cleanly reflects the difference in how dependent one is on their own job for

insurance. A second comparison is again only among the more homogeneous group of women

with ECHI, but contrasting those who have the option to switch to a spouse’s policy with those

who do not.

2. Labor Market Incentives from Employer-Based Health Insurance

       The studies most relevant to our investigation directly examine labor supply following a

health shock, although only a handful of studies fit this description, suggesting a substantial gap

in the literature that can be addressed by the current study. There are also studies of “job lock” –

a phenomenon conjectured to occur when workers remain in their current job to retain health

insurance. These studies are related because they link the need for health insurance to being

“locked” into a job – i.e., employees with health conditions (or whose family members have

health conditions), who have employer-provided health insurance, should be more reluctant to

leave their jobs than healthy employees (who also have healthy families) because other jobs may

not offer health insurance or, if they do, may be less secure than their current job. Although there

is a larger literature on job lock, we focus our discussion on studies that incorporate health status

of the employee (or their dependents) into their analysis.

       Labor supply and health conditions. We are aware of three studies of labor supply that

report evidence on how workers with employer-provided health insurance respond to illness. In a

study using primary data collected from a sample of married Detroit women with breast cancer,

those with ECHI were significantly more likely to remain employed relative to women whose

insurance was provided by another source, and ECHI moderated the negative impact of cancer

on weekly hours worked (Bradley et al., 2006). Specifically, women with ECHI were 10

percentage points more likely to remain employed six months following diagnosis than women

with insurance through another source, rising to 17 percentage points at 18 months following



                                                  4
diagnosis. Similarly, Tunceli et al. (2009), using data from cancer survivors two to six years

following diagnosis, and a non-cancer sample drawn from the Health and Retirement Study

(HRS), reported higher employment rates after a cancer diagnosis for those with ECHI as

opposed to either another source of health insurance or being uninsured. The negative influences

of ECHI on transitions to non-employment or part-time employment, or other job changes, were

significant for both genders in the cancer sample, but strongest for men. Using the HRS to

identify respondents with a broad range of health shocks, and a comparison group without health

shocks, Bradley et al. (2011) found that for some specifications of health shocks ECHI

encourages continued employment of men, although not of women. In particular, this was true

for health shocks mainly associated with higher future costs of health care rather than current

morbidity that could itself directly reduce employment.

       Although the literature on how ECHI affects labor supply following a health shock is

scant, it generally suggests that ECHI dampens the negative labor supply response to illness, as

employees with ECHI appear to work at higher levels following illness, presumably to maintain

insurance. One likely reason for the small quantity of research is that in national databases such

as the HRS the prevalence of illness and/or poor health status is too low, especially among

employed individuals, to provide adequate sample sizes for study. Furthermore, illnesses are

heterogeneous in type, severity, and treatment, but few studies collect sufficient detail on illness

and treatment to adequately control for these differences in analyses. Thus, researchers seeking

to study this topic are limited by the secondary data sources available. This motivates efforts to

collect primary data from a sample of individuals with a similar disease followed by similar

treatments.

       Job lock. Cooper and Monheit’s seminal work on job lock suggested that the

phenomenon was important. Studying a sample of workers aged 25 to 55, they estimated that



                                                  5
employer-provided health insurance reduced the likelihood a worker changed jobs by 25%

among married males, the group with the strongest labor force attachment, up to 38% for married

females, the group with the weakest attachment (Cooper and Monheit, 1993). Madrian (1994)

compared the influence of employer-provided health insurance for samples that had high and low

medical expenditures as defined by family size and the occurrence of a pregnancy. She found

evidence that job lock reduced voluntary job changes for those with employer-provided health

insurance by 25%.

        Other research, however, finds weaker effects. Kapur (1998) improved the research on

job lock by using several measures of health status including medical conditions, nights in a

hospital, emergency department visits, medical visits, prescribed medications, and medical

expenses. She found little evidence of job lock. Gilleskie and Lutz (2002), using broader

measures of health status (e.g., health limitation, disability, age, body mass index, and crack use),

found only a modest effect (10% to 15%, or about one-half of Cooper and Monheit’s (1993)

estimates). Still, these studies are problematic because health conditions are heterogeneous in

type, severity, and future expected health care expenses. Illnesses with high future expected

expenses, for example, would be expected to exhibit a stronger negative relationship between

employer-provided health insurance and job mobility, whereas conditions that are short-lived

may have little influence on the relationship between health insurance and job mobility.

Therefore, when there are heterogeneous health conditions it may be difficult to detect evidence

of job lock.4

         Aside from health conditions, job and worker characteristics could drive evidence that

looks like job lock – and similarly could drive evidence indicating that ECHI dampens labor

supply reductions when a worker experiences a health shock. Jobs that offer health insurance

4
 This same problem can arise in research on labor supply responses to health shocks depending on whether one has
ECHI, and may help explain variation in results across different kinds of diagnoses in Bradley et al. (2011).


                                                       6
also have other benefits including pensions, life insurance, sick leave, and paid vacations, and

may also pay higher wages and offer better working conditions. All of these factors may reduce

turnover because of other economic incentives (like maintaining pensions), or may dampen labor

supply responses by making it easier for ill workers to continue working. Turnover and labor

supply responses may also be more moderate if these jobs attract less mobile or more committed

workers. To address this issue, Gilleskie and Lutz (2002) incorporated data regarding the offer of

health insurance into a model of the relationship between unobserved individual characteristics

that are correlated with the offer of health insurance, the acceptance of insurance, and

employment transitions, and argue that their results provide an estimate of job lock that is not

biased from correlations between the provision of health insurance and job characteristics. They

found no evidence of job lock for married men and only a modest effect for unmarried men. In

the current paper, we also pay close attention to unobserved individual and job characteristics

correlated with ECHI that can influence labor supply responses to a health shock.

3. Application to Breast Cancer

       Female breast cancer survivors comprise the largest percentage of all cancer survivors,

approximately 23%, and the largest percentage (41%) of all female cancer survivors (National

Cancer Institute, 2011a). Five-year survival rates exceed 83% for women diagnosed with

regional stage disease and 96% for women with local stage disease (National Cancer Institute,

2011b). There are numerous studies of breast cancer’s impact on employment, motivated by the

fact that with screening and earlier detection, working age women are more likely to be

diagnosed with and treated for the disease. One study found that women with breast cancer were

17 percentage points less likely to be employed than women in a non-cancer control group six

months following diagnosis, but by 12 and 18 months following diagnosis, their likelihood of

employment was not statistically different (Bradley et al., 2007). Recent studies of breast cancer



                                                 7
and employment also find evidence that breast cancer does not lead to substantial longer-term

declines in employment; examining over 1,000 initially-employed women diagnosed with breast

cancer, Mujahid et al. (2011) report that approximately 90% were employed nine months

following diagnosis, although non-employment rates were higher for Latina women than for

white women.

         Although the evidence points to high long-term rates of return to work on average,

women with more extensive disease that requires several months of chemotherapy and/or

radiation may experience greater work interruption than women treated with surgery alone

(Stephan, 2010). In addition to the time away from work required for treatment, women who

receive chemotherapy experience considerable morbidity, which can negatively affect their

ability to return to work. For example, Hassett et al. (2009) reported return to work rates of 93%

among over 3,200 employed and insured women, but those who received chemotherapy were

more likely to go on disability, stop working, or retire relative to women who did not receive

chemotherapy. The effects of chemotherapy can continue for several months or even years

following the completion of treatment (Bradley et al., 2007; Johnsson et al., 2011; Hassett et al.,

2009).

         In spite of the morbidities imposed by breast cancer treatments, women have a strong

incentive to continue working if they are dependent on their jobs for health insurance. The cost

of breast cancer treatment for insured women in 2007 was estimated to be $66,489, and out-of-

pocket expenses for women with employer-provided coverage were estimated to be $6,250

(Gabel et al., 2009). Given high survival rates, once women are successfully treated for the

disease, their worries may turn from survival to the future costs of care for cancer surveillance,

second primary cancers, and reoccurrence of the first primary cancer.

         Capitalizing on our knowledge of breast cancer’s impact on employment, and our past



                                                 8
experience recruiting, enrolling, and studying breast cancer patients, we designed a study to

address the intersection of breast cancer, employment, and employment-provided health

insurance. The earlier research on employment and hours responses (Bradley et al., 2006) used a

sample limited to a single metropolitan area (Detroit, MI) and collected limited information on

cancer treatment. Our current study of ECHI and breast cancer was designed to overcome these

limitations. Most importantly, it targeted women who received chemotherapy or radiation (or

both), since non-employment effects and incentives to remain employed are likely to be strongest

among them; these treatments are the most costly and are more likely to entail both severe

disease (making the chances of reoccurrence higher) and long-term side effects from the

chemotherapy or radiation. In addition to these reasons, we study women with breast cancer

because we can determine disease severity and the uniformity of treatment by disease stage.

These conditions allow us to isolate ECHI’s incentives without introducing noise due to

differences in diseases and treatments. These new data provide a more complete picture of how

employer-provided health insurance affects labor supply responses to illness than has been

available to date.

4. Data

        We conducted a study using a quasi-experimental design to examine how of dependence

on one’s job for health insurance influences the labor supply responses of women newly

diagnosed with breast cancer. We enrolled 496 employed, married women within two months

following surgery or initiation of chemotherapy or radiation. The women had to have ECHI, or

be covered by their spouse’s employer-provided health insurance. We refer to the latter as “non-

ECHI.”5 We aimed to enroll women with chemotherapy and/or radiation, although a small

number of women in our sample did not pursue these options and others were recommended

5
 The non-ECHI group includes a handful of women covered by their spouse’s military insurance (5 of the 195
women in the final sample who coded as non-ECHI).


                                                       9
against chemotherapy and/or radiation following results from surgery.6 The study was powered

to detect statistically significant differences (p<.05) in the proportion subsequently employed

between those with and without ECHI, based on estimated effect sizes from prior work. In that

prior work, 85% of women with ECHI and 70% of women without ECHI remained employed

following diagnosis and treatment (Bradley et al., 2006). To detect this effect size, we required a

minimum of 134 women in each group, but ultimately aimed to enroll 500 women with 250 in

each group, anticipating that we would retain 220 in each group throughout the study.7 Enrolling

women with health insurance through their spouse proved to be more difficult than anticipated

because a greater share of eligible women was covered through their own employer than we

observed in the past (Bradley et al., 2006). As a result, when enrollment ended, we had 278

subjects with ECHI and 218 with insurance through their spouse’s employer-provided policy.

         To obtain this sample, we collaborated with three hospital-based treatment centers and

five private oncology centers from urban and rural areas in Virginia. Figure 1 traces out how we

got from our initial subjects identified to our analysis sample. We reviewed the records of 5,840

breast cancer patients to identify prospective study subjects. Inclusion criteria were: married,

between ages 21 and 64 years at the time of diagnosis, employed at diagnosis, and insured either

through their own employer or through a spouse’s employer.8 Subjects had to be without

metastatic disease9 and within two months of initiating chemotherapy and/or radiation or for the

few cases of women who did not receive these treatments, within two months following surgery.

         Letters were mailed to eligible subjects’ physicians (N=749). Physicians of three subjects

refused to allow us to contact their patients. We mailed letters and consent forms to 746 women.


6
  There were 28 women in the sample who did not receive chemotherapy or radiation.
7
  This sample size was larger than what we needed to detect the effect size for changes in hours of work based on the
prior evidence.
8
  The factor most responsible for exclusion from the sample was age greater than or equal to 65.
9
  Treatment for metastatic disease is generally palliative without clear rules for when to stop chemotherapy.


                                                         10
Interviewers then telephoned the women to screen for eligibility. Only 124 (20%) of eligible

women refused to participate; 82 (11.1%) were ineligible for the study because they had multiple

insurance sources or were uninsured; and we were unable to contact 44 (6%) women. If we

include subjects who we were unable to contact in the refusal rate (possibly passive refusals), the

refusal rises slightly (25.3%). Women who refused were approximately two years older than

retained subjects, and more likely to be white.

       We retained 92% of the sample over the nine-month study period. Women who dropped

out of the study were comparable to women retained in terms of age and insurance source, but

were more likely to be white. Among those who dropped out of the study and for whom we have

cancer stage information, fewer had ductal carcinoma in situ relative to those who completed the

study (8% versus 16%), and more of the drop-outs had stage III cancer (20%) than the retained

sample (9%). The difference in stage between those retained and those who dropped out may

lead to more muted labor supply reductions. Abbreviated surveys were completed by 18 of the

dropouts (47.4%), of which 10 had ECHI and 8 had insurance through their spouse. Only one of

these women reported that they were no longer working. Given the small number of drop-outs

overall, we suspect the impact on the analysis is minimal. Lastly, two women died before

completing all interviews and were removed from the sample. Starting in the fall of 2007, we

interviewed women covering three periods: at enrollment (a retrospective interview that referred

to the employment situation at diagnosis), during chemotherapy or radiation treatment

(approximately 2 months following the initiation of treatment – in many cases coupled with the

same interview that collected the retrospective information), and approximately 9 months

following treatment initiation. The majority of women (85%) completed treatment by the last

interview.

       The questionnaire asked about subject and spouse demographic characteristics, job



                                                  11
characteristics, job involvement, job satisfaction, insurance characteristics, and mental and

physical health status. In addition to the telephone interview, we conducted audits of subjects’

medical records. These audits extracted detailed information about cancer stage, surgery,

chemotherapy regimen, and radiation. All interviews were audio recorded; quality control checks

of the audio recordings against data entry revealed a data entry error rate below 1%.10 The last

interview was completed in September 2011.11

5. Empirical Approach

         The transition from employment to non-employment and the percentage change in

weekly hours worked are modeled as functions of source of health insurance prior to diagnosis

(either ECHI or spouse insurance in our baseline specification, with INS an indicator of having

one form of insurance or the other), breast cancer stage (BCA),12 other exogenous variables (the

vector of these other variables and BCA are denoted X), and unobserved influences (). Breast

cancer stage is categorized as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS or stage 0), Stage I (tumor <2 cm

and no lymph node involvement), Stage II (tumor <2 cm and lymph node involvement or tumor

<5 cm without lymph node involvement), and Stage III (cancer present in the axillary lymph

nodes and chest wall). Stage IV is metastatic cancer. Although we excluded patients with Stage

IV disease from initial study enrollment, three such patients were included in the sample who

were thought to have earlier stage disease but were later found to have distant metastases.

         We estimate the employment equation for post-diagnosis periods using,

         Eit* = E + EECHIi1 + Xi1E + it | Ei1=1 and INSi1=1.                                    (1)


10
   The error rate was defined as the number of incorrectly entered responses out of all questions. The total number of
questions varied, depending on the skip patterns for a particular subject. We defined a “critical error rate” as the
number of incorrect responses that invoked an incorrect skip pattern or affected study outcomes of employment or
hours worked. The critical error rate was also less than 1%.
11
   The questionnaire is available upon request.
12
   Breast cancer stage was determined using the American Joint Commission on Cancer staging criteria, which
incorporates Tumor, Node, and Metastases. Cancer stage is used to decide treatment course and is the best indicator
of prognosis.


                                                         12
       We define employment status as a binary variable (Eit) that equals one if a woman reports

that she worked for pay one or more hours per week. We estimate separate linear probability

models for employment at the two- and nine- month interviews. The subscript i refers to the ith

individual and the subscript t refers to the interview period (t=1 for the baseline interview period,

t=2 for the two-month interview, and t=3 for the nine-month interview), and E, E, and E are

parameters.

       In our estimation of the effect of ECHI on weekly hours worked (H), we assume that the

same variables that affect employment also potentially affect hours worked. We estimate percent

change in hours worked relative to the onset of breast cancer.

       {Hit – Hi1}/Hi1 = H + HECHIi1 + Xi1H + it | Eit=1 and INSi1=1.             (2)

       We also report results from similar models of the percent change in weekly hours worked

that are not conditional on employment after diagnosis. These unconditional models also capture

the effect of non-employment for women no longer working. Weekly hours worked post-

diagnosis are zero for women who report that they are not employed. The conditional and

unconditional hours equations are estimated separately for the two- and nine-month interviews,

and all models are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and all reported standard

errors are clustered at the physician level.

Control variables

       The control variables describing the respondents and their job characteristics are

measured for the pre-diagnosis period. We control for weekly hours worked at baseline,

individual characteristics including age, race (Non-Hispanic white, Non-Hispanic African

American, and other), education (high school diploma or less, some college or Associate’s

degree, Bachelor’s degree, advanced degree), whether the subject has children under age 18,

occupation type (white collar or blue collar), and annual household income (< $40,000, between


                                                 13
$40,000 and $74,999, between $75,000 and $150,000, > $150,000). Age is specified as a

continuous variable. All estimations include dummy variables for the year of the interview

(2007-2011) as well as an indicator whether the patient ever received chemotherapy or radiation

treatment at any point.

       In addition to these patient-level controls, in expanded specifications we add controls that

are more specific as to the timing and type of treatment (separate indicators for whether

chemotherapy and/or radiation was being received at the time of the 2-month and/or 9-month

interview), job characteristics, and share of household income that was contributed by the

subject. Job characteristics (in addition to blue- and white-collar designations) include firm size

(<25, 25 to 49, 50 to 99, 100 or more employees), employer type (government, private for-profit,

non-profit, and self-employed), and job tasks.

       Job task questions paralleled those in the HRS. These questions asked if the woman

agreed with statements such as “My job involves a lot of physical effort.” The response

categories were all/almost all of the time, most of the time, some of the time, or none/almost

none of the time, for the following tasks: physical effort, lifting heavy loads, stooping, kneeling,

crouching, intense concentration/attention, data analysis, keeping up with the pace set by others,

learning new things, and whether the job requires good eyesight. We dichotomized responses

into all/almost all of the time and most of the time versus some of the time or none/almost none

of the time. We also asked subjects to report the number of hours they spent sitting per day and

created a dummy variable indicating if the respondent spent less than 2.5 hours, 2.5 to 5, 5 to 7,

or more than 7 hours a day sitting. Share of household income contributed by the subject was

categorized as ≤ 25%, 26% to 50%, 51% to 75%, and > 75%.

Alternative Comparisons

       Our baseline analysis compares the labor response to health shocks for women with and



                                                 14
without ECHI. However, there may be unobserved differences between women with ECHI and

women without ECHI, and likewise there may be differences between jobs that offer ECHI and

jobs that do not. Either these individual or job differences may affect the labor supply response

to health shocks, leading to spurious attributions of response differences to dependence on

employment for health insurance. For example, women with ECHI could be more persistent or

committed workers less likely to reduce labor supply in response to a health shock, or,

conversely, they could be in jobs that are more accommodating to health shocks allowing for

greater labor supply reductions; in other words, biases from unobserved differences between

women based on whether or not they have ECHI could in principle bias the estimates in either

direction.

         To address these concerns, we estimated three additional specifications intended to

provide cleaner assessments of how women’s dependency on their jobs for health insurance

affects their labor supply responses to a breast cancer diagnosis. First, we include a dummy

variable for whether the woman was offered ECHI (OFFER), and an interaction between ECHI

and OFFER.13 We then focus on the interaction between ECHI and OFFER, conditioning on

women being offered ECHI, on the presumption that those who took up the ECHI offer are

dependent on their own work for insurance, whereas those who did not take it up are not. The

idea is that women who were offered ECHI but did not accept it should have jobs with similar

unobserved characteristics to those jobs held by women with ECHI, so that the difference –

among those offered ECHI – between those who take up the offer and those who do not provides

a comparison among more homogeneous women than we get from the simple comparison




13
   Notice that because everyone who holds ECHI must have been offered ECHI, the interaction of ECHI and OFFER
is the same variable as ECHI. In the context of this alternative regression we refer to this variable as OFFER × ECHI
to make clear the dependence of ECHI on OFFER.


                                                         15
between women with ECHI and without ECHI.14 The inclusion of the OFFER variable can be

interpreted as adding a control for employer and job characteristics; any remaining differences

between women who declined an offer of ECHI and those who accepted come from individual-

level differences, such as career orientation, insurance generosity relative to a spouse’s policy,

and degree of dependence on a spouse.

         Second, to try to obtain a better comparison that holds constant individual-level

differences, we estimate our specifications retaining the ECHI indicator, and adding an

interaction term between ECHI and an indicator for whether or not the woman’s spouse is

insured through his own employer provided policy. We define a dummy variable NOSECHI

equal to one when the spouse does not have this coverage.15 In this case, the ECHI versus non-

ECHI difference captures unobservables associated with ECHI, and instead we focus on the

difference – among women with ECHI – between women who can switch to an insured spouse’s

policy (assuming his insurance offers coverage for his wife) and women who cannot, as the

former group is less dependent on their own employment for health insurance. That is, we focus

just on those women with ECHI, distinguishing between those who depend on their own

employment for insurance (NOSECHI = 1) and those who do not (NOSECHI = 0). The

prediction is that the coefficient of the ECHI × NOSECHI interaction should be positive,

indicating that those with ECHI but without an option for coverage through their spouse are

more likely to remain employed or to work longer hours after diagnosis.16


14
   This has some parallels to Gilleskie and Lutz (2002).
15
   There is not a NOSECHI main effect because the women in the sample either have ECHI or insurance through
their spouse, so knowing the value of ECHI we know the value of NOSECHI.
16
   This parallels Madrian (1994). Note that because of HIPAA, these women could switch to their husband’s policy
despite the pre-existing condition. Among men that were offered insurance through their employer, 97% of the
wives surveyed reported that they would be covered by their husband’s policy.
   It might seem more straightforward to include an interaction between ECHI and a dummy variable indicating
spousal coverage (labeled SECHI – the opposite of NOSECHI). In that case, though, we would be testing for a
negative effect. We find it simpler to use specifications that uniformly predict a positive coefficient on the variable
indicating that a woman is reliant on her own employment for insurance.


                                                          16
       Finally, we estimate a similar specification, again effectively conditioning on ECHI but

using information on whether the spouse is offered insurance (NOSOFFER), rather than whether

the spouse has insurance (NOSECHI). The motivation is the same as for the previous

specification; NOSECHI and NOSOFFER are two different ways of capturing whether a woman

could potentially switch to a spouse’s policy. The spouse offer comparison among those women

with ECHI may be cleaner because whether or not the spouse takes up his ECHI may be more of

a choice variable reflective of the wife’s or the husband’s individual or job characteristics.

6. Results

Descriptive statistics

       Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the sample. We start with a comparison between

women with and without ECHI, in columns 1 and 2. Women with ECHI were more likely to be

diagnosed at later stages and were more likely to have had chemotherapy by the second

interview. Women with ECHI were more likely to be African American, responsible for a larger

share of household income, and more likely to work for a large firm (100 or more employees) or

to be employed by a government agency. They were also more likely to have jobs that required

the analysis of data or other information, where they had to keep the pace set by others, and

where they were required to sit for the majority of the day; but were less likely to require

stooping, kneeling, or crouching.

       At the two- and nine-month interviews, the percentages of women employed exceeded

80% and were comparable for women with and without ECHI. At all interviews, women with

ECHI worked more weekly hours than women with insurance through a spouse. During the pre-

diagnosis period, women with ECHI worked, on average, 44 hours per week whereas women

without ECHI worked 37 hours per week. At the two-month interview, women with ECHI

worked an average of 31 hours per week and women without ECHI worked 26 hours per week.



                                                 17
And at the final interview, women with ECHI returned to nearly full-time work (on average, 38

hours per week), while women without ECHI worked about 30 hours per week. The difference-

in-difference in hours worked between women with ECHI and women with insurance through a

spouse between baseline and the two-month and nine-month interviews were 1.8 and 1.7 hours,

respectively, which are relatively small.

       In columns 3 through 8 we present descriptive statistics for the other comparisons we use

to estimate the effects of dependence on employment for insurance. These alternative

comparisons use more homogeneous groups of women differentiated by this dependence, with

the goal of reducing unobservable differences. The statistics in Table 1 speak to differences in

observables, but if these differences are smaller it is likely that differences in unobservables

follow suit.

       Columns 3 and 4 focus on those offered ECHI, distinguishing between those who do and

do not take it up. For this comparison, many of the differences that were statistically significant

between columns 1 and 2 (for women with and without ECHI) remain statistically significant or

large. This is not surprising, because this comparison still focuses on differences between women

with and without ECHI, but in more similar jobs where insurance is offered. We might expect

job characteristics to be more similar, but not necessarily individual characteristics. That appears

to be the case. For example, the firm size distribution is more similar, as are the self-employment

rates and job requirements, but the education distribution is more different.

       The other two alternative comparisons, in columns 5 through 8, would be expected to

yield groups more similar on both job and individual characteristics, and that is true to some

extent. For example, the racial distributions are no longer significantly different, nor are the firm

size categories in columns 7 and 8. Moreover, for the comparisons in columns 5 through 8 the

differences in baseline hours worked are much more similar. Overall, the comparisons in the last



                                                 18
two columns (“Alternative 3”) appear most similar, and the comparisons in the last four columns

are more similar than the others, suggesting that these alternative comparisons may give us the

most reliable estimates of how dependence on one’s job for health insurance affects the labor

supply response to a health shock.

Probability of employment

         Table 2 reports estimates of our models explaining the probability of being employed at

the two- and nine-month interviews. In all estimations, the coefficient for ECHI is positive,

consistent with women with ECHI being more likely to remain employed, but is statistically

significant only in one estimation (column 3), where the estimate implies that women with ECHI

were 5.29 percentage points more likely to be employed than women with health insurance

through a spouse at the nine-month interview. This specification most closely replicates

estimations from Bradley et al. (2006).17 In the expanded specification that includes controls for

job and treatment characteristics and share of household income (column 4), the ECHI

coefficient falls slightly from 5.29 to 4.74 percentage points and is no longer statistically

significant.18

Change in weekly hours worked

         Table 3 reports estimates for our models explaining the percent change in weekly hours

worked from the baseline interview to the two- and nine-month interviews. In the conditional (on

employment) estimations of the baseline models for both the two- and nine-month interviews,

there is statistically significant evidence that women with ECHI reduced their weekly hours by

less than women with health insurance through a spouse (columns 1 and 3), although the

17
   In Bradley et al. (2006), women with ECHI were 10 percentage points more likely to be employed at six months
following diagnosis, but this estimate was not statistically significant. At 12 months following diagnosis, women
with ECHI were 13 percentage points more likely to be employed than women without ECHI (p<.05).
18
   We tested specifications in which we included interaction terms between cancer stage and ECHI. Coefficients on
these estimates were not statistically significant (results not shown). The full estimates including the coefficients of
all the control variables are available upon request.


                                                           19
magnitudes are not large (about 5 percent). The coefficient estimates remain positive, but are

smaller and statistically insignificant in the specifications when other controls are added. The

unconditional estimations in columns 5 through 8 mirror these findings, although all of the

coefficients become larger because they reflect the employment effects of ECHI as well as

change in hours worked.

Alternative Comparisons

       In Table 4, we provide what we regard as more compelling tests of the dependence of

labor supply on the need to maintain health insurance, using the alternative comparisons

discussed earlier. All models include the full set of controls (expanded models). The first set of

regressions (Alternative 1) focuses on those offered ECHI, distinguishing between those who

take up ECHI and those who do not. The interaction term OFFER × ECHI is positive in all cases

except one, but is significant in only one case (for employment at the nine-month interview). The

positive estimates are consistent with women who are more dependent on their employment for

health insurance working relatively more hours following a breast cancer diagnosis.

       The second specification (Alternative 2) focuses on those with ECHI, distinguishing

between women whose husbands have employer-provided health insurance. In this specification,

a positive coefficient on the ECHI× NOSECHI interaction implies that women with a health

shock who are more dependent on their own employment for insurance maintain higher labor

supply. The hours estimates are all positive, and in column 2 the estimated coefficient on this

interaction – for the change in hours conditional on working at the two-month interview – is both

positive and statistically significant, suggesting that conditional on being employed, women with

ECHI but without the option to switch to a spouse’s policy reduce their hours less than women

with ECHI whose spouse also has ECHI to which they can likely switch. This evidence is

consistent with the hypothesis that dependence on employment for one’s health insurance mutes



                                                20
the labor supply response to breast cancer, although the evidence is not strong and emerges only

for some analyses.

       In the final set of estimations (Alternative 3), we focus on whether the spouse is offered

ECHI rather than whether the spouse has ECHI. We suggested that, on a priori grounds, this

comparison might be the most compelling because whether or not the spouse takes up his ECHI

may be more of a choice variable; the descriptive statistics in Table 1 appear to back this up, as

the women we compare in this specification are the most similar on observables. Indeed, the

evidence in the last two rows of Table 4 provides the strongest evidence consistent with our

hypothesis. For three of the specifications there is statistically significant evidence that women

more dependent on their own job for health insurance have higher labor supply following a

health shock. We find this evidence for hours at both the two- and nine-month interviews, with

estimated magnitudes in the 5.5 to 7 percent range.

Perceptions of the need to work to keep health insurance

       Thus far, we focused on observed labor supply responses to ECHI. Next, we report

responses to questions that ask women directly if they are working to preserve health insurance

coverage (Table 5). The responses to these questions provide insight into the perceived link

between ECHI and labor supply, which can provide complementary evidence to what we learn

from observed behavior. We present these responses for the same comparisons we used in the

regression analysis of labor supply responses.

       As shown in columns 1 and 2, overwhelmingly women with ECHI perceive that they are

working to maintain health insurance relative to women without ECHI. For example, at the two-

month interview, nearly two-thirds of women (63%) with ECHI report that they strongly agree or

agree with a statement affirming that they are working to maintain health insurance, relative to a




                                                 21
tiny percentage among those without ECHI.19 The numbers are virtually the same in columns 3

and 4.

           Of potentially more interest are the comparisons based only on women with ECHI or

offered ECHI, where we infer dependence on one’s employment for health insurance based on

what might be available through the spouse. In columns 7 and 8, where the comparison is based

on whether or not the spouse is offered employer-provided health insurance, among women with

ECHI, at the two-month interview women whose spouses are not offered health insurance are

about 15 percentage points more likely to report they are currently working to maintain

insurance, a statistically significant difference.

           When we look at responses about whether women would reduce hours worked if they

could have the same insurance without additional cost, we find even more consistent evidence

that the need to maintain health insurance constrains labor supply choices of women with breast

cancer. For the more reliable and meaningful comparisons – in columns 5 through 8 – which

focus on differences among women with ECHI or offered ECHI, there are significant differences

at the nine-month interview, with about 13 to14 percentage points more women whose husbands

do not have or are not offered ECHI indicating that are maintaining higher hours than they want

to maintain their health insurance.

7. Discussion

           The evidence supports the hypothesis that ECHI incentivizes women newly diagnosed

with breast cancer to maintain higher labor supply than they would otherwise. The estimated

difference in labor supply responses to the health shock is modest – about 5 to 7 percent – and

the evidence is somewhat sensitive to the choice of comparison groups. However, the evidence is

strongest statistically when we compare women who differ in their dependency on their jobs for


19
     The question is not well-posed for those without ECHI, but we report the responses for completeness.


                                                          22
continued insurance, but are otherwise most similar in terms of personal and job characteristics,

which in our view strengthens the conclusion. In particular, the strongest evidence emerges from

comparing women with ECHI, but differentiated only by whether their spouses are offered

employer-provided health insurance that would cover the woman if she lost coverage through her

employer. In addition, the subjective responses of women diagnosed with breast cancer to

questions about whether they are working more to maintain health insurance are consistent with

the conclusions from observed behavior.

       Our study advances what is known about the relationship between ECHI and labor

supply, and has two advantages over prior studies. First, we collected data on a rich set of control

variables, including disease and treatment characteristics, job characteristics, and respondent and

spouse characteristics, which were used to help rule out competing explanations of the observed

effects. Second, we improved upon prior assessments of ECHI’s effect on labor supply (our own

included) by using alternative, more homogeneous comparison groups that better identify the

effects of dependence on one’s job for health insurance. In general, these alternative comparisons

led to stronger evidence that dependence on one’s employment for health insurance moderates

labor supply reductions in response to breast cancer.

       Our estimates of the magnitude of the difference in labor supply response to breast cancer

for women who depend on their own employment for health insurance are consistently positive

across specifications, but modest empirically. This evidence can be viewed as consistent with the

job lock literature that suggests only a modest positive relationship between employment-

contingent insurance and job lock. Of course it differs in weighing evidence on a different

channel by which employer-provided health insurance may constrain worker’s labor market

decisions – which we might think of as “hours lock” that constrains labor supply, rather than job

lock that constrains mobility.



                                                23
       In addition to drawing inferences from observed labor supply behavior, we questioned

the women in our sample – all of whom had a breast cancer diagnosis – about their motivation to

continue employment. There is a strong perception among with women dependent on their own

employment for health insurance that they are working – or are working more – in order to

maintain health insurance, which may explain worries related to insurance expressed by

participants in qualitative studies of cancer survivorship (Schwartz et al. 2009). Although few

women stopped working during the study period, concerns regarding health insurance insecurity

are probably well founded given the strong correlation between job loss and loss of health

insurance coverage (Cawley et al. 2011).

       There are limitations to the study as well. First, the study is confined to a single state,

which may limit whether it can be generalized to other settings. To mitigate this possibility, we

enrolled subjects from academic and private practices and from rural and urban settings.

Nonetheless, an advantage of focusing on a single state is that women in the sample were most

likely subject to similar economic conditions that may affect employment.

       Second, we study a single disease where treatment is reasonably uniform across practices.

Again, this limits generalizability, but it can avoid the effects being obscured by heterogeneity of

disease and treatments. Nonetheless, it would be valuable to gain more knowledge about how

health insurance that is tied to one’s job influences labor supply responses to different types of

health shocks, although collecting the requisite data, as in our study, is expensive.

       Third, we study married women, so the findings may not generalize to single women (or

men) who do not have the option to switch to a spouse’s policy, nor to married men who are less

likely to have the option to switch to a wife’s policy. Prior work suggests that men will be more

constrained by ECHI following the diagnosis of a serious illness because they are likely to have

fewer options than women to switch to their spouse’s employer-provided health insurance



                                                 24
(Bradley et al., 2011).

       Fourth, in spite of our attempts to enroll and study similar groups of women, in the

absence of randomization of employees to equivalent ECHI policies and non-ECHI policies,

dissimilarities between the treatment and control groups are inevitable. Dissimilarities can occur

between study subjects, comparability of insurance policies, and jobs. We therefore cannot

completely rule out bias from selection into different health insurance statuses. Absent an

experimental design, we tried to overcome or assess this limitation by studying more similar

groups of women. The overall consistency of our findings, and the fact that they are stronger

when we use comparisons among more homogeneous groups of women who are still

differentiated by how dependent they are on their own employment for health insurance, should

bolster confidence in the findings.

       The evidence that dependence on employment for health insurance creates an incentive to

maintain higher labor supply when faced with a health shock, and that women strongly perceive

this incentive, suggests that employer-provided health insurance may lead to anxiety or stress

among people who experience a health shock and are dependent on employment for their health

insurance. Moreover, the resulting constraint on reducing labor supply may influence treatment

decisions and adherence behavior to avoid reducing labor supply as much. Future research will

explore the effects on treatment, adherence, and health consequences of the dependence on

employment for health insurance. From a public policy perspective, having better and cheaper

options for health insurance outside of the employer may benefit some workers. At the same

time, the relatively modest differences we find in labor supply responses to health shocks suggest

that providing these alternatives outside the employer-based system are unlikely to trigger

substantial reductions in labor supply.




                                                25
References

Bradley CJ, Neumark D, Luo Z, Bednarek H. Employment-based health insurance, illness, and
labor supply of women: evidence from married women with breast cancer. Health Economics
2006;16(7):719-734.

Bradley CJ, Neumark D, Luo Z, Schenk M. Employment and cancer: findings from a
longitudinal study of breast and prostate cancer survivors. Cancer Investigation 2007;25(1):47-
54.

Bradley CJ, Neumark D, Motika M. The effects of health shocks on employment and health
insurance: the role of employer-provided health insurance. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 17223. 2011. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17223. Accessed
November 22, 2011.

Cawley J, Moriya AS, Simon KI. The impact of the macroeconomy on health insurance
coverage: evidence from the great recession. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 17600. 2011. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17600.pdf. Accessed April 26, 2012.

Cooper PF, Monheit AC. Does employment-related health insurance inhibit job mobility?
Inquiry 1993;30(4):400-416.

Gabel JR, McDevitt R, Lore R, Pickreign J, Whitmore H, Ding T. Trends in underinsurance and
the affordability of employer coverage, 2004-2007. Health Affairs 2009;28(4):w595-606.

Gilleskie DB, Lutz BF. The impact of employer-provided health insurance on dynamic
employment transitions. The Journal of Human Resources 2002;37(1):129-162.

Hassett MJ, O'Malley AJ, Keating NL. Factors influencing changes in employment among
women with newly diagnosed breast cancer. Cancer 2009;115(12):2775-2782.

Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Focus on health reform: summary of coverage provisions in
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 2011. http://www.kff.org/
healthreform/upload/8023-R.pdf. Accessed January 26, 2012.

Johnsson A, Fornander T, Rutgvist LE, Olsson M. Work status and life changes in the first year
after breast cancer diagnosis. Work 2011;38(4):337-346.
Kapur K. The impact of health on job mobility: a measure of job lock. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 1998;51(2):282-298.

Madrian B. Employment-based health insurance and job mobility: Is there evidence of job lock?
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 1994; 109(1):27-54.

Mujahid MS, Janz NK, Hawley ST, Griggs JJ, Hamilton AS, Graff J, Katz SJ. Racial/ethnic
differences in job loss for women with breast cancer. Journal of Cancer Survivorship
2011;5(1):102-111.
National Cancer Institute (a). Estimated U.S. cancer prevalence. 2011. http://cancercontrol.
cancer.gov/ocs/prevalence/prevalence.html#allsites. Accessed November 10, 2011.

National Cancer Institute (b). SEER Stat Fact Sheets: Breast. 2011.
http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/breast.html#incidence-mortality. Accessed November 22,
2011.

Schwartz K, Claxton G, Martin K, Schmidt C. Spending to survive: cancer patients confront
holes in the health insurance system. 2009. http://www.kff.org/insurance/upload/7851.pdf.
Accessed April 26, 2012.

Stephan P. Breast cancer treatment and recovery times: treatment schedule and time management
during breast cancer. 2010. http://breastcancer.about.com/od/whattoexpect/a/Breast-Cancer-
Treatment-Recovery-Times.htm. Accessed November 10, 2011.

Tunceli K, Short PF, Moran JR, Tunceli O. Cancer survivorship, health insurance, and
employment transitions among older workers. Inquiry 2009;46(1):17-32.

United States Department of Labor Employee Benefits Security Administration. COBRA
continuation coverage assistance under ARRA. 2011. http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/COBRA.html.
Accessed January 26, 2012.

United States Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division. Family and Medical Leave Act.
2012. http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla. Accessed April 26, 2012.
Figure 1. Subject identification, enrollment, and retention


                                   Married Breast Cancer Subjects Identified
                                                    5,840




                                                  Ineligible
                                                    5,091



                                                   Eligible
                                                     749



                            Physician Refusal
                                    3



                                            Subject Letters Mailed
                                                     746




                                            Screening Calls Made
                                                    746




                 Not Eligible                                        Subject Refusal        Unable to Contact
                     82                                                   124                      44



                                                   Enrolled
                                                     496


                ECHI                                                                       Spouse
                 278                                                                        218




    Deceased                    Dropouts                                       Deceased                 Dropouts
       2                           16                                             0                        23




                       Completed Study                                   Completed Study
                            260                                               195
Table 1. Descriptive statistics at baseline interview
                                          (1)                 (2)       (3)                 (4)       (5)               (6)        (7)              (8)
                                                Base comparison              Alternative 1                Alternative 2               Alternative 3
                                                                     OFFER=1           OFFER=1      ECHI=1          ECHI = 1     ECHI=1           ECHI=1
                                        ECHI=0             ECHI=1     ECHI=0            ECHI=1     NOSECHI=0      NOSECHI=1    NOSOFFER=0 NOSOFFER=1
                         Observations    195                 260        110                260        109               151       164               96
Breast cancer stage                                          ***                            **
   Stage 0                                9.74              11.92      10.91              11.92       13.76          10.6         13.41          9.38
   Stage I                               39.49              29.62        40               29.62       27.52         31.13         28.05         32.29
   Stage II                              43.59              41.92      43.64              41.92       41.28         42.38         39.63         45.83
   Stage III or IV                        7.18              16.54       5.45              16.54       17.43         15.89          18.9         12.5
Had chemotherapy and/or radiation        93.33              94.23      96.36              94.23       96.33         92.72         95.73         91.67
Radiation at 2 months post-diagnosis     13.85              13.08      17.27              13.08       14.68         11.92         14.02         11.46
Radiation at 9 months post-diagnosis      4.10              4.65        5.45               4.62        5.50          3.97         4.88          4.17
Chemotherapy at 2 months                 52.31             64.23**     52.73             64.23**      60.55         66.89         64.02         64.58
  post-diagnosis
Chemotherapy at 9 months                 14.87              15.38      15.45            15.38         17.43         13.91         18.29        10.42*
   post-diagnosis
Mean age                                 48.92              49.38      48.34            49.38         48.73         49.84         48.27       51.26***
Race/ethnicity                                               ***                          **
   White, non-Hispanic                   84.62              73.85      81.82            73.85         72.48         74.83         70.12         80.21
   African-American, non-Hispanic        9.23               23.46      11.82            23.46         23.85         23.18         26.22         18.75
   Other                                 6.15               2.69        6.36             2.69          3.67         1.99          3.66          1.04
Education
   High school diploma or less           13.85              14.62      10.91            14.62         19.27         11.26         14.63         14.58
   Some college or Associates degree     27.18              29.62      27.27            29.62         27.52         31.13         30.49         28.12
   Bachelor’s degree                     30.77              32.31      32.73            32.31         34.86         30.46         35.37         27.08
   Advanced degree                       28.21              23.46      29.09            23.46         18.35         27.15         19.51         30.21
Has children < 18                        46.67              39.23      51.82           39.23**        40.37         38.41         42.68         33.33
Household income
   <$40,000                               3.59              5.00        4.55             5.00         5.50          4.64          3.66          7.29
   $40,000 – $74,999                     17.95              21.54      15.45            21.54          21.1         21.85         18.29         27.08
   $75,000 – $150,000                    48.72              48.46      50.91            48.46         46.79         49.67         48.78         47.92
   >$150,000                             27.18              22.31      28.18            22.31         23.85         21.19         26.22         15.62
   Don’t know / refused                   2.56              2.69        0.91             2.69         2.75          2.65          3.05          2.08
Respondent’s share of household
   income                                                    ***                         ***                          **                         ***
   <25%                                  36.41              6.92       25.45             6.92         11.01          3.97          8.54          4.17
   26% – 50%                             45.64              44.23      53.64            44.23         49.54          40.4         51.22         32.29
   51% – 75%                             14.87              35.00      18.18            35.00         31.19         37.75         32.32         39.58
   >75%                                   1.03              11.54       1.82            11.54          5.50         15.89          4.88         22.92
Occupation status
   White collar                          92.82              93.08      95.45            93.08         89.91         95.36         91.46         95.83
   Blue collar                           7.18               6.54        4.55             6.54          9.17          4.64         7.93          4.17
Firm size                                                    ***                          **                          *
   <25 employees                         37.44              7.31       16.36             7.31         9.17           5.96          7.32         7.29
   25 – 49 employees                      6.15              5.00        4.55             5.00         8.26           2.65          6.10         3.12
                                                   (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)             (6)                  (7)             (8)
                                                         Base comparison                       Alternative 1                        Alternative 2                       Alternative 3
                                                                                       OFFER=1           OFFER=1              ECHI=1          ECHI = 1            ECHI=1            ECHI=1
                                               ECHI=0               ECHI=1              ECHI=0            ECHI=1             NOSECHI=0      NOSECHI=1           NOSOFFER=0 NOSOFFER=1
                            Observations         195                  260                 110                260                109               151               164                96
     50 – 99 employees                           6.67                 5.00               10.00               5.00               2.75             6.62              3.05               8.33
     100+ employees                             49.74                82.31               69.09              82.31               78.9            84.77              82.93             81.25
  Firm type                                                           ***
     Government                                    21.03             39.23                 30.00               39.23             35.78             41.72              37.80               41.67
     Private, for-profit                           53.85             48.08                 53.64               48.08             51.38             45.70              49.39               45.83
     Non-profit                                    13.33             10.00                 13.64               10.00              8.26             11.26               9.76               10.42
     Self-employed                                 11.79              2.31                  2.73                2.31              3.67              1.32               2.44                2.08
  Job requires all/almost all the time or
     most of the time
     Lots of physical effort                       28.72               25.38               26.36               25.38             23.85             26.49              25.00               26.04
     Intense concentration or attention            80.00               82.69               78.18               82.69             77.98            86.09*              79.88               87.50
     Lifting heavy loads                            7.69               8.85                 6.36                8.85              8.26              9.27               9.15                8.33
     Stooping, kneeling, or crouching              23.59              17.31*               21.82               17.31             11.01           21.85**              14.63               21.88
     Analysis of data or information               63.08             72.69**               68.18               72.69             71.56             73.51              72.56               72.92
     Learning new things                           54.36               58.46               51.82               58.46             58.72             58.28              57.32               60.42
     Good eyesight                                 88.72               88.85               88.18               88.85             88.07             89.40              86.59               92.71
     Keeping up with pace set by others            45.13             36.92**               47.27              36.92*             43.12            32.45*              39.63               32.29
  Number of hours sitting per day                                       **
     <2.5 hours                                    30.77               23.08               29.09               23.08             24.77             21.85              22.56               23.96
     2.5 to 4.5 hours                              31.28               25.00               25.45               25.00             23.85             25.83              25.61               23.96
     5 to 7                                        26.15               31.92               29.09               31.92             30.28             33.11              29.27               36.46
     >7 hours                                      11.79               20.00               16.36               20.00             21.10             19.21              22.56               15.62
  Employed 2 months                                83.08               83.08               81.82               83.08             85.32             81.46              84.76               80.21
  Employed 9 months                                87.69               91.92               86.36              91.92*             90.83             92.72              91.46               92.71
  Mean weekly hours worked (SD),
     baseline                                  37.26 (13.34)     43.97 (8.30)***       40.59 (10.40)      43.97 (8.30)***    43.36 (7.58)      44.42 (8.78)        43.65 (7.97)       44.52 (8.85)
  Mean weekly hours worked (SD),
     2 months                                  25.96 (16.68)    30.89 (16.92)***       28.57 (16.90)       30.89 (16.92)    30.42 (15.95)      31.23 (17.62)      31.12 (16.39)       30.50 (17.85)
  Mean weekly hours worked (SD),
     9 months                                  29.79 (16.35)    38.11 (14.27)***       32.63 (15.86)     38.11 (14.27)***   36.74 (14.33)      39.10 (14.19)      37.22 (14.11)       39.64 (14.48)
Notes: Values in Table 1 are percentages unless otherwise specified as mean of continuous variable. ECHI=employment-contingent health insurance for the respondent, OFFER=respondent
was offered ECHI, NOSECHI=respondent’s spouse is not covered by employment-contingent or military health insurance, , and NOSOFFER=spouse was not offered (from his employer)
employment-contingent health insurance and did not have military health insurance. Columns within each pair are compared for statistical testing using the χ2 test for multinomial categorical
variables and two-sample t-test for continuous or binomial variables. Missing data: radiation at 2 months (n=17); radiation at 9 months (n=11); chemotherapy at 2 months (n=7); chemotherapy
at 9 months (n=7). In some cases (including for binomial variables) there are a few respondents in a “don’t know/refused category.” In these cases the statistical significance reported in the table
is always based on a χ2 test treating these responses as a separate category, and these cases are captured with dummy variables in the regressions that follow. In almost all cases (except some
with don’t know/refused responses), asterisks are reported above estimates for multinomial variables, and next to estimates for binomial variables. Statistically significant differences indicated
as: *p<.10, **p<.05, ***p<.01.
Table 2. Linear probability models of employment at two-month and nine-month interviews
                                         (1)                (2)                          (3)                 (4)
                                          Two-month interview                             Nine-month interview
                                   Baseline model    Expanded model                Baseline model     Expanded model
 ECHI                                  0.0129             0.0150                      0.0529*              0.0474
                                      (0.0393)           (0.0441)                     (0.0302)            (0.0326)
 Breast Cancer Stage
     Stage 0                            0.0300                 0.0317                  -0.0817                 -0.0492
                                       (0.0418)               (0.0476)                 (0.0573)                (0.0663)

     Stage II                         -0.140***               -0.103**               -0.0812***                -0.0594*
                                       (0.0332)               (0.0425)                 (0.0302)                (0.0299)

     Stage III or IV                   -0.132*                -0.123*                   -0.101                 -0.0853
                                       (0.0665)               (0.0724)                 (0.0640)                (0.0545)

 Treatment indicators, job                No                     Yes                      No                     Yes
 characteristics, and
 household income share
 included
Notes: There are 455 observations. Standard errors in parentheses: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01 (two-tailed tests).
ECHI=employment-contingent health insurance. OLS regressions with robust standard errors clustered by physician. Stage I is
the omitted cancer stage. Controls in baseline model include age in years, indicator of chemotherapy or radiation observed at
any point, pre-diagnosis weekly hours worked, and sets of dummy indicators for race, education level, having children under
age 18, household income, whether the respondent's job is a blue collar job, and year of interview (2007 to 2011). Treatment
indicators designate that chemotherapy and/or radiation was being received at the time of the two-month or nine-month
interview. Job characteristics include sets of dummies for firm size (<25, 25 to 49, 50 to 99, 100 or more employees) and firm
type, categories for number of hours spent sitting daily, and other job requirements: physical effort, intense concentration,
lifting, stooping/kneeling/crouching, data analysis, keep pace set by others, learning new things, and good eyesight. Household
income share indicates the respondent's share as a percentage of her household income (≤25%, 26% to 50%, 51% to 75%, and
>75%).
 Table 3. Percentage change in hours worked, conditional and unconditional on working post-diagnosis
                                    (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)                (6)                (7)                 (8)
                                                   Conditional on working                                                     Not conditional on working
                                         N=378                                N=410                                                       N=455
                                  Two-month interview                 Nine-month interview                    Two-month interview                   Nine-month interview
                                 Baseline    Expanded                Baseline      Expanded                 Baseline      Expanded                Baseline       Expanded
                                   model       model                  model          model                   model          model                  model           model
ECHI                             0.0479**      0.0286                0.0584*         0.0128                 0.0610*         0.0435                0.102**          0.0490
                                 (0.0222)     (0.0262)               (0.0326)       (0.0300)                (0.0353)       (0.0426)               (0.0389)        (0.0380)

Breast Cancer Stage
    Stage 0                      0.0492*          0.00233             0.0461            0.0314               0.0648             0.0216            -0.0357            -0.00800
                                 (0.0259)         (0.0332)           (0.0282)          (0.0275)             (0.0487)           (0.0531)           (0.0658)           (0.0691)

    Stage II                    -0.0713**         -0.0548             0.0249            0.0204             -0.184***          -0.138***           -0.0551             -0.0388
                                 (0.0301)         (0.0340)           (0.0343)          (0.0345)             (0.0354)           (0.0427)           (0.0361)            (0.0361)

    Stage III or IV              -0.103**         -0.0725*           0.00862          -0.00627             -0.203***          -0.172***            -0.102              -0.110*
                                 (0.0462)         (0.0432)           (0.0372)         (0.0278)              (0.0642)           (0.0646)           (0.0693)            (0.0619)

Treatment indicators, job           No               Yes                No               Yes                   No                 Yes                No                 Yes
characteristics, and
household income share
included
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01 (two-tailed tests). ECHI=employment-contingent health insurance. All regressions estimated using OLS with
robust standard errors clustered by physician. Stage I is the omitted cancer stage. Controls are the same as noted in Table 2.
Table 4. Labor supply outcomes, alternative specifications of expanded model
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)                           (4)            (5)              (6)
                                       Two-month interview                                          Nine-month interview
                                        Percent change in Percent change                              Percent change in Percent change
                                        hours, conditional   in hours,                               hours, conditional    in hours,
                            Employment     on working      unconditional                 Employment      on working      unconditional

Alternative 1
OFFER                          -0.0711              0.0527              0.00153            -0.0660              0.0832               0.0244
                              (0.0771)             (0.0539)             (0.0850)           (0.0574)             (0.104)              (0.103)

OFFER × ECHI                   0.0352               0.0135               0.0443            0.0650*              -0.0102              0.0412
                              (0.0527)             (0.0250)             (0.0490)           (0.0361)             (0.0363)            (0.0432)

Alternative 2
ECHI                           0.0393              -0.0134               0.0276             0.0499             -0.00501              0.0284
                              (0.0505)             (0.0324)             (0.0528)           (0.0411)            (0.0307)             (0.0444)

ECHI × NOSECHI                 -0.0452            0.0813**               0.0296            -0.00472              0.0336              0.0388
                              (0.0424)            (0.0319)              (0.0457)           (0.0318)             (0.0299)            (0.0418)

Alternative 3
ECHI                           0.0294              0.00992               0.0401             0.0446             -0.00547              0.0259
                              (0.0425)             (0.0267)             (0.0413)           (0.0349)            (0.0299)             (0.0391)

ECHI × NOSOFFER               -0.0440              0.0590*               0.0103            0.00832             0.0551**             0.0704*
                              (0.0463)             (0.0299)             (0.0415)           (0.0335)            (0.0268)             (0.0360)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01 (two-tailed tests). ECHI=employment-contingent health insurance for the
respondent, OFFER=respondent was offered ECHI, NOSECHI=respondent’s spouse is not covered by employment-contingent or military health
insurance, and NOSOFFER=spouse was not offered (from his employer) employment-contingent health insurance and did not have military health
insurance. All regressions run using OLS with standard errors clustered by physician, and all include the same set of control variables as what was
included in the “expanded” models in Tables 2 and 3. Sample sizes are reduced by two non-ECHI respondents in regressions that include the variable
OFFER because those respondents were not asked if they were offered insurance from their employer due to interviewer error.
Table 5. Reasons for continued employment and hours worked, %
                                                   (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)                  (5)          (6)                      (7)           (8)
                                                   Base specification                   Alternative 1                    Alternative 2                          Alternative 3
                                                                                  OFFER=1        OFFER=1             ECHI=1        ECHI = 1                ECHI=1           ECHI=1
Survey question                                 ECHI=0            ECHI=1           ECHI=0         ECHI=1            NOSECHI=0 NOSECHI=1                  NOSOFFER=0 NOSOFFER=1
Two-month interview
Are you currently working to maintain             3.70           62.96***             3.33          62.96***            58.06             66.67               57.55                72.73**
health insurance benefits?                      (N=162)          (N=216)            (N=90)          (N=216)            (N=93)            (N=123)             (N=139)               (N=77)
If you could have the same health                29.33           48.15***            27.91          48.15***            48.39             47.97               48.92                 46.75
insurance without additional cost to            (N=150)          (N=216)            (N=86)          (N=216)            (N=93)            (N=123)             (N=139)               (N=77)
you, would you reduce the number of
hours you work each week?
Nine-month interview
Are you currently working to maintain             7.02           66.95***            11.58          66.95***            66.67             67.14               64.00                 71.91
health insurance benefits?                      (N=171)          (N=239)            (N=95)          (N=239)            (N=99)            (N=140)             (N=150)               (N=89)
If you could have the same health                27.04           49.79***            30.00          49.79***            41.41            55.71**              45.33                57.30*
insurance without additional cost to            (N=159)          (N=239)            (N=90)          (N=239)            (N=99)            (N=140)             (N=150)               (N=89)
you, would you reduce the number of
hours you work each week?
Notes: For the first question, we report the percentage responding “strongly agree” or “agree.” The second question is a simple yes/no response; the percentage reporting yes is reported.
Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences using two- tailed t-tests * p<.10, **p<.05, ***p<.01. Individuals who were not employed and those who responded by refusing to answer
or claiming they did not know are excluded from calculations.
