NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING RACIAL PRICE DIFFERENTIALS IN THE HOUSING MARKET
Patrick Bayer
Marcus D. Casey
Fernando Ferreira
Robert McMillan
Working Paper 18069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18069
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

This paper previously circulated as "Price Discrimination in the Housing Market." The authors would
like to thank Jeff Brown, Hanming Fang, Robert Kaestner, Ron Laschever, Darren Lubotsky, Marie
Mora, Ben Ost, Steve Rivkin, Jake Vigdor and seminar participants at the Harris School of Public
Policy, Purdue University, the University of Illinois, the University of Windsor, and the AEA and
IEA Meetings for helpful comments. Financial support is gratefully acknowledged from the National
Science Foundation through grant SES-0721136, the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie
Real Estate Center at Wharton, and SSHRC. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18069.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Patrick Bayer, Marcus D. Casey, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Racial Price Differentials in the Housing Market
Patrick Bayer, Marcus D. Casey, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 18069
May 2012, Revised April 2013
JEL No. H0,J15,K4,R2,R3
ABSTRACT
This paper uses unique panel data covering over two million repeat-sales housing transactions from
four metropolitan areas to test for the presence of racial price differentials in the housing market. Drawing
on the strengths of these data, our research design controls carefully for unobserved differences in
the quality of neighborhoods and the homes purchased by buyers of each race. We find that black
and Hispanic homebuyers pay premiums of about three percent on average across the four cities, differences
that are not explained by variation in buyer income, wealth or access to credit. Further, the estimated
premiums do not vary significantly with the racial composition of the neighborhood; nor, strikingly,
do they vary with the race of the seller. This latter finding suggests that racial prejudice on the part
of sellers is not the primary explanation for the robust premiums we uncover. The results have implications
for the evolution of racial differences in wealth and home ownership and the persistence of residential
segregation.
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Marcus D. Casey
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan UH725 M/C144
Chicago, IL 60607
mcasey@uic.edu

Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert McMillan
University of Toronto
Department of Economics
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
mcmillan@chass.utoronto.ca

I.

Introduction
For much of the twentieth century, overt forms of centralized racial discrimination were

widespread and deeply-ingrained in US housing markets. Restrictive covenants written into the
deeds of homes prevented the re-sale of properties to minority buyers; redlining in the mortgage
industry substantially raised the costs of borrowing in predominantly black neighborhoods; and
blockbusting and other racially-motivated tactics by realtors reinforced strict racial segregation in
many cities.1 While these institutionalized discriminatory practices had largely disappeared by
the end of the twentieth century,2 important questions remain about the role of race as a
determinant of prices in the housing market. At a basic level, do different-race homebuyers pay
similar prices for comparable housing? And to what extent does decentralized discrimination on
the part of individual home sellers or other market agents continue to play a significant role in the
market? While these questions have important implications for the dynamics of racial inequality
and residential segregation, the difficulty of designing and implementing studies that compare
market outcomes for different-race households in essentially identical circumstances has limited
our ability to provide clear and convincing answers.
This paper seeks to shed new light on these questions. It has two primary goals: (i) to
estimate the extent of any racial price differentials in the housing market – differentials that may
be indicative of discriminatory behavior, and (ii) to test whether race prejudice on the part of
sellers3 can provide the primary explanation for any measured price differences.
Identifying the extent and nature of any racial price differentials in most market settings
is challenging because a variety of other factors might generate correlations between sales prices
and buyer race. An obvious reason why households of different races pay different prices for
housing is that they purchase houses of varying quality, both in terms of structural and
neighborhood amenities. To properly detect price differentials, therefore, one needs to compare
the price that different-race buyers for essentially identical properties.4 The previous housing
literature has pursued this strategy almost uniformly by comparing the prices of homes purchased
in the same neighborhood at roughly the same time. But these traditional studies implicitly ignore
unobserved differences in house quality within neighborhoods and, unsurprisingly, typically find

1

See Yinger (1995, 1998) for a detailed discussion. Hirsch (1998) provides an account focusing on Chicago.
See Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999) for a characterization of the rise and decline of centralized discrimination
in American cities over the course of the twentieth century.
3
In the discussion and empirical work that follows, we use the term “seller” to refer to the actual owner or the
owner’s selling agent.
4
Controlling for differences in product attributes is potentially more straightforward in other contexts such as new
automobile sales – see, for example, Ayres (1991), Ayres and Siegelman (1995), and Goldberg (1996) – where
researchers can compare sales prices for cars of the same make, model, and options.
2

2

that white buyers, who have systematically higher levels of income and wealth, pay a ‘premium’
for housing.5
In this paper, we extend the existing literature by exploiting a unique data set that
provides information on transaction prices and buyer and seller attributes for a large,
representative sample of home sales in order to isolate variation in sales prices for comparable
properties. Our data set is based on all housing transactions that occurred in four large
metropolitan areas (Chicago, Baltimore/Washington DC (‘Maryland’ for shorthand), Los
Angeles, and San Francisco) over a period spanning two decades, 1990-2008.6 For each
transaction, we observe the sales price as well as detailed information about the house location
and housing attributes. To these transactions data, we merge information about the race and
income of the buyer by matching mortgage records, creating a rich data set featuring over two
million transactions. For houses in our data set that sell more than once, we can also pin down
the race of the seller.
Our research design capitalizes on the geographic and temporal specificity of these data,
examining differences in prices for houses that are far more comparable, in terms of housing and
neighborhood characteristics, than those studied in prior work. In particular, we estimate how the
sales price varies with the race and ethnicity of the buyer in a repeat-sales specification that
controls explicitly for the unobserved quality of the individual house as well as time-varying
neighborhood effects. In essence, a repeat-sales approach provides a measure of the expected
sales price of a house, given a prior sale and the estimated rate of appreciation in the
neighborhood since it last sold. By comparing the price paid by buyers of different races relative
to this expected sales price, we isolate racial differences in sales prices for comparable homes.
Our initial results indicate that black and Hispanic buyers pay a statistically significant
premium for comparable housing in all four major city markets, ranging from 1 to 4 percent
relative to their white counterparts; the average estimated premium pooling across all four
markets is more than 2 percent for both black and Hispanic buyers in this initial analysis. The
estimated premiums for black buyers are highest in the Chicago and Maryland areas, where they
represent a reasonably large fraction of the population and segregation levels have historically
been very high. There is weaker evidence for price differentials for black buyers in Los Angeles
and San Francisco, where the estimated premiums are 1.1-1.2 percent. The estimated premiums
for Hispanic buyers are fairly comparable in Chicago, Maryland, and San Francisco (around 2.5-

5

An exception is the study by Myers (2004). We discuss the previous literature in detail in Section III.
We observe data for the two California metropolitan areas from 1990 to 2008, and for Chicago and Maryland from
1997 to 2007.
6

3

3.0 percent), but only 1.2 percent in Los Angeles. Due to the large sample sizes involved, all of
these estimates are statistically significantly different from zero.
While these initial results provide strong statistical evidence that black and Hispanic
buyers pay more for comparable housing than whites, it is unclear whether these price differences
are directly related to race. Instead, race might simply be correlated with other buyer attributes
affecting the home sales process. In practice, the typical housing transaction is complicated by the
need of the buyer to secure a mortgage and engage in a formal inspection of the property. This
means that there is often some uncertainty for the seller at the time the sales price is set about the
likelihood that the sale will go through. It would not be surprising, therefore, if sellers were
willing to accept a lower transaction price from a buyer whom they deemed more likely to be able
to secure financing and close the deal. On the flipside, wealthier buyers may have higher search
costs and therefore make higher initial offers when they find a house that they like in order to
make sure to get it. In this way, the estimated price premiums for black and Hispanic buyers may
simply reflect differences in the buyer’s income, wealth, or ability to secure mortgage financing.
The novel features of our data set allow us to address these issues directly. In particular,
for each transaction, we observe the buyer’s income as well as the down-payment associated with
the mortgage and the lender’s name. When we include controls for buyer’s income and downpayment in the repeat-sales specification described above, the estimated premiums for black and
Hispanic buyers increase significantly, to an average of 2.8 percent in each case (over 4 percent
for black buyers in Chicago and Maryland). When we add a complete set of lender fixed effects,
which might proxy for the buyer’s access to credit, the results in each city remain largely
unchanged, with the average premiums remaining at 2.8-2.9 percent. Thus it appears that, if
anything, the correlation of race with financial considerations leads to an underestimate of the
racial premium in our initial analysis.
Having established the existence of robust racial differentials in sales prices, we turn our
attention to the second main goal of our analysis: testing whether racial animosity/prejudice on
the part of sellers can explain these premiums. To this end, we present a series of results that
characterize how these differentials vary across sellers and neighborhoods. We begin by
decomposing the estimated price differences by the race of both the buyer and seller. If racial
animosity or prejudice is an important factor driving seller behavior, we would expect sellers to
systematically favor buyers of their own race or ethnicity. Instead, we find that the average price
premium paid by black and Hispanic buyers is about the same regardless of the race of the seller.
That is, black and Hispanic buyers pay significantly more than their white counterparts not only
when they buy from white sellers but also from black and Hispanic sellers. Our analysis also

4

indicates that there is little difference in the estimated price differentials across different
neighborhood compositions. Taken together, these results provide strong support for the
conclusion that racial prejudice – or any explanation that would lead sellers to favor buyers of
their own race – is not the primary explanation for the observed racial price differentials.7
A limitation of our analysis is that we cannot isolate a single alternative explanation for
the estimated price premiums paid by black and Hispanic buyers in these markets. Statistical
discrimination might be motivated, for example, by the correlation of race with search costs or
experience with real estate bargaining; and further research is needed to determine the extent to
which a particular channel predominates. Regardless of the ultimate explanation, though, our
results show that black and Hispanic buyers pay more than their white counterparts in almost
every purchase setting and that robust racial differences in the price paid to buy a home –
upwards of 3-3.5 percent on average in multiple major US markets – persist to the present day,
long after many of the most overt forms of institutional discrimination have been eliminated.
Price differences of this magnitude have clear implications for the levels and persistence of racial
differences in home ownership, neighborhood segregation, and the dynamics of wealth
accumulation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the data set that
we have constructed for our analysis. Section III introduces our primary research design and
relates it to those used in previous studies that attempt to infer racial price differentials in housing
markets. We present our main estimates in Section IV, and test whether racial prejudice provides
the primary explanation for these results in Section V. Section VI concludes, drawing out the
implications of our findings.

II. Data
The data set we use is constructed by combining information from proprietary
transactions data collected by a real estate monitoring service, DataQuick, with publicly-available
loan application registry information gathered under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA).8 The transactions data set includes a complete census of housing transactions and is
available for the San Francisco and Los Angeles metropolitan areas from 1988-2008, and for the
Chicago metropolitan area and Baltimore-Washington DC corridor in Maryland from 1997-2008.
These cities are particularly useful for studying racial price differences because each has a large
7

Note that these results for home sales, where buyer and seller engage in a single interaction, do not imply that
racial animosity or prejudice is not an issue in the rental market, where the rental contract generates a dynamic
relationship between landlord and tenant.
8
Additional information about the HMDA legislation and the public-use data can be found at http://www.ffiec.gov.

5

and heterogeneous population of homebuyers. Data on the transaction price, date of sale, loan
amount, lender name, and location of the home are provided for each transaction. In addition –
most crucial to our analysis – each property is characterized by a unique identifier that makes it
possible to track the longitudinal transactions history of each home.
We match demographic information to individual homes by using the HMDA application
registry files. The HMDA legislation was enacted to monitor potential redlining and
discriminatory lending behavior. An important feature of this legislation is the requirement that
race and other pertinent demographic information be recorded for each mortgage application.
Hence, from these data we are able to retrieve demographic information relevant to our study:
race and income of the buyer, transactions date, and the census tract of the home in question for
linkage purposes.
Our primary data set for each city is then constructed by matching the transactions and
HMDA data sets on the basis of (i) census tract, (ii) loan amount, (iii) transaction year, and (iv)
lender name.9 An observation in the matched data set consists of the full set of information
provided for each transaction record by DataQuick, along with demographic and economic
information about the buyer drawn from HMDA. Finally, tract-level Census data are merged into
the DataQuick-HMDA matched data set to augment the neighborhood level characteristics
available for empirical analysis.
As we describe below, our main estimating equation includes house fixed effects. Thus,
the effective sample for our analysis, which uses a repeat-sales approach, includes only houses
that sell at least twice over the period. Our sample includes over a quarter million transactions for
both Chicago and Maryland, over half a million transactions for San Francisco, and close to one
million for Los Angeles, giving an overall sample size of over two million. Table 1 presents
descriptive statistics for the attributes of buyers and sellers, as well as transaction prices for the
observations in our repeat-sales sample. For comparison, Appendix Table 1 reports analogous
statistics for homes that transacted only once during our sample period; the differences are, for
the most part, small to negligible.10 The columns of Table 1 report statistics separately for each
metropolitan area, and the top panel of the table reports the number of observations in the repeatsales data set and the frequency with which homes in each area sold 2-4 or more times,

9

Overall, the matching procedure works well. Due to missing, misreported, or other idiosyncratic differences in the
values of the matching variables, a unique match was not achieved for all observations. However, these unmatched
homes account for a small percentage of transactions – in most cases, less than 5 percent of the data.
10
The two distributions of buyer race are essentially identical, comparing the repeat-sales sample to the full sample;
mean and median incomes are close to one another; and median transactions prices are slightly higher in the repeatsales sample for all but Chicago.

6

respectively (The three categories are exhaustive.). In all four cities, houses that sold exactly
twice make up the majority of observations.
The second panel of the table reports the distribution of buyer race and ethnicity. While
the majority of buyers in each city are white, there is considerable variation in buyer race and
ethnicity across the cities in our sample. For example, while only 5 percent of buyers are black in
Los Angeles and 8 percent in Chicago, blacks constitute 25 percent of buyers in Maryland. The
fraction of Hispanic buyers is contrastingly low there, at 7 percent, and much higher, at 25
percent, in Los Angeles, while the fraction of Asian (including ‘other’ race/ethnicity) buyers is
highest in San Francisco, at 25 percent.
For homes that sell multiple times, we are able to characterize the race of the seller,
beginning with the second transaction observed in the data set.11 The next panel of Table 1
reports the distribution of sales in each metropolitan area jointly by the race of the buyer and
seller for all transactions where both buyer and seller race is recorded. In each metropolitan area,
white-to-white transactions make up the majority of sales – between 43 to 60 percent of all
transactions. There is, however, considerable variation in the composition of the remaining
transactions in each metropolitan area. Maryland has the highest fraction of interracial
transactions: white-to-black and black-to-white transactions make up 12 and 7 percent of repeat
sales, respectively. Chicago also has a considerable fraction of white-to-black sales but far fewer
black-to-white transactions. Transactions between white and Hispanic buyers, running in each
direction, are reasonably prevalent in Chicago, higher in San Francisco and still higher in Los
Angeles.
Finally, the bottom panel of Table 1 reports some basic summary statistics by
metropolitan area: Home prices are significantly higher in the two Californian metropolitan areas,
not surprisingly, and so too are the average incomes and median down-payments of homebuyers.

III. Research Design: Identification of Racial Price Differentials
The research design that we develop exploits the unique structure of our data set to shed
light on racial differences in the price paid to purchase comparable housing. Our primary
methodology can be summarized using the following regression equation, which relates the log
price of transaction i for house j in neighborhood n at time t over the sample period to the buyer’s
race and a set of controls:

11

The seller’s race is unobserved for the first transaction for each house in our repeat sales sample.

7

( )

(1) ln pijnt = race _ buy erit " + X ijt # + µ j + $ nt + % ijnt .

Here, race_buyerit is a vector of indicators for the race/ethnicity of the buyer at time t; X denotes

!

a vector of observable house buyer characteristics for transaction i at time t; µj denotes a housespecific fixed effect, and !nt denotes a set of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. As reported
below, the coefficient " measures the average premium, if any, paid by minorities (blacks and
Hispanics) relative to whites.12
Our main goal is to measure any difference in the prices that buyers of different
races/ethnicities pay for comparable housing. As we make clear in what follows, the inclusion of
house fixed effects, µj, in equation (1) ensures that the race parameters are identified by
comparing prices for houses for which buyer race changes over successive transactions to those
for which buyer race remains constant. The inclusion of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects
ensures that these comparisons are made within the same neighborhood during the same time
period.
To see how the effect of buyer’s race is identified in this model, it is helpful to re-write
equation (1) by differencing observations for a consecutive pair of transactions (i, t) and (i’, t’)
involving house j:

( ) (

)

(

)

(2) ln pijnt % ln pi ' jnt ' = (race _ buyerit % race _ buyeri 't ' )$ + X ijt % X i ' jt ' # + (" nt % " nt ' ) + !ijnt

Notice that the house fixed effect drops out of equation (2) and that " now multiplies the
difference in buyer race for transaction i and i’. This term is, of course, equal to zero if the
buyer’s race does not change between transactions, and thus those transactions contribute
exclusively to the identification of the ! parameters, which characterized the pattern of price
appreciation in the neighborhood n. When the buyer’s race does change between transactions, the
vector of differenced buyer race variables is non-zero and " is identified by comparing the price
appreciation of these transactions relative to the baseline rate of appreciation in the neighborhood.
By way of a concrete example, consider neighboring houses that both sold initially to
white buyers in 1999 and that both sell again in 2006, this time to a black and white buyer
respectively. In this case, the estimated racial difference in prices would be identified by the
difference in price appreciation between the two sales. If, for example, the price paid by the white
12

We also control for Asian and ‘Other’ races. Interpretation of the corresponding coefficient is less clear because
the large set of ethnicities that fall under this umbrella. These results are available from the authors upon request.

8

buyer in 2006 implied an appreciation rate of 50 percent and the price paid by the black buyer
implied an appreciation rate of 55 percent, we would infer that the black buyer paid a 5 percent
premium. Averaging these differences across the full set of comparable houses in the data set
provides the basis for identifying the buyer race parameters in equations (1) or (2).
A potential concern with the research design captured in equation (1), and one that
applies to the entire existing literature, is that the homes purchased by buyers of different races
may have undergone differential amounts of renovation or maintenance over the holding period
of the previous owner. If buyers of one race, for example, tend to buy houses that are more likely
to have been improved over the previous holding period, this would bias the buyer race
parameters. In essence, the appreciation associated with these improvements would be mistakenly
attributed to the race of the buyer. Because white buyers have significantly higher levels of
income and wealth than black and Hispanic buyers, we would generally expect whites to be
systematically more likely to buy improved or especially well-maintained houses. If this were
indeed the case, the estimated " would understate the actual premiums paid by minorities (blacks
and Hispanics) relative to whites. We address this potential concern by using the detailed assessor
records associated with each housing transaction in the data set.13

Prior Evidence on Price Differentials in the Housing Market
To estimate price differentials in the housing market, one would ideally like to compare
the price that buyers of different races would pay for identical properties. The previous literature
has pursued this strategy by comparing the prices of homes purchased in the same neighborhood
at roughly the same time. The pioneering studies that first developed and implemented this
research design (King and Mieskowski, 1973; Kain and Quigley, 1975; Yinger, 1978) estimated
that minorities paid a premium for comparable housing. In contrast, subsequent analyses based on
larger samples by Follain and Malpezzi (1981), Chambers (1992) and Kiel and Zabel (1996)
found statistically significant discounts for black buyers relative to whites. These studies were
still constrained by the size and nature of the data sets available at the time, limiting the
researchers’ ability to control for unobserved differences in house quality within neighborhoods
or neighborhood attributes. Given higher levels of income and wealth, it would not be surprising
if white buyers generally purchased higher quality housing within the same neighborhood,

13

In particular, the records for most homes include an assessor flag that indicates whether there has been a major
renovation to the home and when such a renovation occurred. Dropping these houses from the sample has a
negligible impact on the parameter estimates, indicating that there is little confounding within-neighborhood
correlation between race and housing improvements/maintenance.

9

potentially leading to a spurious finding that white buyers pay a ‘premium’ for housing. By
including house fixed effects in equation (1), we can address this limitation directly.
In this sense, our approach is related to specifications reported in Myers (2004) that
include house fixed effects estimated with data from three waves of the American Housing
Survey, supplemented with special neighbors samples. Myers finds evidence that blacks pay
premiums for their homes of around 10 percent relative to whites, although the estimates are
significant only at the 10 percent level.14 Another recent study, by Ihlanfeldt and Mayock (2009),
examines price differentials by race in a specification that controls for detailed structural
characteristics and block-group fixed effects for data on 20 metropolitan areas in Florida. As in
much of the prior literature, Ihlanfeldt and Mayock find evidence of price discounts for nonwhite
buyers, and argue that correlation between race and unobserved property characteristics may bias
the estimated race coefficients downwards.15 It is precisely this potential bias that the inclusion
of house fixed effects is designed to eliminate.
Relative to Myers (2004) and Ihlanfeldt and Mayock (2009), our analysis offers two main
advantages. The first is that we have a complete census of housing transactions in major
metropolitan areas over a long period of time, including many houses that sell to buyers of
different races. Such ‘switches’ in the race of the buyer are needed to identify racial differences
in pricing when house fixed effects are included in the analysis. We effectively have multiple
orders of magnitude more data, and this allows us to estimate racial differences far more precisely
and characterize how they vary across sellers, neighborhoods, and market conditions. The second
main advantage of our research design is the inclusion of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects that
effectively control for time-varying factors in each neighborhood that might influence prices.
Again, it is the sheer size and scope of our data set that allows us to control for neighborhood
dynamics in this especially flexible way.

IV. Main Results
We now present the main results of our analysis. We begin by estimating limited versions
of equation (1) that leave out the house and/or neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. Comparing
our final model (1) with these incomplete specifications provides a clear demonstration of the
importance of the additional features in estimating racial differences in purchase prices for
14

Myers’ sample consists of just under 22,000 observations. She notes that a larger sample would increase the
precision of fixed effects estimates reported in the paper, as more changes in the race of home owners would then be
likely.
15
Building on a model of bargaining and an estimation approach put forward in Harding, Rosenthal, and Sirmans
(2003), they ultimately argue that their results provide evidence of discrimination.

10

comparable housing. We then add controls that proxy for other aspects of the buyer’s financial
position – income, down-payment, and lender fixed effects – to examine whether the racial
differences estimated in our baseline specification might be driven by these financial
considerations, which are correlated with race, rather than the buyer’s race/ethnicity itself.

Baseline Results
Table 2 reports baseline results for minority-white price differentials from the estimation
of equation (1). The table reports results for each metropolitan area organized into two panels:
Panel A presents the black coefficient and Panel B presents the Hispanic coefficient for each
specification. In each case, the coefficient measures the difference in transaction price relative to
a white buyer. Each panel reports results for four specifications. The first controls for neither
house nor neighbor-by-time fixed effects. Not surprisingly, the parameter estimates in this case
are uniformly negative and large in magnitude as black and Hispanic buyers purchase
substantially less expensive properties than white buyers in each metropolitan area.
The second column of each panel reports parameter estimates for a specification that
includes neighborhood-by-time fixed effects but does not include house fixed effects. This
specification compares more closely to the specifications typically reported in the existing
literature, which generally include controls for neighborhood-level attributes but not house fixed
effects. And as in the existing literature, the parameter estimates reported in column (2) remain
negative in almost every sample. The estimated black-white and Hispanic-white price
differentials for the full sample in this specification are -0.044 and -0.061, respectively, giving no
indication that black or Hispanic buyers may pay more for comparable housing than their white
counterparts.
The specification reported in the third column of Table 2 includes house fixed effects,
while the one reported in the fourth column controls simultaneously for both house and
neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. Focusing on the parameter estimates reported in column (4)
of each panel, it is immediately obvious that the inclusion of house fixed effects flips the sign on
the estimated minority-white price differentials from negative to positive in every sample for both
black and Hispanic buyers. The estimated price differentials for black and Hispanic buyers are
0.020 and 0.021, respectively, implying that black and Hispanic buyers typically pay about 2
percent more for comparable housing than whites.
There is considerable variation in the estimated price differentials across cities. The
estimated black-white price differential is highest in Cook County, which includes the central city
of Chicago (4.7 percent), and the Baltimore area (2.9 percent), while estimates range between

11

0.8-1.9 percent in the other six areas. The estimated Hispanic-white price differential, on the other
hand, is in the 2.0-3.0 percent range for much of Chicago, Maryland, and San Francisco,
contrasting with the estimates for the Los Angeles area, which are little more than 1 percent.

Controlling for Other Buyer Attributes
While the results presented in Table 2 provide strong statistical evidence that black and
Hispanic buyers pay more for comparable housing than whites, it is not necessarily the case that
these estimated differentials are motivated by racial considerations. Instead, race may simply be
correlated with other buyer attributes that affect the home sales process. To assess this possibility,
Table 3 presents results from additional specifications that control for various aspects of the
buyer’s financial position, including the income, down-payment percentage, and a set of lender
fixed effects. As previously mentioned, the buyer’s financial position might be correlated with
sales price for a number of reasons including the ability to secure mortgage financing and search
costs. Because some lenders specialize in high-priced or subprime loans, the inclusion of lender
fixed effects proxies to some extent for the buyer’s credit worthiness.
The first column of Table 3 repeats the final specification from Table 2, which controls for
house and neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. The specification reported in column (2) adds
controls for measures of the buyer’s income and down-payment percentage. The coefficients for
both the black-white and Hispanic-white differentials increase in a relatively uniform way for
each city sub-sample with the inclusion of these controls. As shown in the bottom row, both the
black-white and Hispanic-white gaps increase from approximately 2.0 to 2.8 percent for the full
sample. Column (3) reports results for a specification that adds second-order polynomial terms in
buyer attributes to the specification reported in column (2). The addition of these controls again
results in larger estimates of the black- and Hispanic-white price differentials in almost all city
sub-samples, increasing the estimate of the black differential to 3.3 percent and the Hispanic
differential to 2.9 percent. Column (4) reports results for a specification that adds lender fixed
effects to the specification reported in column (2). The inclusion of these lender controls has a
negligible effect on the estimates in each sub-sample, and the ‘all-city’ estimated price premiums
for blacks and Hispanics are almost identical and very precisely-estimated: 2.8 percent for blacks
and 2.7 percent for Hispanics. Taken as a whole, the results presented in Table 3 provide clear

12

and consistent evidence that the correlation of race and financial considerations leads to an underrather than over-estimate of the magnitude of racial price differentials.16

V. Heterogeneity Across Sellers and Neighborhoods
The results presented in Tables 2 and 3 establish premiums in sales prices for comparable
housing on the order of 3 percent for both black and Hispanic buyers relative to whites. We now
present a series of results that characterize how these premiums vary across sellers and
neighborhoods. The main goal of this portion of our analysis is to examine whether racial
animosity or prejudice can explain the observed price premiums.

Seller’s Race
We begin by decomposing the estimated premiums by the race of both the buyer and
seller.17 To this end, we expand equation (1) to include a full set of interactions between buyer
and seller race:

( )

(3) ln pijnt = (race _ seller " race _ buyer)it # + X ijt $ + µ j + % nt + & ijnt ,

reporting all of the estimated premiums, #, relative to white-to-white transactions. Again, for

!

expositional purposes, it is helpful to consider a differenced version of equation (3):
(4) ln(pij nt ) " ln(pi ' jnt ' ) = (r ace _ s # race _ bit " race _ s # race _ bi ' t ' ) $ + (X ijt " X i' jt ' )% + (& nt " & nt ' ) + ' ij nt

!

Because, as noted, seller’s race is unobserved for the first transaction for each house in
our repeat sales sample, we consider three alternative approaches to estimating equation (4). All
three approaches yield very similar point estimates for the key parameters of interest, # and are
reported below or in appendices. Our first approach is to restrict the sample to observations from
homes that sell at least three times, dropping the first transaction for each of these houses (for
which seller’s race is unknown) from the analysis. As one might expect, this approach greatly

16

A potential explanation for this finding is that individuals with higher levels of income and wealth have higher
search costs due to a higher value of time. As a result of such a mechanism, conditioning on income and wealth,
which is highly correlated with race, would lead to larger estimates of racial price premiums.
17
This test bears some relation to the test for racial profiling proposed by Anwar and Fang (2006) and Close and
Mason (2007). In these settings, researchers compare the search rates of drivers of different races by officers of
different races to study whether racial differences in search are motivated by prejudice versus differential search
costs.

13

diminishes the number of observations in the sample (i.e., it entirely eliminates the use of houses
that sell twice and cuts in half the number of observations in equation (4) for houses that sell three
times). As a result, the neighborhood-by-time effects, !, are not very precisely estimated, leading
to less precise estimates of our main coefficients of interest, ", although these are still statistically
significant in many cases.
In order to estimate the neighborhood-by-time effects more precisely, our two alternative
approaches make use of the full repeat sales sample to identify the pattern of price appreciation at
the neighborhood level, while making sure that the use of observations which are missing seller’s
race do not contaminate the estimates of ". Our second approach is thus to create a new category
for seller’s race that equals one if it is unobserved. We then simply include interactions of this
unobserved seller race category with the appropriate buyer race for the first transaction that we
observe for each house. We treat the parameters on interactions that involve sellers of unknown
race and buyers of each race as nuisance parameters. The advantage of this approach over the first
is that it allows all of the consecutive pairs of transactions to help identify the neighborhood-bytime fixed effects. For our third and final approach, we estimate equation (4) for all consecutive
pairs of transactions for each house j in the repeat-sales sample. But for the first pair of
transactions for house j, we simply set the buyer-seller race difference (i.e., the first term on the
right hand side of equation (4)) to zero. In this way, houses that sell only twice, for example, are
helpful in getting a much more precise estimate of price appreciation patterns by neighborhood,
but do not contribute directly to the identification of #.
The results from this final and preferred approach – Approach 3 – are shown in Table 4.
(The results from the first two approaches are reported in Appendix Tables 2 and 3 respectively
and, as mentioned above, yield qualitatively very similar point estimates across all four
metropolitan areas.) The panels of Table 4 report results for each buyer-seller race combination
relative to a white-to-white transaction separately for each of the four metropolitan samples. For
each, the buyer’s race is indicated in the row heading and the seller’s race is indicated in the
column heading. Thus, comparing results across rows shows how the sales price varies with
buyer’s race for sellers of the race/ethnicity shown in the column heading.
Comparing the row average price differentials for buyers of different races is, in essence,
the focus of Tables 2 and 3. In contrast, our main focus in examining the results presented in
Table 4 is instead to compare across columns, which shows how the sales price for each type of
buyer varies with the seller’s race. If racial animosity or prejudice is an important factor driving
seller behavior, we would expect sellers to systematically favor buyers of their own race or
ethnicity. Instead, in the Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco sub-samples, the estimated

14

sales price premiums are almost identical, irrespective of seller’s race. For black buyers in
Chicago, for example, the estimated premium falls within a narrow range between 5.2 and 5.3
percent for white, black, and Hispanic sellers, respectively. If anything, for black and Hispanic
buyers in these cities, the estimated premiums are slightly larger for black and Hispanic sellers
relative to their white counterparts. For white buyers in these cities, the estimated premiums for
black and Hispanic sellers are all within 1.0 percentage points of the baseline estimate for whiteto-white transactions. The results for Maryland differ from those for the other city samples in that
black and Hispanic sellers in Maryland earn a premium of 5-8 percent relative to their white
counterparts but again, the size of this premium does not vary with the race of the buyer. Taken as
a whole, the results presented in Table 4 provide strong evidence that the price differentials
associated with buyer’s race reported in Tables 2 and 3 do not vary systematically with the
seller’s race.
Another interesting way to view the results presented in Table 4 is to consider what they
tell us about the relative market returns among sellers of each race. In Chicago, Los Angeles, and
San Francisco, sellers of each race receive prices that are within about a single percent of one
another when they sell to white buyers, and a similar pattern holds for sales to Hispanic and black
buyers. In the Maryland area, black and Hispanic sellers command a premium of about 5 percent
when they sell to buyers of each race. Averaging across the four metropolitan areas as a whole,
these results imply that there is very little difference in the prices that households of each race
receive when they sell their homes – if anything, black and Hispanic sellers appear to do slightly
better than white sellers.18

Neighborhood Initial Demographic Composition
Table 5 reports results that explore the heterogeneity in estimate racial price differentials
across another important dimension of heterogeneity – the existing composition of the
neighborhood (Census tract). In particular, the table reports estimates for black and Hispanic
buyers in each city separately for (i) all Census tracts, (ii) tracts that were more than 50 percent
non-Hispanic white in 2000, and (iii) tracts with 80 percent non-Hispanic white or greater in
2000. For black buyers, the parameter estimates are fairly stable across these three specifications

18

We return to this result in the concluding section below, as it points to a role for experience in the real-estate
bargaining process in explaining the premiums that black and Hispanic buyers pay on average.

15

in the four city subsamples, implying that the price premium paid by black buyers does not vary
much with the neighborhood setting.19
A different pattern emerges for Hispanic buyers. In particular, the estimated price
premium for Hispanic buyers is uniformly higher in neighborhoods with a lower fraction of white
residents, falling from 1.6-3.4 percent in all tracts to 0.3-1.1 percent in neighborhoods that were
more than 80 percent white in 2000 in the four city subsamples. In fact, the point estimate for the
Hispanic price premium is statistically insignificant in all of the cities except Chicago in
neighborhoods that were initially at least 80 percent white. Thus, the price premium essentially
goes away for Hispanic buyers when they purchase houses in predominantly white
neighborhoods, while a premium remains for black buyers in these neighborhoods.20 One possible
explanation for the fact that the Hispanic premium diminishes in predominantly white
neighborhoods is that the Hispanic buyers in these neighborhoods may be systematically different
from those that purchase homes in more racially diverse neighborhoods. Buyers in the latter set of
neighborhoods, for example, may include a higher percentage of recent immigrants, an attribute
that we cannot observe directly in the data.

VI. Do We Detect Discrimination?
The magnitude and remarkably robust nature of the premiums paid by blacks and
Hispanics provide strong evidence that these households pay more than their white counterparts
when purchasing comparable homes. The lack of any same-race preference on the part of sellers,
however, makes it less clear whether such differentials actually represent the consequences of
discriminatory behavior or are an artifact of some other process related to home-buying.
Largely uncontroversial, however, is the notion that discriminatory behavior is ongoing
in housing markets. Audit studies provide a particularly powerful and complementary strategy for
detecting signs of discriminatory behavior in housing markets. Generally speaking, these studies
aim to test for discrimination by sending individuals of different races or ethnicities, matched as
well as possible on other characteristics, to inquire about housing units either for sale or rent.

19

It is worth noting that the estimates for the Chicago area imply that blacks pay a greater premium for housing in
neighborhoods in which the initial percentage of white buyers is less than 50 percent. This result may be capturing
in part the activity of white buyers moving into gentrifying neighborhoods.
20
We also tested whether racial price differentials are larger in ‘hot’ market conditions, in which a seller is more
likely to receive multiple offers simultaneously and might, more generally, be willing to decline offers knowing that
subsequent offers will arrive relatively quickly. In this way, hot market conditions might make it easier for a seller to
avoid transacting with a buyer of a certain race, should that be his or her preference. Estimated racial premiums do
not vary much with market conditions, although some estimates are noisy. These results are available upon request.

16

Using this approach, Yinger (1996) and Ondrich et al. (2003) find direct evidence of the
discriminatory treatment of minority buyers and renters along a number of dimensions. In
particular, they find evidence of statistical discrimination likely stemming from uncertainty about
black potential buyers ability to put forward successful bids. For example, they find evidence that
agents do not increase their effort in response to higher sales prices and substantial steering of
blacks to homes with fewer features than they request. These findings suggest that agents may be
skeptical of black ability to purchase more expensive homes. If such beliefs are pervasive, one
can imagine a situation where conditional on choosing a particular house, blacks may need to
submit higher bids than observationally equivalent whites to be taken seriously.
While audit studies provide a powerful way to identify the pervasiveness of exclusion
and steering in the market, they yield little evidence about transactions that are actually
consummated.21 This is important both because audit studies may miss aspects of discrimination
that occur through price negotiation/determination and because it is difficult to gauge the ultimate
impact of the observed exclusion or steering on housing outcomes (Goldberg, 1996; Yinger,
1998). Conversely, a limitation of studies that focus on the pricing of observed transactions (like
our own) is that they miss exactly the kinds of effects that steering and exclusion have on the
choice of homes captured by audit studies. In this sense, the two approaches for detecting signs of
discriminatory behavior in consumer markets neatly complement each other.
Another possible explanation for the robust premiums we find is that nonwhite buyers
pay higher prices because of differences in bargaining power or search costs. If a substantial
portion of sellers, for example, were unwilling to sell to buyers of a particular race, the effective
cost of continuing to search for a suitable home would be higher for these buyers. Faced with a
lower value of continuing to search, buyers of this race might settle for a higher transaction price
in order to secure a property of their liking.

The results examining how the premiums vary

across seller race, however, do not point in an obvious way to this potential explanation, as
nonwhite buyers do not appear to get a ‘better’ deal through transacting with someone of their
own race.22

21

Another limitation of audit studies is that they require all participants to behave identically, despite the fact that
participants are likely aware of the goals of the study. To address this concern, a new study by Hanson and Hawley
(2011) uses email communication to respond to online apartment listings, signaling race through the use of names
that are predominantly used by either white or black parents. Another interesting recent paper by Ewens, Tomin and
Wang (2012) uses a similar approach to distinguish between prejudice and statistical discrimination as explanations
for callback behavior. Their results point to statistical discrimination rather than prejudice as the most likely
explanation for landlord behavior; this is broadly consistent with our findings.

17

VII.

Summary and Conclusion
The main goals of this paper have been to measure the extent of price differentials in the

housing market on the basis of buyer’s race and to gauge the explanatory power of a set of
alternative explanations for any estimated price differences. In this concluding section of the
paper, we summarize our main findings briefly and discuss their implications for the evolution of
racial differences in wealth and home ownership and the persistence of residential segregation.
Combining a novel data set with a fixed effects approach that allowed us to control for
unobserved differences in housing and neighborhood quality to a much greater extent than the
prior literature, our analysis documented meaningful, statistically significant premiums in the
prices paid by black and Hispanic buyers in each of the four large metropolitan areas that we
studied – a result which sharply contrasts with the best-known results in the recent literature. The
unique features of our data set also allowed us to examine whether racial differences in income,
wealth, or access to credit might be responsible for these premiums. Here, the results indicated
that the correlation of race with these factors works in the opposite direction: the estimated racial
premiums conditional on flexible functions of income and down-payment percentage, as well as
lender fixed effects are actually positive and larger in size.
Having established the presence of robust differences in the prices paid by buyers of each
race, we then took up the question of whether systematic cross-racial bias by sellers could explain
these differences. In particular, we examined whether sellers are willing to accept lower prices
from buyers of the same race, finding that the premiums paid by black and Hispanic buyers in
fact vary very little with the race of the seller. While these results provide evidence against racial
bias on the part of sellers as the primary explanation for the observed racial price premiums, it is
important to note that we cannot rule out that animosity or prejudice may lead to the exclusion of
minority buyers from purchasing certain properties in the first place, as suggested by previous
audit studies.
Our analysis also revealed that sellers of each race do roughly as well on average when
they sell their homes, no matter what the race of the buyer is. Thus, any disadvantage that black
and Hispanic buyers face when purchasing homes disappears when it comes time to sell. While
certainly not conclusive, this pattern suggests that the relative inexperience of black and Hispanic
buyers, due to the historically lower rates of home ownership, may contribute to the higher prices
that they initially pay upon entering the market. With the experience gained from having
participated in the real estate bargaining process at least once, black and Hispanic sellers do as
well as their white and Asian counterparts. What this means for subsequent purchasing
experiences of more seasoned buyers is unclear, however, as sellers of each race may continue to

18

statistically discriminate against experienced black and Hispanic buyers because race/ethnicity is
highly correlated with experience, which may be difficult to observe.
Of course, relative inexperience with the bargaining process is not the only possible basis
for statistical discrimination on the part of sellers. Another potential explanation, put forward by
Yinger (1995, 1998), is that black and Hispanic buyers face higher search costs in the housing
market. Such higher search costs might stem from a variety of fundamental sources or because of
the expectation of discriminatory treatment in the market. Knowing that black and Hispanic
buyers typically face higher costs of continuing to search, sellers might statistically discriminate
by holding out for a higher price (i.e., use a higher reservation price) in negotiations.
No matter what the ultimate reason for the price premium, our results imply that
systematic, robust racial differences in the price paid to buy a home – on the order of 3 percent on
average in multiple major US markets – persist to the present day, long after many of the most
overt forms of institutional discrimination have been eliminated. Considering the average
purchase price paid by a black homebuyer in our sample is $177,000, this translates to an average
premium of about $5,000 per transaction, a substantial amount given the average income of black
households in these cities.
These price differentials are likely to have important implications for a range of other
social and economic outcomes, including the evolution of racial differences in wealth, home
ownership rates, and location decisions. Faced with what amounts to a substantial transaction tax
with each home purchase, one would naturally expect home ownership rates to be lower and the
benefits of ownership for wealth accumulation to be systematically diminished for minority
households. Moreover, to the extent that these differentials represent price discrimination, the
added cost may alter black and Hispanic household location decisions (i.e., leading to the choice
of neighborhoods with more rental properties or lower prices). Hence, existing residential
segregation may be reinforced, which has further important consequences for educational and
labor market outcomes.23

23

See Yinger (1995) and Cutler and Glaeser (1997) for a discussion of the consequences of segregation for
education and labor market outcomes. It is particularly noteworthy that the estimated premiums are largest for black
households in Chicago and Maryland – metropolitan areas that remain largely segregated along racial lines to this
day.

19

References
Anwar, S. and H. Fang (2006), “An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor Vehicle
Searches: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 96(1): 127-151.
Arrow, K.J. (1998), “What has Economics to Say About Racial Discrimination?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 12(2): 91-100.
Ayres, I. (1991), “Fair Driving: Gender and Race Discrimination in Retail Car Negotiations,”
Harvard Law Review, 104: 817-872.
Ayres, I. (2003), Pervasive Prejudice?: Unconventional Evidence of Race and Gender
Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Ayres, I and P. Siegelman (1995), “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New
Car,” American Economic Review, 85: 304-321.
Chambers, D.N. (1992), “The Racial House Price Differential and Racially Transitional
Neighborhoods,” Journal of Urban Economics, 32: 214-232
Charles, K. and J. Guryan (2011), “Studying Discrimination: Fundamental Challenges and Recent
Progress,” NBER Working Paper #17156.
Charles, K. and E. Hurst (2002), “The Transition to Home Ownership and the Black/White
Wealth Gap,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2): 281-297
Close, B. and P. Mason (2007), “Searching for Efficient Enforcement: Officer Characteristics and
Racially-Biased Policing,” Review of Law and Economics, 3(2).
Cornelissen, T. (2008), “The Stata command felsdvreg to fit a linear model with two high
dimensional fixed effects,” The Stata Journal, 8(2): 170-189.
Cutler, D.M., and E. Glaeser (1997), “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(3): 827-872.
Cutler, D.M., E. Glaeser and J. Vigdor (1999), “The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107(3): 455-506.
Ewens, M., B. Tomlin, and C. Wang (2012), “Statistical Discrimination or Prejudice? A Large
Sample Field Experiment,” mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.
Follain, J.R. and S. Malpezzi. (1981), “Another Look at Racial Differences in Housing Prices,”
Urban Studies, 18: 195-203.
Goldberg, P.K. (1996), “Dealer Price Discrimination in New Car Purchases: Evidence from the
Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3): 622-654.
Hansen, A. and Z. Hawley (2011), “Do Landlords Discriminate in the Rental Housing Market?
Evidence from an Internet Field Experiment in U.S. Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics,
forthcoming.

20

Harding, J.P., S. Rosenthal, and D.F. Sirmans (2003), “Establishing Bargaining Power in the
Market for Existing Homes,” Review of Economics and Statistics,85(1): 178 – 188.
Hirsch, A. (1998), Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago 1940-1970,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Ihlanfeldt, K. and T. Mayock (2009), “Price Discrimination in the Housing Market,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 66: 125 – 140.
Kain, J.F. and J.M. Quigley (1975), Housing Markets and Racial Discrimination: A
Microeconomic Analysis, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Kiel, K.A. and J. Zabel (1996), “House Price Differentials in US Cities: Household and
Neighborhood Racial Effects,” Journal of Housing Economics, 5: 171-189.
King, A. and P. Mieskowski (1973), “Racial Discrimination, Segregation, and the Price of
Housing,” Journal of Political Economy, 81: 590-606.
Munnell, A.H, G.M.B. Tootell, L.E. Browne, and J. McEneaney (1996) “Mortgage Lending in
Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data,” American Economic Review, 86(1): 25-53.
Myers, C.K. (2004), “Discrimination and Neighborhood Effects: Understanding Racial
Differentials in US Housing Prices,” Journal of Urban Economics, 56: 279-306.
Ondrich, J., S. Ross and J. Yinger (2003), “Now You See It, Now You Don’t: Why Do Agents
Withhold Available Houses from Black Customers?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4):
854-873.
Yinger, J. (1978), “The Black-White Price Differential in Housing: Some Further Evidence,”
Land Economics, 54: 187-206.
Yinger, J. (1986), “Measuring Discrimination with Fair Housing Audits: Caught in the Act,”
American Economic Review, 76: 881-893.
Yinger, J. (1995), Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: The Continuing Cost of Housing
Discrimination, Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Yinger, J. (1998), “Evidence on Discrimination in Consumer Markets,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 12(2): 23-40.

21

Table 1: Characteristics of the Repeat-Sales Transactions Data Set

Chicago

San Francisco

Maryland

Los Angeles

384,114

536,242

279,304

926,713

Sold Twice
Sold Three Times
Sold Four or More Times

0.75
0.21
0.04

0.58
0.31
0.11

0.71
0.25
0.04

0.58
0.32
0.10

Buyer Race
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian and Other

0.70
0.08
0.09
0.13

0.57
0.04
0.14
0.25

0.61
0.25
0.07
0.07

0.54
0.05
0.25
0.16

Transaction Type
White-to-White
White-to-Black
White-to-Hispanic
Black-to-Black
Black-to-White
Black-to-Hispanic
Hispanic-to-Hispanic
Hispanic-to-White
Hispanic-to-Black
Other types

0.60
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
<0.01
0.02
0.05
<0.01
0.18

0.46
0.02
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.04
<0.01
0.34

0.53
0.13
0.05
0.08
0.06
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.10

0.43
0.02
0.12
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.10
0.06
0.01
0.22

Summary Statistics
Mean Trans. Price
Median Trans. Price
Mean Income
Median Income
Med. Down-payment

228,148
179,999
90,644
68,000
27,999

439,793
364,999
125,762
100,000
78,000

243,749
200,000
90,071
71,000
23,999

325,370
258,000
107,496
82,000
48,500

Number of Repeat-Sale
Observations

Notes:
Data for Chicago and Maryland span the years 1997-2007; San Francisco and Los Angeles cover the period 19902007. Los Angeles refers solely to LA and Orange Counties. Transaction type refers to the race of those involved in the
transaction (e.g. 'White-to-Black' refers to a white seller transacting with black buyer). Transaction price is the actual
recorded closing price of the home. Income refers to reported income on the mortgage application. The bottom two
panels of the table characterize transactions for all houses that sell a minimum of four times in the four metropolitan
areas. (Sources: Dataquick and HMDA data.)

Table 2: Racial Housing Price Differentials - Baseline Results
Panel A: Black-White Differential
Location
Chicago - Cook
Chicago - Outside Cook
San Francisco - West Bay
San Francisco - East Bay
Maryland - Baltimore Area
Maryland - DC Area
Los Angeles - LA
Los Angeles - Orange

All-City Estimate

Additional Controls Included:
Time
House Fixed Effects
Tract ! Time Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel B: Hispanic-White Differential
(4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.580

0.011

0.026

0.047

-0.281

-0.021

-0.017

0.027

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.007]

[0.005]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.004]

-0.250

-0.027

0.013

0.019

-0.174

-0.097

0.004

0.004

[0.008]

[0.006]

[0.008]

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.004]

-0.295

-0.062

0.000

0.010

-0.341

-0.079

0.034

0.030

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.009]

[0.007]

[0.002]

[0.003]

[0.005]

[0.004]

-0.378

-0.063

-0.006

0.012

-0.387

-0.066

0.032

0.026

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.006]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.003]

-0.502

-0.033

0.024

0.029

-0.145

-0.015

0.021

0.020

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.008]

[0.007]

[0.003]

[0.006]

[0.011]

[0.010]

-0.363

-0.078

0.009

0.011

-0.286

-0.094

0.039

0.028

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.007]

[0.007]

-0.379

-0.026

-0.006

0.015

-0.413

-0.056

0.005

0.012

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.001]

[0.002]

[0.002]

-0.166

-0.068

0.006

0.008

-0.325

-0.124

0.011

0.011

[0.007]

[0.006]

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

-0.350

-0.044

0.010

0.020

-0.272

-0.061

0.019

0.021

[0.042]

[0 .012]

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.037]

[0.015 ]

[0.007]

[0.003]

Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

N
245,783
138,331
254,655
281,587
131,429
147,875
627,383
299,330

2,126,373

Notes:
Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. Estimates are derived from a regression of log transaction prices on race indicators and other variables. The sample period for
Chicago and Maryland covers 1997-2007: the sample period for San Francisco and Los Angeles covers 1990-2007. 'Chicago - Outside Cook' consists of DuPage, Lake, and
Will Counties. 'West Bay' counties comprise San Francisco, San Mateo, and Marin Counties; 'East Bay' counties consist of Alameda, Contra Costa, and Santa Clara Counties.
'Baltimore Area' comprises Baltimore City and County, Calvert, Howard and Anne Arundel Counties; 'DC Area' counties consist of Prince George's, Montgomery, and
Fredrick Counties.

Table 3: Racial Housing Price Differentials - Controlling for Buyer's Financial Position
Panel A: Black-White Differential
Location
Chicago - Cook
Chicago - Outside Cook

San Francisco - West Bay
San Francisco - East Bay

Maryland - Baltimore
Maryland - DC Area

Los Angeles - LA
Los Angeles - Orange

All-City Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel B: Hispanic-White Differential
(4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.047

0.056

0.057

0.054

0.027

0.038

0.039

0.039

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

0.019

0.026

0.026

0.024

0.004

0.011

0.014

0.012

[0.006]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

0.010

0.020

0.026

0.021

0.030

0.036

0.036

0.037

[0.007]

[0.007]

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.003]

N
245,783
138,331

254,655

0.012

0.021

0.028

0.022

0.026

0.032

0.036

0.034

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

0.039
[0.006]

0.020

0.027

0.028

[0.010]

[0.007]

0.024
[0.008]

131,429

[0.010]

0.017
[0.004]

0.028

0.035

0.036

[0.007]

[0.005]

0.030
[0.005]

147,875

[0.007]

627,383

0.029

0.042

0.047

[0.007]

[0.007]

[0.005]

0.011

0.021

0.026

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.004]

0.015

0.020

0.019

0.019

0.012

0.017

0.017

0.016

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.002]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.008

0.010

0.012

0.013

0.011

0.013

0.014

0.013

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.002]

[0.003]

[0.001]

[0.001]

0.020

0.028

0.033

0.028

0.021

0.028

0.029

0.027

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.005]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.004]

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

281,587

299,330

2,126,373

Additional Controls Included:
House Fixed Effects
Tract ! Time Fixed Effects
Other Buyer Attributes
Polynomial in Buyer Attributes
Lender Fixed Effects
Notes:

Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. The estimates are derived from a regression of log transaction prices on race indicators and other variables. Each regression
includes a set of house fixed effects and a set of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. 'Other Buyer Attributes' include buyer income and buyer down-payment percentage.
Polynomial refers to a square in income and down-payment percentage. 'Lender Fixed Effects' refer to indicators for indivdual large lenders in each market and one
indicator for small lenders. The sample period for Chicago and Maryland covers 1997-2007: the sample period for San Francisco and Los Angeles covers 1990-2007.
'Chicago - Outside Cook' consists of DuPage, Lake, and Will Counties. 'West Bay' counties comprise San Francisco, San Mateo, and Marin Counties; 'East Bay' counties
consist of Alameda, Contra Costa, and Santa Clara Counties. 'Baltimore Area' comprises Baltimore City and County, Calvert, Howard and Anne Arundel Counties; 'DC
Area' counties consist of Prince George's, Montgomery, and Fredrick Counties.

Table 4: Heterogeneity in Racial Price Differentials - Seller's Race

Chicago
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

White Seller

Black Seller

Hispanic Seller

0.052

0.053

0.053

[0.010]

[0.016]

[0.021]

0.010

0.031

0.031

[0.010]

[0.025]

[0.013]

0.004

-0.009

[0.011]

[0.007]

0.032

0.032

0.012

[0.006]

[0.012]

[0.018]

384,112

White Buyer
San Francisco
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

536,240

0.032

0.040

0.046

[0.003]

[0.011]

[0.006]

White Buyer
Maryland
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

0.007

-0.003

[0.007]

[0.005]

0.031

0.104

0.116

[0.008]

[0.012]

[0.023]

0.053

0.097

0.109

[0.010]

[0.020]

[0.023]

279,304

White Buyer
Los Angeles
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer
White Buyer

N

0.063

0.051

[0.010]

[0.016]

0.015

0.026

0.022

[0.003]

[0.007]

[0.006]

0.017

0.022

0.033

[0.002]

[0.005]

[0.003]

0.008

0.002

[0.004]

[0.002]

926,712

Notes:
Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. Estimates are derived from a regression of log transaction
prices on race indicators and a polynomial in other variables, including buyer income and down-payment
percentage. Each regression includes a set of house fixed effects and a set of neighborhood-by-time fixed
effects. All comparisons are relative to a white-to-white transaction - selected coefficients shown.
Estimates are reported for the specification described as 'Approach 3' in the text. In particular,
transactions for which the race of the seller is unknown are allowed to contribute directly to the
identification of only the neighborhood-by-time effects and not the coefficients on buyer-seller race
reported in the table. (See the text for more details.)

Table 5: Heterogeneity in Racial Price Differentials - Neighborhood Initial Conditions
Chicago
Neighborhood Percent White

Black
Hispanic

Other Buyer Attributes
House Fixed Effects
Tract ! Time Fixed Effects
N

All

> 0.5

San Francisco
> 0.8

All

> 0.5

Maryland
> 0.8

All

> 0.5

Los Angeles
> 0.8

All

> 0.5

> 0.8

0.043

0.029

0.033

0.021

0.021

0.028

0.035

0.031

0.035

0.017

0.018

0.022

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.008]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.017]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.007]

[0.002]

[0.003]

[0.007]

0.027

0.019

0.011

0.034

0.018

0.003

0.030

0.025

0.014

0.016

0.009

0.004

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.008]

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.009]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.004]

Yes
Yes
Yes
384,114

Yes
Yes
Yes
317,831

Yes
Yes
Yes
202,028

Yes
Yes
Yes
536,242

Yes
Yes
Yes
316,549

Yes
Yes
Yes
65,566

Yes
Yes
Yes
279,304

Yes
Yes
Yes
205,325

Yes
Yes
Yes
110,558

Yes
Yes
Yes
926,713

Yes
Yes
Yes
506,006

Yes
Yes
Yes
121,822

Notes:
Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. Estimates are derived from a regression of log transaction price on race indicators and polynomials in other variables. '> 0.5' refers to a sample that
includes neighborhoods initally greater than 50 percent non-Hispanic white. '> 0.8' refers to neighborhoods initially greater than 80 percent white. Each regression includes a set of house
fixed effects and a set of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. 'Other Buyer Attributes' include income and down-payment percentage.

Appendix Table 1: Comparison of Overall Transactions Sample and Repeat-Sales Sample
Chicago

San Francisco

Maryland

Los Angeles

0.70
0.09
0.09
0.12

0.56
0.04
0.14
0.25

0.60
0.26
0.07
0.07

0.54
0.05
0.26
0.15

Mean Trans. Price
Median Trans. Price
Mean Income
Median Income
Med. Down-payment
N

248,738
183,000
91,329
68,000
36,000
1,336,581

430,645
346,000
128,341
101,000
75,499
1,418,069

235,986
186,000
92,324
72,000
33,000
1,065,965

329,553
254,999
116,558
84,000
48,000
2,240,023

Repeat Sales Sample
Buyer Race
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian and Other

0.70
0.08
0.09
0.13

0.57
0.04
0.14
0.25

0.61
0.25
0.07
0.07

0.54
0.05
0.25
0.16

Mean Trans. Price
Median Trans. Price
Mean Income
Median Income
Med. Down-payment
N

228,148
179,999
90,644
68,000
27,999
384,114

439,793
364,999
125,762
100,000
78,000
536,242

243,749
200,000
90,071
71,000
23,999
279,304

325,370
258,000
107,496
82,000
48,500
926,713

Overall Sample
Buyer Race
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian and Other

Notes:
This table compares select characteristics of the repeat-sales sample (i.e., transactions from houses that sell a
minimum of twice) with the overall sample of transactions for the four metropolitan areas. Statistics for the
overall sample are reported in the upper panel and for the repeat-sales sample, in the lower panel. The
transaction price is the actual recorded closing price of the home. 'Income' refers to reported income on the
mortgage application. (Sources: Dataquick and HMDA data.)

Appendix Table 2: Heterogeneity in Racial Price Differentials - Seller's Race
Approach 2: Creating 'Unknown' Category for Seller
White Seller
Black Seller
Hispanic Seller
Chicago
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

384,643
0.041

0.034

0.033

[0.008]

[0.013]

[0.016]

0.024

0.01

0.038

[0.006]

[0.021]

[0.010]

-0.007

0.0002

[0.012]

[0.007]

White Buyer
San Francisco
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

544,337
0.025

0.025

-0.0002

[0.006]

[0.011]

[0.015]

0.027

0.048

0.035

[0.003]

[0.010]

[0.006]

White Buyer
Maryland
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

-0.013

-0.01

[0.008]

[0.006]

0.035

0.103

0.104

[0.006]

[0.010]

[0.019]

0.049

0.116

0.089

[0.008]

[0.013]

[0.016]

296,101

White Buyer
Los Angeles
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer
White Buyer

N

0.061

0.072

[0.010]

[0.016]

0.008

0.014

0.019

[0.003]

[0.006]

[0.005]

0.016

0.021

0.028

[0.002]

[0.005]

[0.002]

955,477

-0.007

0.008

[0.004]

[0.002]

Notes:
Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. Estimates are derived from a regression of log transaction
prices on race indicators and a polynomial in other variables, including buyer income and
downpayment percentage. Each regression includes a set of house fixed effects and a set of
neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. All comparisons are relative to a white-to-white transaction selected coefficients shown. Estimates are reported for the specification described as 'Approach 2' in
the text. In particular, a new race category for the seller is created when the seller's race is unknown,
and this category of seller race is fully interacted with buyer race in the analysis. (See the text for
more details.)

Appendix Table 3: Heterogeneity in Racial Price Differentials - Seller's Race
Approach 1: Excluding Transactions with Unknown Race of Seller
White Seller
Black Seller
Hispanic Seller
N
Chicago
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

65,045
0.042

0.055

0.036

[0.030]

[0.047]

[0.058]

-0.006

0.019

0.005

[0.024]

[0.075]

[0.038]

White Buyer
San Francisco
Black Buyer
Hispanic Buyer

Hispanic Buyer

Hispanic Buyer
White Buyer

[0.020]

0.031

0.029

-0.007

[0.012]

[0.024]

[0.032]

0.032

0.045

0.039

[0.007]

[0.021]

[0.006]

-0.009

-0.003

[0.014]

[0.011]

0.045

0.095

0.102

[0.018]

[0.026]

[0.044]

0.048

0.105

0.092

[0.020]

[0.039]

[0.046]

62,863

White Buyer
Los Angeles
Black Buyer

-0.015

[0.039]

178,863

White Buyer
Maryland
Black Buyer

0.009

0.036

0.048

[0.023]

[0.039]

0.015

0.024

0.026

[0.006]

[0.012]

[0.010]

0.015

0.016

0.032

[0.003]

[0.009]

[0.005]

258,380

-0.004

0.002

[0.008]

[0.004]

Notes:
Cluster-robust standard errors in brackets. Estimates are derived from a regression of log
transaction prices on race indicators and a polynomial in other variables, including buyer
income and downpayment percentage. Each regression includes a set of house fixed effects
and a set of neighborhood-by-time fixed effects. All comparisons are relative to a white-towhite transaction - selected coefficients shown. Estimates are reported for the specification
described as 'Approach 1' in the text. In particular, transactions for which the race of the seller
is unknown are dropped from the analysis. (See the text for more details.)

