                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE AND THE WELFARE IMPACT OF EUROPEAN
                          INTEGRATION

                                        Andrei A. Levchenko
                                            Jing Zhang

                                        Working Paper 18061
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




We are grateful the editor (Tullio Jappelli), three anonymous referees, Ayhan Kose, Marcelo Olarreaga,
and seminar participants at IMF, University of Michigan, 2011 SED (Gent), 2011 ELSNIT (St. Gallen),
and 2012 AEA Meetings (Chicago) for helpful suggestions, and to Lin Ma and Aaron Flaaen for excellent
research assistance. This is a preliminary version of a paper prepared for the 55th Panel Meeting of
Economic Policy, April 2012. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Comparative Advantage and the Welfare Impact of European Integration
Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 18061
May 2012
JEL No. F11,F14,F15

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the welfare gains from European trade integration, and the role of comparative
advantage in determining the magnitude of those gains. We use a multisector Ricardian model implemented
on 79 countries, and compare welfare in the 2000s to a counterfactual scenario in which East European
countries are closed to trade. For West European countries, the mean welfare gain from trade integration
with Eastern Europe is 0.16%, rang- ing from zero for Portugal to 0.4% for Austria. For East European
countries, gains from trade are 9.23% at the mean, ranging from 2.85% for Russia to 20% for Estonia.
For Eastern Europe, comparative advantage is a key determinant of the variation in the welfare gains:
countries whose comparative advantage is most similar to Western Europe tend to gain less, while
countries with technology most different from Western Europe gain the most.


Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

Jing Zhang
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
jzhang@umich.edu
1    Introduction

The fall of the Iron Curtain 20 years ago led to one of the largest episodes of abrupt trade
integration in postwar history. It brought some 375 million people of the former communist
bloc out of the politically imposed isolation and into the world trading system. Indeed, trade
integration has been rapid. Figure 1(a) plots total inflation-adjusted exports of the East European
countries between 1962 and 2007, expressed as an index number relative to 1990. The nearly 8-
fold expansion in East European exports between 1990 and 2007 far outpaces the growth of
overall world trade. For geographical, historical, and political reasons, Western Europe is the
region most affected by the integration of ex-communist countries. Figure 1(b) plots the share
of Eastern Europe in total West European imports from the rest of the world. After remaining
stable at about 10% from the early 1960s to the early 1990s, it reached 24% by 2007.
    Such episodes of rapid trade integration of large regions are relatively rare, and provide an
important “laboratory” for a quantitative study of the welfare gains from trade. This paper
provides a comprehensive quantitative assessment of the welfare gains from the post-Cold War
European trade integration. The analysis extends the quantitative framework recently developed
by Levchenko and Zhang (2011). We build a multisector Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin model that
incorporates a number of realistic features, such as multiple factors of production, an explicit non-
traded sector, the full specification of input-output linkages between the sectors, and both inter-
and intra-industry trade. We use the model to estimate sector-level productivities – comparative
advantage – for 19 manufacturing sectors and a sample of 79 countries that includes 17 West
European and 14 East European countries, as well as virtually all important economies in the
rest of the world.
    The key advantage of our multi-sector framework is that unlike quantitative assessments based
on one-sector models (e.g. Eaton and Kortum 2002, Alvarez and Lucas 2007, Arkolakis, Costinot
and Rodrı́guez-Clare 2012), we can examine the role of an often neglected determinant of welfare
gains from trade: the Ricardian comparative advantage. Standard theories tell us that while
trade integration should be beneficial to the countries involved, how much countries gain depends
on the nature of comparative advantage. Generally, countries that are very different from each
other will tend to gain more from trade opening than similar countries. Though qualitatively
this idea is well-understood, quantitatively we still do not have a clear understanding of the role
that Ricardian comparative advantage plays in general, and for welfare gains from European
integration in particular.
    We first use our sectoral productivity estimates to document that there is indeed a great deal
of variation in relative technology among the different countries in our sample. Correlations of
sectoral productivities range from 0.16 between Russia and the Netherlands, to virtually 1 between


                                                 1
Finland and Poland. Among the West European countries, average (GDP-weighted) correlations
in sectoral technology with the Eastern bloc countries as a group range from 0.285 and 0.417
for the Netherlands and Ireland to 0.928 and 0.926 for Switzerland and Finland. Similarly, for
Eastern Europe, average GDP-weighted correlations with Western Europe range from 0.533 and
0.537 for Estonia and Kazakhstan to 0.921 and 0.916 for Poland and Slovenia.
   We then quantify the welfare gains from the trade integration of Eastern Europe, by comparing
welfare in each West and East European country to a counterfactual scenario in which Eastern
Europe is closed to trade. For each East European country, this comparison reveals the total gains
from trade relative to autarky. The mean gain for Eastern Europe is 9.23%, ranging from 2.85% for
Russia to 20% for Estonia. Ricardian comparative advantage plays an important role in explaining
the variation in welfare gains in Eastern Europe. Controlling for country size and average trade
costs, East European countries that are similar in relative technology to Western Europe – the
wealthier Central European countries – tend to gain less. The most technologically different
countries – Estonia and Kazakhstan – gain the most. The impact of similarity in comparative
advantage is significant in magnitude: a one-standard deviation change in similarity to Western
Europe increases the welfare gains for an East European country by 2.4%, all else equal.
   For Western Europe, the mean gain from East European trade integration is 0.16%, ranging
from zero for Portugal to 0.4% for Austria. Technological similarity to Eastern Europe does not
help account – in the least-squares sense – for the variation in the gains to Western Europe. Trade
costs with the East European countries are the predominant determinant of the variation in gains.
   Not surprisingly, West European gains are much smaller, since for each West European coun-
try, this comparison represents the gains from the ability to trade with Eastern Europe, given
that it trades with the rest of the world as well. Even at the peak, imports from Eastern Europe
take up only a quarter of total West European imports from outside the region. Probing further,
the main reason for the negligible role of comparative advantage is that the rest of the world has
very similar sectoral productivity to the East European countries as a group. The simple correla-
tion of average sectoral productivities in Eastern Europe with average sectoral productivities in
the other countries serving the West European market – the Americas, Asia and the Pacific, the
Middle East, and Sub-Saharan Africa – is in excess of 0.9. Thus, from the perspective of Western
Europe, taken as a group Eastern Europe looks much like the rest of the world economy with
which it trades. This is not to say that individual East European countries are not very different
from the rest of the world – they are. But on the whole, Eastern Europe is a collection of diverse
economies that looks quite similar to the world as a whole in terms of comparative advantage.
   As a result, when Western Europe opens to trade with the East European countries, its imports
from all other regions decrease somewhat and total West European imports expand by a modest
5%. Opening to trade with Eastern Europe also has a negligible effect on the sectoral structure

                                                2
in the West: value added shares of individual sectors never change by more than a fraction of a
percentage point. This implies that Western Europe’s gains come largely from within-industry
specialization. Thus, part of the reason for small welfare gains in Western Europe is that without
East European trade Western Europe easily substitutes towards other source countries, and its
industrial structure remains largely unchanged.
       We place our analysis in a broader context by evaluating the impact of other policy experiments
in the European economy, benchmarking the main results and informing the policy priorities. Our
first exercise compares deeper trade integration within Western Europe and the EU to broader
but shallower trade integration with countries farther afield. For the West European countries
the welfare gains from greater intra-West European integration are on average 16 times larger
than the gains from integration with Eastern Europe.1 In addition, more than two-thirds of the
West European gains from East European trade are due to the EU accession countries. Both
of these results suggest that deeper integration brings much greater welfare gains than shallower
integration with more distant economies.
       Next, we compare the welfare benefits of different types of integration. Western Europe gains
far less from the observed productivity growth in Eastern Europe than from trade integration
per se. This suggests that the West derives negligible welfare benefits from technology transfer
to Eastern Europe, and that the majority of those benefits accrue to the East European coun-
tries. Finally, we examine the impact of barriers to factor reallocation. Our results reveal an
important role for the cross-sectoral reallocation of labor and capital in Eastern Europe. When
factors of production cannot reallocate across sectors, East European gains from trade integration
are reduced by 14%. Equally important as the impact on aggregate gains, trade opening without
sectoral reallocation can have dramatic distributional effects. The policy implications are twofold.
In order to reap the full gains from trade, opening must be accompanied by policies that promote
smooth functioning of both labor and capital markets. And, since wages and returns to capital
can fall dramatically in some import-competing sectors, it is essential to supplement trade open-
ing with appropriate social safety net programs, especially in cases where trade liberalization is
expected to lead to large cross-sectoral reallocations of resources.
       This paper relates to the broad line of research that studies regional economic integration
using quantitative models (see Baldwin and Venables 1995, for a survey). With respect to its
focus on Europe, our analysis is most closely related to Computable General Equilibrium (CGE)
assessments of the welfare impact of East European trade integration (e.g., Baldwin, Francois and
Portes 1997, Brown, Deardorff, Djankov and Stern 1997, Hertel, Brockmeier and Swaminathan
   1
    Indeed, the welfare gains from the observed fall in trade costs within Western Europe from the 1960s to the
2000s are equivalent to more than half of the total West European gains from trade relative to complete autarky
in the 2000s. Put simply, for a West European country the majority of the total benefits from international trade
come from trading with other West European countries.


                                                       3
1997, Baourakis, Lakatos and Xepapadeas 2008), and to the quantitative industry equilibrium
studies of West European integration under imperfect competition (e.g. Smith and Venables 1988,
Ottaviano, Taglioni and di Mauro 2009, Corcos, Del Gatto, Mion and Ottaviano 2011).
       Our main contribution to this literature is to focus on a neglected determinant of the gains
from trade: Ricardian comparative advantage. We thus build on the CGE approach by incor-
porating the multi-sector Eaton and Kortum (2002) structure explicitly into a global general
equilibrium framework. Our results are more complementary to the industry equilibrium in-
vestigations of Smith and Venables (1988), Ottaviano et al. (2009), and Corcos et al. (2011).
While we ignore the pro-competitive effects of liberalization on firm scale, markups, and firm
selection, we explicitly model cross-industry Ricardian specialization. Methodologically, our work
builds on recent quantitative welfare assessments of trade integration and technological change
in multi-sector Ricardian models (Shikher 2011, Caliendo and Parro 2010, Costinot, Donaldson
and Komunjer 2011, Hsieh and Ossa 2011, Levchenko and Zhang 2011, di Giovanni, Levchenko
and Zhang 2011). This paper is the first to apply this type of analysis to the trade integration of
Eastern Europe.
       Before moving on to the description of the model and the results, we outline some limitations
of our analysis. Though our estimates of capital stocks and productivity are taken from the data,
our counterfactuals ignore any endogenous responses of factor endowments and technology to
trade opening. For instance, our analysis abstracts from endogenous cross-border movements of
capital in response to trade opening, and any resulting impacts on factor prices. Similarly, we do
not model the possibility that trade opening was itself responsible for technology transfer from
West to East, and thus in the absence of trade productivity would be lower in Eastern Europe.2
In addition, because the model has no aggregate uncertainty, it also cannot be used to study the
welfare benefits of improved international risk sharing.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the theoretical framework,
and describes the estimation procedure and the data. Section 3 examines the welfare implications
of East European integration, paying special attention to the role of comparative advantage.
Section 4 performs a number of other policy experiments and discusses the policy implications of
the results. Section 5 concludes.
   2
     The cross-border impact of technology transfer is quantitatively negligible, as we show in section 4.2. Technology
transfer accompanying trade opening may have a large impact on the country receiving the technology, but not on
its trading partners.




                                                          4
2     Theoretical Framework
2.1   The Environment

The world is comprised of N countries, indexed by n and i. In the numerical implementation
below, there are 17 West European countries, 14 East European countries, and 48 non-European
countries. There are J tradeable sectors, plus one nontradeable sector J + 1. Utility over these
sectors in country n is given by
                                                                            η
                                                                            ξ
                                                                           η−1 n
                                       J         1               η−1
                                       X                                                       1−ξn
                                             ωj Ynj                                 YnJ+1
                                                 η
                                                                 η
                           Un =                                                                      ,                         (1)
                                       j=1


where ξn denotes the Cobb-Douglas weight for the tradeable sector composite good, η is the
elasticity of substitution between the tradeable sectors, ωj is the taste parameter for tradeable
sector j, YnJ+1 is the nontradeable-sector composite good, and Ynj is the composite good in
tradeable sector j.
    Each sector j aggregates a continuum of varieties q ∈ [0, 1] unique to each sector using a CES
production function:
                                                                                     ε
                                                 Z      1          ε−1
                                                                                   ε−1
                                       Qjn   =               Qjn (q) ε dq                  ,
                                                     0

where ε denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties q, Qjn is the total output of sector
j in country n, and Qjn (q) is the amount of variety q that is used in production in sector j and
                                                                                                              1
country n. Producing one unit of good q in sector j in country n requires                                   j       input bundles.
                                                                                                           zn (q)
    Production uses labor (L), capital (K), and intermediate inputs from other sectors. The cost
of an input bundle is:
                                                                       J+1
                                                                                           !1−βj
                                            α 1−α βj
                                                                     Y          γk,j
                             cjn   =       wn j rn j                         pkn                   ,
                                                                       k=1

where wn is the wage, rn is the return to capital, and pkn is the price of intermediate input from
sector k. The value-added based labor intensity is given by αj , and the share of value added in
total output by βj . Both vary by sector. The shares of inputs from other sectors, γk,j vary by
output industry j as well as input industry k.
    Following Eaton and Kortum (2002, henceforth EK), productivity znj (q) for each q ∈ [0, 1] in
each sector j is random, and drawn from the Fréchet distribution with cdf:

                                                                           j −θ
                                                 Fnj (z) = e−Tn z .

In this distribution, the absolute advantage term Tnj varies by both country and sector, with
higher values of Tnj implying higher average productivity draws in sector j in country n. The

                                                                  5
parameter θ captures dispersion, with larger values of θ implying smaller dispersion in draws.
   Following Chor (2010), we adopt a broad interpretation of the sectoral productivity parame-
ter Tnj . Countries differ in a variety of ways, for instance in the quality of contract enforcement
and property rights, financial development, and labor market institutions, among others. Recent
empirical and theoretical literature has shown that all of these are sources of comparative advan-
tage in international trade. Our paper adopts a reduced-form approach, under which institutions,
financial development, and other country characteristics manifest themselves in the productiv-
ity parameters Tnj . For instance, countries with worse contracting institutions will have lower
Tnj s in the more institutionally intensive sectors. Chor (2010) provides empirical evidence that
sector-level trade patterns can indeed be modelled this way. We follow this approach by necessity,
since it would be impractical to explicitly incorporate all of these various sources of comparative
advantage into a quantitative framework of this scale.
   The production cost of one unit of good q in sector j and country n is thus equal to cjn /znj (q).
Each country can produce each good in each sector, and international trade is subject to iceberg
costs: djni > 1 units of good q produced in sector j in country i must be shipped to country n in
order for one unit to be available for consumption there. The trade costs need not be symmetric
– djni need not equal djin – and will vary by sector. We normalize djnn = 1 ∀ n and j.
   All the product and factor markets are perfectly competitive, and thus the price at which
country i supplies tradeable good q in sector j to country n is:
                                                                  !
                                                            cji
                                        pjni (q)   =                  djni .
                                                        zij (q)

Buyers of each good q in tradeable sector j in country n will only buy from the cheapest source
country, and thus the price actually paid for this good in country n will be:
                                                               n        o
                                      pjn (q) = min             pjni (q) .
                                                   i=1,...,N


2.2   Characterization of Equilibrium

The competitive equilibrium of this model world economy consists of a set of prices, allocation
rules, and trade shares such that (i) given the prices, all firms’ inputs satisfy the first-order con-
ditions, and their output is given by the production function; (ii) given the prices, the consumers’
demand satisfies the first-order conditions; (iii) the prices ensure the market clearing conditions
for labor, capital, tradeable goods and nontradeable goods; (iv) trade shares ensure balanced
trade for each country.

   The set of prices includes the wage rate wn , the rental rate rn , the sectoral prices {pjn }J+1
                                                                                                j=1 , and



                                                        6
the aggregate price Pn in each country n. The allocation rules include the capital and labor alloca-
tion across sectors {Knj , Ljn }J+1                              j J+1                       j J+1
                                j=1 , final consumption demand {Yn }j=1 , and total demand {Qn }j=1
(both final and intermediate goods) for each sector. The trade shares include the expenditure
       j
share πni in country n on goods coming from country i in sector j.

2.2.1   Demand and Prices

It can be easily shown that the price of sector j’s output will be given by:
                                                                                1
                                                   Z    1                    1−ε
                                         pjn   =             pjn (q)1−ε dq           .
                                                     0

Following the standard EK approach, it is helpful to define

                                                     N                   −θ
                                                             Tij cji djni
                                                     X
                                          Φjn =                               .
                                                     i=1

This value summarizes, for country n, the access to production technologies in sector j. Its value
will be higher if in sector j, country n’s trading partners have high productivity (Tij ) or low cost
(cji ). It will also be higher if the trade costs that country n faces in this sector are low. Standard
steps lead to the familiar result that the price of good j in country n is simply

                                                                    − θ1
                                                   pjn = Γ Φjn              ,                        (2)
                            1
                θ+1−ε
                        1−ε
where Γ = Γ       θ              , with Γ the Gamma function. The consumption price index in country
n is then:                                               1 ξn
                                           J              1−η
                                          X
                                                  j  1−η
                                 Pn = Bn    ωj (pn )          (pJ+1
                                                                  n )
                                                                      1−ξn
                                                                           ,                         (3)
                                               j=1

where Bn = ξn−ξn (1 − ξn )−(1−ξn ) .
   Both capital and labor are mobile across sectors and immobile across countries, and trade is
balanced. The budget constraint (or the resource constraint) of the consumer is thus given by

                                         J+1
                                         X
                                                pjn Ynj = wn Ln + rn Kn ,                            (4)
                                         j=1


where Kn and Ln are the endowments of capital and labor in country n.
   Given the set of prices {wn , rn , Pn , {pjn }J+1  N
                                                 j=1 }n=1 , we first characterize the optimal allocations
from final demand. Consumers maximize utility (1) subject to the budget constraint (4). The




                                                               7
first order conditions associated with this optimization problem imply the following final demand:

                                                          ωj (pjn )1−η
                   pjn Ynj   = ξn (wn Ln + rn Kn ) PJ                          , for all j = {1, .., J}      (5)
                                                                  k 1−η
                                                         k=1 ωk (pn )

and
                                        pJ+1
                                         n Yn
                                             J+1
                                                 = (1 − ξn )(wn Ln + rn Kn ).

2.2.2   Production Allocation and Market Clearing

Let Qjn denote the total sectoral demand in country n and sector j. Qjn is used for both final
consumption and as intermediate inputs in domestic production of all sectors. Denote by Xnj =
pjn Qjn the total spending on the sector j goods in country n, and by Xni
                                                                       j
                                                                          country n’s total spending
on sector j goods coming from country i, i.e. n’s imports of j from country i. The EK structure
in each sector j delivers the standard result that the probability of importing good q from country
    j                                                                           j
i, πni is equal to the share of total spending on goods coming from country i, Xni /Xnj , and is
given by:
                                                                           −θ
                                              j
                                             Xni               Tij cji djni
                                                      j
                                                   = πni =                        .                          (6)
                                             Xnj                     Φjn
The market clearing condition expenditures on sector j in country n is:

                                  J                     N
                                                                          !
                                  X                     X
            pjn Qjn = pjn Ynj +         (1 − βk )γj,k          k k k
                                                              πin pi Qi       + (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1
                                                                                                   n Qn
                                                                                                       J+1

                                  k=1                   i=1

for tradeable sectors j = 1, ..., J, and

                                                                  J+1
                                                                  X
                               pJ+1
                                n Qn
                                    J+1
                                        = pJ+1
                                           n Yn
                                               J+1
                                                   +                    (1 − βk )γj,k pkn Qkn
                                                                  k=1


in the nontradeable sector. That is, total expenditure in sector j = 1, ..., J of country n, pjn Qjn ,
is the sum of (i) domestic final consumption expenditure pjn Ynj ; (ii) expenditure on sector j
                                                       PJ                   PN k k k
goods as intermediate inputs in all the traded sectors  k=1 (1 − βk )γj,k ( i=1 πin pi Qi ), and
(iii) expenditure on the j’s sector intermediate inputs in the domestic non-traded sector (1 −
βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1 J+1
              n Qn . These market clearing conditions summarize two important features of
the world economy captured by our model: complex international production linkages, as much
of world trade is in intermediate inputs, and a good crosses borders multiple times before being
consumed (Hummels, Ishii and Yi 2001); and two-way input linkages between the tradeable and
the nontradeable sectors.
   In each tradeable sector j, some goods q are imported from abroad and some goods q are ex-


                                                              8
ported to the rest of the world. Country n’s exports in sector j are given by EXnj = N                   j j j
                                                                                          P
                                                                                             i=1 1Ii6=n πin pi Qi ,
and its imports in sector j are given by IMnj = N                 j j j
                                                  P
                                                      i=1 1Ii6=n πni pn Qn , where 1Ii6=n is the indicator
                                                                   PJ          j
function. The total exports of country n are then EXn =                j=1 EXn , and total imports are
IMn = j=1 IMnj . Trade balance requires that for any country n, EXn − IMn = 0.
        PJ
                                                                                       PN j j j
   Given the total production revenue in tradeable sector j in country n,                i=1 πin pi Qi , the
optimal sectoral factor allocations must satisfy

                                   N
                                   X      j j j        wn Ljn      rn Knj
                                         πin pi Qi   =        =             .
                                                       αj βj    (1 − αj )βj
                                   i=1

For the nontradeable sector J + 1, the optimal factor allocations in country n are simply given by

                                                  wn LJ+1
                                                      n          rn KnJ+1
                              pJ+1
                               n Qn
                                   J+1
                                       =                   =                 .
                                                 αJ+1 βJ+1   (1 − αJ+1 )βJ+1

Finally, the feasibility conditions for factors are given by, for any n,

                                     J+1
                                     X                        J+1
                                                              X
                                           Ljn   = Ln and           Knj = Kn .
                                     j=1                      j=1


    The model has two principal uses. The first is to estimate the sector-level technology param-
eters Tnj for a large set of countries. The technology parameters in the tradeable sectors relative
to a reference country (the U.S.) are estimated using data on sectoral output and bilateral trade.
The procedure relies on fitting a structural gravity equation implied by the model. Intuitively,
if controlling for the typical gravity determinants of trade, a country spends relatively more on
domestically produced goods in a particular sector, it is revealed to have either a high relative
productivity or a low relative unit cost in that sector. The procedure then uses data on factor
and intermediate input prices to net out the role of factor costs, yielding an estimate of relative
productivity. This step also produces estimates of bilateral, sector-level trade costs djni . The next
step is to estimate the technology parameters in the tradeable sectors for the U.S.. This procedure
requires directly measuring TFP at the sectoral level using data on real output and inputs, and
then correcting measured TFP for selection due to trade. Third, we calibrate the nontradeable
technology for all countries using the first-order condition of the model and the relative prices of
nontradeables observed in the data. The detailed procedures for all three steps are described in
Levchenko and Zhang (2011) and reproduced in Appendix A.
    The second use of the quantitative model is to perform welfare analysis. Given the estimated
sectoral productivities, factor endowments, trade costs, and model parameters, we solve the system
of equations defining the equilibrium under the baseline values, as well as under counterfactual
scenarios, and compare welfare. The algorithm for solving the model is described in Levchenko


                                                          9
and Zhang (2011).

2.3      Data and Calibration

Estimation of sectoral productivity parameters Tnj and trade costs djni requires data on total out-
put by sector, as well as sectoral data on bilateral trade. To maximize coverage of the European
countries as well as data quality, sectoral output data for the 27 European Union countries plus
FYR Macedonia were taken from EUROSTAT. For the other 52 countries in the sample, infor-
mation on output was obtained from the 2009 UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database. The two
output data sources were merged at the roughly 2-digit ISIC Revision 3 level of disaggregation,
yielding 19 manufacturing sectors. Bilateral trade data were collected from the UN COMTRADE
database, and concorded to the same sectoral classification. Productivity and trade cost estima-
tion in this model requires an assumption on the dispersion parameter θ. We pick the value of
θ = 8.28, which is the preferred estimate of EK, and in addition assume that it does not vary
across sectors.3
       In order to implement the model numerically, we must in addition calibrate the following sets
of parameters: (i) preference parameters ωj , ξn , and η; (ii) production function parameters ε, αj ,
βj , γk,j for all sectors j and k; (iii) country factor endowments Ln and Kn .
       The share of expenditure on traded goods, ξn in each country is sourced from Yi and Zhang
(2010), who compile this information for 30 developed and developing countries. For countries
unavailable in the Yi and Zhang data, values of ξn are imputed based on fitting a simple linear
relationship to log PPP-adjusted per capita GDP from the Penn World Tables. The fit of this
simple bivariate linear relationship is quite good, with the R2 of 0.55. The taste parameters
for tradeable sectors ωj were estimated by combining the model structure above with data on
final consumption expenditure shares in the U.S. sourced from the U.S. Input-Output matrix,
as described in Appendix A. The elasticity of substitution between broad sectors within the
   3
     There are no reliable estimates of how θ varies across sectors, and thus we do not model this variation. Shikher
(2004, 2005, 2011), Burstein and Vogel (2009), and Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2010), among others,
follow the same approach of assuming the same θ across sectors. Caliendo and Parro (2010) use tariff data and
triple differencing to estimate sector-level θ. However, their approach may impose too much structure and/or
be dominated by measurement error: at times the values of θ they estimate are negative. In addition, in each
sector the restriction that θ > ε − 1 must be satisfied, and it is not clear whether Caliendo and Parro (2010)’s
estimated sectoral θ’s meet this restriction in every case. Our approach is thus conservative by being agnostic on
this variation across sectors. It is also important to assess how the results below are affected by the value of this
parameter. One may be especially concerned about how the results change under lower values of θ. Lower θ implies
greater within-sector heterogeneity in the random productivity draws. Thus, trade flows become less sensitive to
the costs of the input bundles (cji ), and the gains from intra-sectoral trade become larger relative to the gains from
inter-sectoral trade. In Levchenko and Zhang (2011), we estimated the sectoral productivities for a sample of 75
countries assuming instead a value of θ = 4, which has been advocated by Simonovska and Waugh (2010) and
is at or near the bottom of the range that has been used in the literature. Overall, the results are remarkably
similar. The correlation between estimated Tij ’s under θ = 4 and under θ = 8.28 is above 0.95, and there is actually
somewhat greater variability in Tij ’s under θ = 4.



                                                          10
tradeable bundle, η, is set to 2. Since these are very large product categories, it is sensible that
this elasticity would be relatively low. It is higher, however, than the elasticity of substitution
between tradeable and nontradeable goods, which is set to 1 by the Cobb-Douglas assumption.
       The production function parameters αj and βj are estimated using the output, value added,
and wage bill data from EUROSTAT and UNIDO. To compute αj for each sector, we calculate
the share of the total wage bill in value added, and take a simple median across countries (taking
the mean yields essentially the same results). To compute βj , compute the ratio of value added
to total output for each country and sector, and take the median across countries.
       The intermediate input coefficients γk,j are obtained from the Direct Requirements Table
for the United States. We use the 1997 Benchmark Detailed Make and Use Tables (covering
approximately 500 distinct sectors), as well as a concordance to the ISIC Revision 3 classification
to build a Direct Requirements Table at the 2-digit ISIC level. The Direct Requirements Table
gives the value of the intermediate input in row k required to produce one dollar of final output
in column j. Thus, it is the direct counterpart of the input coefficients γk,j . Note that we assume
these to be the same in all countries.4 In addition, we use the U.S. I-O matrix to obtain αJ+1
and βJ+1 in the nontradeable sector.5 The elasticity of substitution between varieties within each
tradeable sector, ε, is set to 4.
       The total labor force in each country, Ln , and the total capital stock, Kn , are computed based
on the Penn World Tables 6.3. Following the standard approach in the literature (see, e.g. Hall and
Jones 1999, Bernanke and Gürkaynak 2001, Caselli 2005), the total labor force is calculated from
data on the total GDP per capita and per worker.6 The total capital stock is calculated using the
perpetual inventory method that assumes a depreciation rate of 6%: Kn,t = (1−0.06)Kn,t−1 +In,t ,
where In,t is total investment in country n in period t. For most countries, investment data start
in 1950, and the initial value of Kn is set equal to In,0 /(γ + 0.06), where γ is the average growth
rate of investment in the first 10 years for which data are available.
       All of the variables that vary over time are averaged for the period 2000-2007 (the latest
available year), which is the time period on which we carry out the analysis. Appendix Table A1
lists the countries used in the analysis, separating them into Western Europe, Eastern Europe,
and the rest of the world.7 Appendix Table A2 lists the sectors along with the key parameter
   4
     di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) provide suggestive evidence that at such a coarse level of aggregation, Input-
Output matrices are indeed similar across countries. To check robustness of the results, Levchenko and Zhang (2011)
collected country-specific I-O matrices from the GTAP database. Productivities computed based on country-specific
I-O matrices were very similar to the baseline values, with the median correlation of 0.98, and all but 3 out of 75
countries with a correlation of 0.93 or above, and the minimum correlation of 0.65.
   5
     The U.S. I-O matrix provides an alternative way of computing αj and βj . These parameters calculated based
on the U.S. I-O table are very similar to those obtained from UNIDO, with the correlation coefficients between
them above 0.85 in each case. The U.S. I-O table implies greater variability in αj ’s and βj ’s across sectors than
does UNIDO.
   6
     Using the variable name conventions in the Penn World Tables, Ln = 1000 ∗ pop ∗ rgdpch/rgdpwok.
   7
     Due to lack of required data, a number of East European countries are missing. The missing countries include all


                                                         11
values for each sector: αj , βj , the share of nontradeable inputs in total inputs γJ+1,j , and the
taste parameter ωj .


3     The Welfare Impact of European Integration
3.1    Basic Patterns

Table 1 reports the matrix of correlations of Tnj in the tradeable sectors j = 1, ..., J between
all pairs of East and West European countries. In order to focus on differences in comparative
rather than absolute advantage, we compute the correlations on the vectors of Tnj demeaned
by each country’s geometric average Tnj . It is clear that the differences in sectoral similarities
between country pairs are pronounced. In Eastern Europe, countries most similar to the West are
Poland, Slovenia, and Slovakia, while Estonia and Kazakhstan are most different from the West.
Among the West European countries, Finland and Switzerland have the most similar comparative
advantage to Eastern Europe, while the Netherlands and Ireland are the most different. Figure
2 presents these correlations graphically, using a contour plot with darker shades representing
higher correlations. We next explore the impact of such pronounced differences in technological
similarity on the magnitude of the welfare gains from European integration.

3.2    Model Fit

Our model matches quite closely the relative incomes of countries as well as bilateral and overall
trade flows observed in the data. Table 2 compares the wages, returns to capital, and the trade
shares in the baseline model solution and in the data. The top panel shows that mean and median
wages implied by the model are very close to the data. The correlation coefficient between model-
implied wages and those in the data is above 0.99. The second panel performs the same comparison
for the return to capital. Since it is difficult to observe the return to capital in the data, we follow
the approach adopted in the estimation of Tnj ’s, and impute rn from an aggregate factor market
clearing condition: rn /wn = (1 − α) Ln / (αKn ), where α is the aggregate share of labor in GDP,
assumed to be 2/3. Once again, the average levels of rn are very similar in the model and the
data, and the correlation between the two is 0.95.
    Next, we compare the trade shares implied by the model to those in the data. The third panel
                                                                                                j
of Table 2 reports the spending on domestically produced goods as a share of overall spending, πnn .
These values reflect the overall trade openness, with lower values implying higher international
                                                                                       j
trade as a share of absorption. Though we under-predict overall trade slightly (model πnn ’s tend
but two of the countries comprising former Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, and Serbia),
the trans-Caucasus countries (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia), Albania, Belarus, and Moldova. These countries
together account for 14% of total Eastern bloc population and 10% of its GDP, but less than 6% of its exports.



                                                      12
to be higher), the averages are quite similar, and the correlation between the model and data
values is 0.92. Finally, the bottom panel compares the international trade flows in the model and
the data. The averages are very close, and the correlation between the model and data values is
0.91.
    Figure 3 presents the comparison of trade flows graphically, by depicting the model-implied
                                                                                     j
trade values against the data, along with a 45-degree line. Red/solid dots indicate πni ’s that
involve Eastern Europe, that is, trade flows in which an East European country is either an
exporter or an importer. All in all the fit of the model to trade flows is quite good. Eastern
Europe is unexceptional when it comes to the fit of the model, with East European trade flows
clustered together with the rest of the observations.

3.3     Welfare Analysis

This section evaluates the welfare gains from trade integration of Eastern Europe. To do so,
we first compute welfare in the baseline model under the actual trade costs djni estimated on
data for the 2000s. We next compute the welfare in a counterfactual scenario in which all East
European countries are in autarky.8 Table 3 reports, for each West and East European country,
the percentage welfare gain from European integration (that is, the proportional difference in
welfare between the benchmark model for 2000s and the counterfactual model in which all East
European countries are in autarky).
    All throughout, welfare is defined as the indirect utility function. Straightforward steps using
the CES functional form can be used to show that indirect utility in each country n is equal to
total income divided by the price level. Since the model is competitive, total income equals the
total returns to factors of production. Expressed in per capita terms welfare is thus:

                                                    wn + rn kn
                                                               ,
                                                       Pn

where kn = Kn /Ln is capital per worker, and the consumption price level Pn comes from equation
(3).
    The gains to Western Europe are not large: the mean welfare increase is 0.16%, and the range
is between essentially zero for Portugal and 0.4% for Austria. This result is not surprising. First,
in the 2000s imports from Eastern Europe are only about 22% of overall West European imports
from outside Western Europe, and only 8% of total West European imports (including from within
   8
     In the counterfactual, each individual East European country is in autarky, that is, it does not trade with other
Eastern bloc countries. Assuming complete autarky in this counterfactual may over-estimate the gains, since there
was some trade among the Eastern bloc countries, as well as between those countries and the rest of the world.
Our model is not suited to evaluate the welfare gains from trade among the communist bloc countries, since those
were command economies in which all international exchange was centrally planned rather than driven by market
forces.


                                                         13
the region). In addition, our counterfactual takes into account the fact that in the absence of
Eastern Europe, the total West European imports would not fall by 8%: Western Europe will
increase imports from all other regions to partially substitute for East European imports. In fact,
as we discuss in detail in Section 3.4, in the complete absence of Eastern Europe, total West
European imports would only fall by 4.7%.
       For Eastern Europe, gains are much greater, since in this case we are comparing complete
autarky to trade. The median change in welfare is 9.23%, ranging from 2.85% for Russia to
nearly 20% for Estonia. Not surprisingly, larger and farther away countries (Russia, Ukraine)
tend to gain much less than smaller ones, such as the Baltic countries, FYR Macedonia, and
Bulgaria. Note that the gains are from trade with all of the world, not just with Western Europe.
       How much does comparative advantage affect the magnitude of these gains? To account for
the variation in the gains from East European trade, we regress the total welfare change on the
average djni , the correlation between the T ’s, as well as total GDP to control for the well-known
role of country size. Note that we do not seek any kind of causal interpretation of these regressions.
Rather, we only want to see which variables correlate with the variation in the welfare gains, and
can “explain” it in the least-squares sense. Table 4 reports the results, for three ways of weighting
djni ’s and correlations of T ’s: equal-weighted, GDP-weighted, and population-weighted. That is,
when the regression is carried out on the sample of West European countries, we compute, for each
country, the (weighted) average of its trade cost to each East European country, and the (weighted)
average of its technological similarity to each East European country. When the regression is run
on the sample of East European countries, these averages are computed across West European
countries. All the left-hand side variables and the regressors are in logs throughout.9
       Panel A reports the results for the 17 West European countries. The R2 ’s of these regressions
are between 0.65 and 0.7, indicating that the three regressors account for the bulk of the cross-
country variation in welfare gains. Trade costs and country size are significant at the 1% level in
all specifications. By contrast, sectoral similarity has the “right” sign but the coefficient is close
to zero and insignificant.
       Panel B reports the results for the 14 East European countries. The same three variables do a
better job in absorbing the variation in the welfare gains for Eastern Europe: the R2 ’s are above
0.88 in all three specifications. Here, by contrast, technological similarity to Western Europe
matters a great deal. Even in such a small sample, the coefficients on similarity are significant at
the 1% level, with robust t-statistics of about 3.5. The coefficients are also large in magnitude. A
one-standard deviation change in GDP-weighted technological similarity increases welfare gains
from trade integration by 2.43 percentage points. On the other hand, trade costs don’t seem to
   9
    None of the average correlations or welfare gains are negative, so taking logs does not lead to dropped obser-
vations. Estimating these relationships in levels delivers similar results.



                                                       14
matter much in accounting for the gains from trade in Eastern Europe, in spite of the fact that
the variation in trade costs is very similar in the West and East European samples.
   Figure 4 presents the contrast between Western and Eastern Europe graphically. It plots
the partial correlations between the welfare gain from East European integration and the GDP-
weighted technological similarity (left side), and the GDP-weighted djni (right side), after netting
out the other variables in Table 4. The top panel reports the results for Western Europe, the
bottom panel for Eastern Europe. As shown by the regression estimates, for Western Europe
trade costs explain the variation in welfare gains remarkably well, while there is virtually no
relationship with technological similarity. For Eastern Europe, trade costs don’t do as well, but
there is a pronounced negative relationship between similarity and the welfare gains.
   This difference in outcomes between Western and Eastern Europe is due to the difference in
relative importance of the two groups in each other’s total trade. Seventy two percent of Eastern
Europe’s imports come from Western Europe in the period we consider. Thus, technological
similarity with Western Europe is an important determinant of the gains from trade relative to
autarky. However, East European countries remain relatively small trade partners for Western
Europe, accounting for about 22% of its imports from the rest of the world on average in the 2000s.
Thus, for Western Europe, East European trade and technological similarity has to be evaluated
in the context of its broader international trade relationships. That is, for Western Europe what
should matter is not so much its similarity to Eastern Europe per se, but the relative similarity
of Eastern Europe to the average country with which Western Europe already trades (see di
Giovanni et al. 2011, for a closely related result).
   To that end, we compute the average productivity of East European countries in a sector, and
correlate it to the average productivity of all the other trade partners of Western Europe (the
Americas, Asia, the Pacific, Middle East and North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa). It turns out
that from the perspective of Western Europe, Eastern Europe looks very much like the rest of the
world with which it trades. The correlation between the average sectoral productivity in Eastern
Europe and in the rest of the world is a remarkable 0.91. Figure 5 presents this result graphically,
with average productivities expressed as a fraction of the world frontier. (This regularity holds for
population- and GDP-weighted averages as well.) Of course, individual East European countries
often have a comparative advantage that is very different from the rest of the world. But Eastern
Europe contains many diverse countries, and as a group they look much like the rest of the world
economy in terms of their relative technology.
   Thus, the gains to Western Europe from East European trade come not primarily from trading
with technologically different countries, but from the expansion of markets. As a result, trade costs
explain very well the variation in the gains from trade for Western Europe, while technological
similarity to Eastern Europe does not matter much.

                                                  15
3.4   Global Trade Volumes

We next explore how East European integration changes the pattern of global trade. By construc-
tion, when Eastern Europe opens to trade, exports from Eastern Europe to all other countries
rise. But what happens to exports from other regions, in particular to Western Europe? As
Eastern Europe takes up a substantial share of West European imports, do imports to Western
Europe from other regions fall, and if yes, by how much?
   Before describing the comparison between the counterfactual and the benchmark, we check
how well the model reproduces the cross-regional trade shares. To do so, we compute, in both the
data and the benchmark model, the shares of total extra-regional imports going to each region.
That is, we take the total imports from the rest of the world to, say, Western Europe, and compute
the share of those imports captured by Eastern Europe, as well as every other region. The regions
we consider are non-Europe OECD countries (which for us are the United States, Canada, Japan,
Australia, and New Zealand); Latin America and the Caribbean; Middle East and North Africa;
East and South Asia; and Sub-Saharan Africa. Figure 6 presents the scatterplot of those shares
in the data (on the x-axis) against the model, along with a 45-degree line. All in all, the model
matches the cross-regional import shares remarkably well. The correlation between model and
data shares is 0.98, and the Spearman rank correlation is 0.98 as well.
   Next, Table 5 presents the matrix of percentage changes in cross-regional trade volumes from
the counterfactual to the benchmark. The table omits Eastern Europe from both the rows and
the columns of the table because in the counterfactual Eastern Europe is in autarky, and thus
percentage changes between the counterfactual and the benchmark are infinity. Of particular
interest is the top row, that shows imports into Western Europe. As Eastern Europe opens
to trade, imports from all other regions fall, by between −1.45% from non-Europe OECD and
−4.09% from the Middle East/North Africa region. As a result, total West European imports –
inclusive of Eastern Europe – increase by only 4.7%. This modest change is an illustration of why
the gains to Western Europe from the opening up of Eastern Europe are so modest: if Eastern
Europe weren’t there, the Western countries would substitute imports from other world regions
for East European imports. The pattern looks similar elsewhere in the world. Total imports
rise, but by less than in Western Europe. Imports from regions other than Eastern Europe fall
modestly.

3.5   Changes in Sectoral Structure

A closely related question is what happens to industrial structure in Western Europe as a result of
European integration. In this subsection, we compare sectoral structure implied by the baseline
model to the counterfactual sectoral structure that would have prevailed had Eastern Europe not


                                                16
been integrated.
    Figure 7(a) presents the absolute changes in shares of value added in each sector and each
country as Eastern Europe opens to trade. The most striking result is just how little change
in sectoral structure takes place. Aside from the non-tradeable sector, in which shares usually
decrease and sometimes by as much as 0.0025 (or a quarter of a percentage point), one hardly
observes changes in value added shares in excess of 0.0005, or 0.05 percentage points. By and large,
industrial structure remains the same as Western Europe opens to trade with Eastern Europe.
This lack of effect is in part because, as mentioned above, Eastern Europe represents only 22%
of all West European imports from outside the region, and in part because Eastern Europe has
similar technology to the rest of Western Europe’s trading partners. Thus, trade liberalization of
Eastern Europe does not represent a significant change in West European comparative advantage
vis-à-vis the rest of the world with which it trades.
    This lack of change in Western sectoral structure is in sharp contrast with Eastern Europe,
depicted in Figure 7(b). Note the difference in scale of the y-axis: while for Western Europe,
changes in the tradeable sector range from −0.0005 to 0.0015, with the non-tradeable share
falling by less than 0.0025 in all cases, for Eastern Europe the changes in tradeable sector shares
range from about −0.005 to 0.02, and as much as −0.05 in the non-tradeable sector. This is a
difference in sectoral share changes of an order of magnitude. Not surprisingly, welfare changes
in Eastern Europe are much greater.


4     Benchmarking the Gains and Policy Implications

Are the gains from East European integration produced by our model large or small? Comparing
the main welfare results to alternative policy experiments will shed light on where integration
of Eastern Europe falls in the ranking of different changes that occurred, or might occur, in
the European economy. These differences in impact will then inform the policy priorities, by
highlighting economic changes that have relatively large or small welfare payoffs. This section
develops a number of alternative counterfactuals, with an eye on comparing the welfare impact
of these alternative changes to the welfare impact of the integration of Eastern Europe.

4.1   West European Integration

The obvious comparison for East European integration is the earlier integration within Western
Europe. Unlike the fall of the Iron Curtain that brought about an abrupt integration of Eastern
Europe, West European integration has been a much more gradual and continuous process. Start-
ing with the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community among the original 6
members that went into effect in 1952, integration both broadened by expanding the EU to 15


                                                 17
West European members, and deepened over time. The major treaties are the Treaty of Rome
(went into effect 1958), Single European Act (1987), the Treaty on European Union (also known
as the Maastricht Treaty, 1993), and up to the Treaty of Lisbon (signed 2007). In between these
major milestones, there were more minor treaties as well. Thus, the basic difficulty in simulating
the welfare impact of West European integration is that there is no single year, or even decade,
during which integration occurred.
       To take the broadest view of this process, we simulate a counterfactual scenario in which
trade costs djni between West European trade partners are rolled back to their 1960s values. Our
estimates for the 1960s show that trade costs within Western Europe are 45% higher in the 1960s
compared to today, and this is the change in trade costs that we simulate. This exercise in effect
attributes all of the fall in iceberg trade costs within Western Europe from the 1960s to the 2000s
to policy measures relating to West European integration, and thus may over-estimate the total
impact of policy measures. On the other hand, a great deal of policy barriers to cross-border trade
in particular were dismantled prior to 1962 (the earliest year in our data) among the original 6
members. The fact that we start in the 1960s may thus under-estimate the total sweep of the
EU’s impact. A fall in trade costs of this magnitude appears to be in a reasonable ballpark for
assessing the impact of deep economic integration on trade flows.
       The first column of Table 6 presents the results. Precisely, we report the change in West
European welfare due to a reduction in intra-West-European trade costs by 45%, the end point of
this reduction being today’s trade costs. This counterfactual assumes that Eastern Europe stays
in autarky throughout, in order to mimic, albeit in a very rough way, historical developments.
Western Europe was well on its way towards deep integration within the region when Eastern
Europe was integrated. The mean welfare gains to Western Europe from observed within-region
integration are 2.53%. These gains are on average 16 times larger than the gains from opening to
Eastern Europe. This finding is not surprising, since West European trade partners are far more
important for a typical West European country than East European partners.
       To probe further, column 2 of Table 6 presents the West European countries’ gains from trade
relative to complete autarky.10 The model implies that the mean gains from trade in Western
Europe are 4.54%. Strikingly, just a 45% reduction in trade costs with only fellow West European
countries accounts for more than half of the total gains from trade for Western Europe. These
results speak to the policy tradeoff between the benefits of continued “deep” integration within
Western Europe, and the “shallow” but broad integration with other regions, such as Eastern
Europe and beyond. West European economies are relatively large, productive, and close to
each other. Thus, quantitatively the gains from reductions in trade barriers within that group of
  10
    In this calculation, gains are computed with respect to the baseline scenario, that is, each West European
country goes from trading with no one to trading with everyone including Eastern Europe.



                                                     18
countries are an order of magnitude larger than even the gains from integration of large economic
blocs such as Eastern Europe, China, or India.11 These results point to a potentially much greater
benefit of deeper, rather than broader, integration.
       The gains from trade relative to autarky in Western Europe can also be compared to the
gains for Eastern Europe in Table 3. East European gains from trade are two times larger than
Western Europe’s gains. Not surprisingly, since East European countries tend to be both smaller
in size and less productive, they derive greater benefits from international exchange. From a
policy perspective, this suggests that further trade integration in Eastern Europe, especially with
its West European neighbors, is likely to have an even larger welfare impact than reductions in
West European trade barriers. Thus, policies that improve the links between the two groups of
countries, such as investment in infrastructure, are likely to have a larger payoff in Eastern Europe
compared to the West.

4.2      East European Integration and Productivity Growth

Another facet of the tradeoff between deeper and broader integration relates to the differing
degrees of integration of East European countries with the West. Does Western Europe gain
more from deeper integration with the Central European countries currently in the European
Union, or from a more arms-length trade relationship with non-EU countries? The answer is not
clear ex ante: non-EU countries such as Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan are both larger in size,
and more technologically different, than the EU-25 countries of Central Europe. Columns 3 and
4 of Table 6 report the gains from integration of EU-member East European countries, and the
gains from integration of non-EU East European countries respectively. Of the total mean gains
from East European integration, 0.156%, two-thirds (0.107%) are due to integration of the EU
East European countries. The remaining one-third (0.049%) is due to non-EU Eastern Europe.12
Once again, these results are suggestive that economic policies should aim at deeper integration
of current EU member countries, rather than broader integration of countries farther afield.
       The previous exercises compare our main results to the impact of other types of reductions in
trade costs, whether within Western Europe, or for different sets of East European countries. Next,
we benchmark the results against another drastic change that took place in the East European
economy, namely economic growth. Has Western Europe benefited more from a fall in trade
costs with Eastern Europe per se, or from the dramatic productivity growth (and the somewhat
  11
     Elsewhere (di Giovanni et al. 2011) we computed the worldwide gains from the trade integration of China. For
West European countries, the mean gains from trade with China are 0.09%, with the maximum gain of 0.162%.
  12
     The EU East European countries are Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovak
Republic, and Slovenia. All of these joined the EU in 2004, in the middle of our sample of years. Bulgaria and
Romania joined in 2007, the last year of our sample, and thus we put them in the non-EU group. Adding them
to the EU group will make the difference between the welfare impact of EU and non-EU integration even more
pronounced.


                                                       19
less dramatic capital accumulation) that took place in Eastern Europe since the fall of the Iron
Curtain? To answer this question, we simulate the welfare benefit to Western Europe from
the productivity growth and capital accumulation that actually occurred in the East European
countries from the 1990s to the 2000s. Over this period, these economies grew dramatically, with
productivity rising 33% over a decade (2.9% growth per annum).13 Note that, as is well known in
the trade literature, a trading partner’s productivity growth need not improve a country’s welfare
(see, e.g. Hicks 1953, Samuelson 2004). In addition, quantitative assessments in other contexts
have found that the overwhelming majority of welfare benefits from productivity growth accrue to
the growing country itself rather than to other countries through trade (Hsieh and Ossa 2011, di
Giovanni et al. 2011).
    Column 5 of Table 6 reports the welfare gains to Western Europe from the observed growth in
Eastern Europe from the 1990s to the 2000s. These gains are virtually nil: 0.028% (i.e. 0.00028),
with a maximum of 0.067%. Thus, it appears that the modest welfare gains to Western Europe
from trade integration with the East are still larger than the gains from productivity growth in
those countries, even though that productivity growth has been dramatic. This finding suggests
that policies favoring eastward technology transfer and foreign direct investment do not have a
large aggregate welfare payoff for the West, even relative to reductions in trade costs with East
European countries. Of course, those policies will have a much greater positive welfare impact on
the East European countries themselves.

4.3    Importance of Factor Reallocation

The preceding counterfactuals assumed that the factors of production reallocate optimally in
response to each change in trade costs, and thus labor and capital markets clear within each
country. A frequently expressed concern with greater integration – be it with Eastern Europe or
other regions – is that reallocation of production factors within a country is difficult. Barriers to
factor reallocation will both reduce the magnitude of the gains from trade, and create winners and
losers even when aggregate gains are positive. To the extent that factor reallocation is required
for reaping the benefits of trade, policies that impede that reallocation, such as rigid labor market
institutions, may also reduce the gains from trade.
    To assess the importance of factor reallocation quantitatively, we compute the welfare gains
from East European integration under the assumption that capital and labor in each sector are
fixed. That is, when Eastern Europe opens to trade, factors cannot move from one sector to
  13
     To be precise, we compare welfare in Western Europe under the 2000s baseline to a counterfactual scenario in
which Eastern Europe’s trade costs are the same as in the baseline, but East European productivities and capital-
labor ratios are as they were in the 1990s. Thus, the counterfactual scenario is a world in which trade integration
with Eastern Europe took place, but there was no growth in those countries from the 1990s to today.




                                                        20
another in response.14 Table 7 reports the welfare changes in that experiment. As expected,
the welfare gains from East European integration are smaller for every country if factors are not
mobile across sectors. For Western Europe, the difference is not large in absolute terms: the
mean gains are 0.142% instead of 0.156% in the main analysis. For Eastern Europe, however, the
welfare gains without sectoral reallocation are significantly smaller in both absolute and relative
terms. The mean gain from trade drops to 7.94%, which is 14% less than the 9.23% welfare gain
when factors are mobile. The pronounced difference between the two groups of countries in the
impact of factor reallocation on welfare gains is not surprising in light of the results in section
3.5. As Figure 7 makes clear, East European integration induced only small changes in sectoral
structure in Western Europe, whereas in Eastern Europe sectoral composition changed much more
dramatically. From a policy perspective, we conclude that efforts to promote smooth functioning
of the labor and capital markets are especially important in trade liberalization episodes that are
expected to produce large cross-sectoral reallocations.
      A distinct but related question is how large are the distributional consequences of trade open-
ing. Understanding the magnitudes of the distributional effects is important in designing the social
safety net programs to cushion the negative consequences of trade opening for import-competing
sectors. To address this question exhaustively, one would require a model with explicit frictions
in the mobility of factors across sectors. The exercise here represents an extreme case in which
factors are not allowed to move at all between sectors. In addition, we do not take an explicit
stand on who owns the capital in each sector, and thus we can only compute changes in wages
and returns to capital in each sector, rather than in individuals’ overall incomes. Nonetheless,
analyzing the factor price changes can give us a rough sense of the distributional impact of trade
opening when factors are immobile across sectors.
      Figure 8 presents, for each sector, the distribution of percentage changes in sector-specific real
wage (top panel) and real return to capital (bottom panel) when Eastern Europe opens to trade.
The solid dots represent Western Europe, and hollow dots Eastern Europe. Two conclusions
emerge. First, the variation in real factor returns across sectors dwarfs the magnitude of the
aggregate impact. For Western Europe, as we saw above the mean welfare change is 0.142%. By
contrast, the changes in real wage and the real return to capital range across sectors from about
−1% to 1% in every country, and as much as from −5% to 5% in smaller countries such as Iceland
and Ireland. Second, the cross-sectoral dispersion in wage and return to capital changes is far
larger in Eastern Europe. It is not uncommon to observe 50% reductions, or 100% increases in
the real returns to factors in individual industries.
      These results further inform policy priorities. The finding that the distributional impacts
of trade liberalization can be an order of magnitude higher than the aggregate gains points to
 14
      In this exercise, capital and labor can still reallocate between varieties within each sector.


                                                            21
the primary importance of social safety net programs. In Western Europe, the absolute welfare
changes even in the most import-competing sectors are small, rarely more than 1%. Thus, East
European integration is unlikely to have led to a large amount of dislocation in the West. By
contrast, East European workers and capital owners in particular sectors can experience very
large swings (from halving to doubling of real wages or capital returns). Thus, social safety nets
are especially needed in those countries as they open to trade. Finally, we stress that smooth and
efficient factor markets will limit the within-country divergence in factor prices across sectors due
to trade liberalization, and thus lead to less reliance on the social safety net.


5    Conclusion

Ever since the original formulation of the Ricardian model in the nineteenth century, it has
been understood that the magnitude of the relative differences in technology – “the strength of
comparative advantage” – matters for the size of the gains from trade. Broadly speaking, stronger
comparative advantage leads to larger gains from trade. However, the importance of this effect
has not been assessed quantitatively.
    This paper uses the trade integration of Eastern Europe after the fall of the Iron Curtain as a
laboratory for evaluating the role of comparative advantage in the gains from trade. We estimate
sector-level productivities for 19 sectors in 79 countries, and document that differences in relative
technology do indeed vary a great deal among the Western and East European country pairs.
Using a multi-sector, multi-factor quantitative model of trade and these sectoral productivity
estimates, we evaluate the gains from European integration for each country.
    The variation in gains to West European countries is mainly accounted for by trade costs, with
technological similarity playing little or no role. By contrast, the dispersion in gains to Eastern
Europe is well explained by technological similarity to Western Europe. This difference is due to
the asymmetry in the relative importance of the two country groups as trade partners. The large
majority of East European trade is with Western Europe. For Western Europe, however, Eastern
Europe is still a minor trade partner. Furthermore, a comparison of sectoral productivities reveals
that as a group, Eastern Europe has a similar comparative advantage as the rest of Western
Europe’s trade partners. Thus, the gains to Western Europe come mainly from expansion of
markets, rather than from technological differences with Eastern Europe.
    Placing the East European trade opening episode within a broader context of West European
integration allows us to draw out a number of policy implications. Deeper within-Europe inte-
gration appears to confer greater welfare benefits than shallower but broader trade integration.
Technology transfer from Western to Eastern Europe will benefit East European countries, but
have virtually no positive welfare impact on the West. Eastern Europe has likely experienced


                                                 22
large distributional effects due to trade opening. Thus, it is imperative that trade integration is
accompanied by policies that promote optimal reallocation of factors of production, and ensure a
minimum safety net for those displaced by import competition.




                                                23
Appendix A            Procedure for Estimating Tnj , djni , and ωj

This appendix reproduces from Levchenko and Zhang (2011) the details of the procedure for esti-
mating technology, trade costs, and taste parameters required to implement the model. Interested
readers should consult that paper for further details on estimation steps and data sources.

A.1    Tradeable Sector Relative Technology

We now focus on the tradeable sectors. Following the standard EK approach, first divide trade
shares by their domestic counterpart:
                                                                         −θ
                                        j
                                       πni         j
                                                  Xni        Tij cji djni
                                        j
                                              =    j
                                                           =       −θ ,
                                       πnn        Xnn         Tn cjn
                                                                j



which in logs becomes:
                                 !
                            j
                           Xni                                       
                      ln    j
                                     = ln Tij (cji )−θ − ln Tnj (cjn )−θ − θ ln djni .
                           Xnn

Let the (log) iceberg costs be given by the following expression:

                           ln djni = djk + bjni + CUni
                                                    j
                                                       + RT Ajni + exji + νni
                                                                           j
                                                                              ,

where djk is an indicator variable for a distance interval. Following EK, we set the distance
intervals, in miles, to [0, 350], [350, 750], [750, 1500], [1500, 3000], [3000, 6000], [6000, maximum).
Additional variables are whether the two countries share a common border (bjni ), belong to a
                  j
currency union (CUni ), or to a regional trade agreement (RT Ajni ). Following the arguments in
Waugh (2010), we include an exporter fixed effect exji . Finally, there is an error term νni
                                                                                          j
                                                                                             . Note
that all the variables have a sector superscript j: we allow all the trade cost proxy variables to
affect true iceberg trade costs djni differentially across sectors. There is a range of evidence that
trade volumes at sector level vary in their sensitivity to distance or common border (see, among
many others, Do and Levchenko 2007, Berthelon and Freund 2008).
   This leads to the following final estimating equation:
                                 !
                            j
                           Xni                                           −θ 
                     ln     j
                                     = ln Tij (cji )−θ − θexji − ln Tnj cjn
                           Xnn         |           {z       }|        {z        }
                                           Exporter Fixed Effect       Importer Fixed Effect

                                       −θdjk   −   θbjni   −      j
                                                               θCUni   − θRT Ajni −θνni
                                                                                      j
                                                                                         .
                                       |                       {z               } | {z }
                                                   Bilateral Observables            Error Term




                                                           24
   This equation is estimated for each tradeable sector j = 1, ...J. Estimating this relationship
will thus yield, for each country, an estimate of its technology-cum-unit-cost term in each sector j,
Tnj (cjn )−θ , which is obtained by exponentiating the importer fixed effect. The available degrees of
freedom imply that these estimates are of each country’s Tnj (cjn )−θ relative to a reference country,
which in our estimation is the United States. We denote this estimated value by Snj :
                                                                                     !−θ
                                                                   Tnj        cjn
                                                        Snj   =    j
                                                                                             ,
                                                                  Tus         cjus

where the subscript us denotes the United States. It is immediate from this expression that
estimation delivers a convolution of technology parameters Tnj and cost parameters cjn . Both will
of course affect trade volumes, but we would like to extract technology Tnj from these estimates.
In order to do that, we follow the approach of Shikher (2004). In particular, for each country n,
the share of total spending going to home-produced goods is given by
                                                                                        !−θ
                                                         j
                                                        Xnn                   Γcjn
                                                               =   Tnj                           .
                                                        Xnj                    pjn

Dividing by its U.S. counterpart yields:
                                                                                !−θ                                 !−θ
                                   j
                                  Xnn /Xnj               Tnj        cjn pjus                                 pjus
                                  j       j
                                                   =      j
                                                                                         = Snj                            ,
                                 Xus,us /Xus             Tus       cjus pjn                                  pjn

and thus the ratio of price levels in sector j relative to the U.S. becomes:
                                                                                             !1
                                                  pjn               j
                                                                   Xnn /Xnj              1           θ

                                                        =                                                .                        (A.1)
                                                 pjus              j
                                                                  Xus,us   j
                                                                         /Xus Snj

The entire right-hand side of this expression is either observable or estimated. Thus, we can
impute the price levels relative to the U.S. in each country and each tradeable sector.
   The cost of the input bundles relative to the U.S. can be written as:

                                                                    J  k γk,j 1−βj  J+1 γJ+1,j (1−βj )
                                                                               !
            cjn
                               αj βj          (1−αj )βj
                          wn               rn                       Y  p            n p                              n
                  =                                                                                                           .
           cjus           wus              rus
                                                                    k=1
                                                                               pkus                                 pJ+1
                                                                                                                     us


Using information on relative wages, returns to capital, price in each tradeable sector from (A.1),
and the nontradeable sector price relative to the U.S., we can thus impute the costs of the input
bundles relative to the U.S. in each country and each sector. Armed with those values, it is




                                                                         25
straightforward to back out the relative technology parameters:
                                                                   !θ
                                            Tnj             cjn
                                            j
                                                  =   Snj               .
                                           Tus              cjus

A.2    Trade Costs

The bilateral, directional, sector-level trade costs of shipping from country i to country n in sector
j are then computed based on the estimated coefficients as:

                                                                j
                                                     d j + θRT
                        ln dˆjni = θdˆjk + θb̂jni + θCU     [         exji + θb
                                                               Ani + θc        j
                                                                              νni ,
                                                        ni


for an assumed value of θ. Note that the estimate of the trade costs includes the residual from the
                     j
gravity regression θb
                    νni . Thus, the trade costs computed as above will fit bilateral sectoral trade
flows exactly, given the estimated fixed effects. Note also that the exporter component of the
             xji is part of the exporter fixed effect. Since each country in the sample appears as
trade costs ec
both an exporter and an importer, the exporter and importer estimated fixed effects are combined
                           exji .
to extract an estimate of θc

A.3    Complete Estimation

So far we have estimated the levels of technology of the tradeable sectors relative to the United
States. To complete our estimation, we still need to find (i) the levels of T for the tradeable
sectors in the United States; (ii) the taste parameters ωj , and (iii) the nontradeable technology
levels for all countries.
   To obtain (i), we use the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database for the U.S. (Bartelsman
and Gray 1996). We start by measuring the observed TFP levels for the tradeable sectors in the
U.S.. The form of the production function gives

                                                                                 J+1
                                                                                 X
                j
            ln Zus = ln Λjus + βj αj ln Ljus + βj (1 − αj ) ln Kus
                                                                j
                                                                   + (1 − βj )                  k,j
                                                                                       γk,j ln Mus  ,   (A.2)
                                                                                 k=1


where Λj denotes the measured TFP in sector j, Z j denotes the output, Lj denotes the labor
input, K j denotes the capital input, and M k,j denotes the intermediate input from sector k. The
NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database offers information on output, and inputs of labor,
capital, and intermediates, along with deflators for each. Thus, we can estimate the observed
TFP level for each manufacturing tradeable sector using the above equation.
   If the United States were a closed economy, the observed TFP level for sector j would be given
                1
by Λjus = (Tus
            j
               ) θ . In the open economies, the goods with inefficient domestic productivity draws


                                                       26
will not be produced and will be imported instead. Thus, international trade and competition
introduce selection in the observed TFP level, as demonstrated by Finicelli, Pagano and Sbracia
                                                              j
(2009a). We thus use the model to back out the true level of Tus of each tradeable sector in the
United States. Here we follow Finicelli et al. (2009a) and use the following relationship:
                                                                                           !−θ
                                                                              cji djus,i
                                                                    Tij
                                                            X
                                (Λjus )θ   =    j
                                               Tus   +                                           .
                                                            i6=us               cjus

Thus, we have
                                                             !−θ                       
                                 X Tj           cji djus,i                    X j  j −θ
             (Λjus )θ = Tus
                         j 
                            1+      i
                                        j
                                                                       j 
                                                                   = Tus  1+  Si dus,i   .             (A.3)
                                 i6=us Tus           cjus                                        i6=us

                                                                  j
This equation can be solved for underlying technology parameters Tus in the U.S., given estimated
observed TFP Λjus , and all the Sij ’s and djus,i ’s estimated in the previous subsection.
   To estimate the taste parameters {ωj }Jj=1 , we use information on final consumption shares in
the tradeable sectors in the U.S.. We start with a guess of {ωj }Jj=1 and find sectoral prices pkn as
follows. For an initial guess of sectoral prices, we compute the tradeable sector aggregate price and
the nontradeable sector price using the data on the relative prices of nontradeables to tradeables.
Using these prices, we calculate sectoral unit costs and Φjn ’s, and update prices according to
equation (2), iterating until the prices converge. We then update the taste parameters according
to equation (5), using the data on final sectoral expenditure shares in the U.S.. We normalize the
vector of ωj ’s to have a sum of one, and repeat the above procedure until the values for the taste
parameters converge.
   Finally, we estimate the nontradeable sector TFP using the relative prices. In the model, the
nontradeable sector price is given by

                                                                          1
                                           pJ+1
                                            n   = Γ(TnJ+1 )− θ cJ+1
                                                                n .


Since we know the aggregate price level in the tradeable sector pTn , cJ+1
                                                                       n , and the relative price of
nontradeables (which we take from the data), we can back out TnJ+1 from the equation above for
all countries.




                                                              27
References
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E., Jr. Lucas, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-
    Kortum Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007,
    54 (6), 1726–1768.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “New Trade Models,
   Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Anthony J. Venables, “Regional Economic Integration,” in Gene
    Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. III, Ams-
    terdam: Elsevier Science, 1995, chapter 31, pp. 1597–1644.
    , Joseph F. Francois, and Richard Portes, “The Costs and Benefits of Eastern Enlarge-
    ment: The Impact on the EU and Central Europe,” Economic Policy, April 1997, 12 (24),
    125–176.
Baourakis, George, Csilla Lakatos, and Anastasios Xepapadeas, “Economic Implica-
   tions of the EU Accession of Bulgaria and Romania: a CGE Approach,” 2008. TradeAg -
   Agricultural Trade Agreements Working Paper Series 08/1.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray, “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database,”
    October 1996. NBER Technical Working Paper 205.
Bernanke, Ben and Refet Gürkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer, and
   Weil Seriously,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2001, 16, 11–57.
Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund, “On the Conservation of Distance in International
    Trade,” Journal of International Economics, July 2008, 75 (2), 310–320.
Brown, Drusilla K., Alan V. Deardorff, Simeon Djankov, and Robert M. Stern, “An
   Economic Assessment of the Integration of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland into the
   European Union,” in Stanley W. Black, ed., Europe’s Economy Looks East: Implications for
   Germany and the European Union, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, “Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium,”
   October 2009. mimeo, UCLA and Columbia University.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
    NAFTA,” January 2010. mimeo, University of Chicago.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Steven Durlauf
    Philippe Aghion, ed., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier-North Holland, 2005,
    chapter 9, pp. 679–741.
Chor, Davin, “Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach,” June
   2010. Forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.
Corcos, Gregory, Massimo Del Gatto, Giordano Mion, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano,
   “Productivity and Firm Selection: Quantifying the ‘New’ Gains from Trade,” December 2011.
   Forthcoming Economic Journal.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, “What Goods Do Countries
    Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” April 2011. Forthcoming Review of
    Economic Studies.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
    Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
    April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.



                                            28
di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Jing Zhang, “The Global Welfare Impact
    of China: Trade Integration and Technological Change,” November 2011. mimeo, University
    of Toronto and University of Michigan.
Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Comparative Advantage, Demand for External
    Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2007, 86
    (3).
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
    September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
    ,     , Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, “Trade and the Global Recession,” July
    2010. mimeo, Penn State University and University of Chicago.
Finicelli, Andrea, Patrizio Pagano, and Massimo Sbracia, “Ricardian Selection,” October
    2009a. Bank of Italy Temi di Discussione (Working Paper) No. 728.
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
    per Worker then Others,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 83–116.
Hertel, Thomas W., Martina Brockmeier, and Padma V. Swaminathan, “Sectoral and
   economy-wide analysis of integrating Central and Eastern European countries into the EU:
   Implications of alternative strategies,” European Review of Agricultural Economics, 1997, 24
   (3-4), 359–386.
Hicks, John, “An Inaugural Lecture,” Oxford Economic Papers, 1953, 5 (2), 117–135.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Ralph Ossa, “A global view of productivity growth in China,” February
    2011. NBER Working Paper No. 16778.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Special-
   ization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54, 75–96.
Levchenko, Andrei A. and Jing Zhang, “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Mea-
    surement and Welfare Implications,” February 2011. NBER Working Paper No. 16806.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P., Daria Taglioni, and Filippo di Mauro, “The euro and the
    competitiveness of European firms,” Economic Policy, January 2009, 24, 5–53.
Samuelson, Paul A., “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of Mainstream
   Economists Supporting Globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (3), 135–
   146.
Shikher, Serge, “Putting industries into the Eaton-Kortum model,” July 2004. Forthcoming,
    Journal of International Trade and Economic Development.
    , “Accounting for International Trade,” August 2005. mimeo, Suffolk University.
    , “Capital, technology, and specialization in the neoclassical model,” Journal of International
    Economics, March 2011, 83 (2), 229–242.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
   December 2010. Mimeo, UC Davis and NYU.
Smith, Alasdair and Anthony J. Venables, “Completing the internal market in the European
   Community : Some industry simulations,” European Economic Review, September 1988, 32
   (7), 1501–1525.
Waugh, Michael, “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Review,
   December 2010, 100 (5), 2093–2124.
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” April 2010. Mimeo,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of Michigan.


                                               29
                                                         Table 1. Country-Pair Correlations

             BGR      CZE      EST      HUN      KAZ       LTU     LVA      MKD      POL      ROM      RUS      SVK      SVN      UKR         Mean
     AUT     0.761    0.795    0.584    0.594    0.530     0.846   0.907    0.918    0.902    0.829    0.735    0.902    0.912    0.719       0.757
     BLX     0.559    0.582    0.371    0.357    0.273     0.683   0.745    0.765    0.766    0.725    0.580    0.738    0.760    0.488       0.585
     CHE     0.985    0.973    0.720    0.796    0.795     0.867   0.965    0.951    0.975    0.901    0.926    0.980    0.987    0.975       0.928
     DEU     0.903    0.832    0.474    0.544    0.524     0.745   0.901    0.889    0.984    0.976    0.933    0.923    0.959    0.830       0.880
     DNK     0.869    0.895    0.674    0.704    0.660     0.898   0.967    0.970    0.960    0.878    0.824    0.968    0.973    0.841       0.845
     ESP     0.946    0.884    0.545    0.619    0.609     0.783   0.931    0.916    0.997    0.978    0.955    0.952    0.979    0.888       0.912
     FIN     0.969    0.928    0.622    0.697    0.689     0.828   0.956    0.941    0.998    0.956    0.950    0.974    0.993    0.930       0.926
     FRA     0.861    0.827    0.512    0.562    0.525     0.789   0.912    0.908    0.968    0.939    0.875    0.927    0.955    0.797       0.846
     GBR     0.715    0.770    0.593    0.592    0.519     0.846   0.883    0.901    0.864    0.776    0.677    0.876    0.881    0.680       0.714
     GRC     0.959    0.989    0.798    0.852    0.840     0.929   0.991    0.984    0.959    0.857    0.870    0.994    0.986    0.966       0.905




30
     IRL     0.377    0.458    0.357    0.306    0.201     0.638   0.636    0.669    0.608    0.537    0.372    0.614    0.621    0.328       0.417
     ISL     0.684    0.576    0.178    0.228    0.187     0.531   0.711    0.707    0.848    0.898    0.791    0.736    0.795    0.562       0.698
     ITA     0.937    0.862    0.502    0.581    0.571     0.752   0.911    0.896    0.993    0.984    0.959    0.936    0.969    0.870       0.905
     NLD     0.246    0.426    0.506    0.412    0.296     0.685   0.582    0.628    0.454    0.315    0.159    0.539    0.507    0.256       0.282
     NOR     0.737    0.711    0.411    0.437    0.380     0.725   0.838    0.842    0.897    0.879    0.773    0.848    0.879    0.658       0.744
     PRT     0.847    0.968    0.956    0.982    0.971     0.957   0.922    0.921    0.792    0.622    0.670    0.908    0.860    0.922       0.779
     SWE     0.801    0.761    0.439    0.480    0.434     0.742   0.870    0.869    0.937    0.921    0.834    0.884    0.917    0.724       0.798

     Mean    0.823    0.807    0.533    0.575    0.537     0.782   0.886    0.884    0.921    0.879    0.820    0.895    0.916    0.772

      Notes: This table reports the correlations in sectoral technological similarities between each West European-East European country pair. The
      correlations are between Tnj ’s demeaned by the country-specific geometric average Tnj . The last column and the last row report GDP-weighted
      average correlations.
                     Table 2. The Fit of the Baseline Model with the Data

                                                               model       data
                          Wages:
                                     mean                       0.390   0.351
                                     median                     0.133   0.150
                                     corr(model, data)              0.994
                          Return to capital:
                                     mean                       0.896   0.939
                                     median                     0.674   0.698
                                     corr(model, data)              0.950
                           j
                          πnn
                                     mean                       0.614   0.569
                                     median                     0.676   0.609
                                     corr(model, data)              0.922
                           j
                          πni , i 6= n
                                     mean                      0.0053 0.0056
                                     median                    0.0001 0.0001
                                     corr(model, data)              0.910

Notes: This table reports the means and medians of wages relative to the U.S. (top panel); return to capital
relative to the U.S. (second panel), share of domestically produced goods in overall spending (third panel),
and share of goods from country i in overall spending (bottom panel) in the model and in the data. Wages
and return to capital in the data are calculated as described in Appendix A.




                                                    31
                    Table 3. Welfare Gains in Western and Eastern Europe

             West                         ∆ Welfare       East                     ∆ Welfare
             Austria                       0.400 %        Bulgaria                 12.571 %
             Belgium-Luxembourg            0.131 %        Czech Republic            6.152 %
             Denmark                       0.202 %        Estonia                  19.858 %
             Finland                       0.273 %        Hungary                   8.117 %
             France                        0.074 %        Kazakhstan                9.654 %
             Germany                       0.226 %        Latvia                   15.396 %
             Greece                        0.150 %        Lithuania                10.725 %
             Iceland                       0.211 %        Macedonia, FYR           10.914 %
             Ireland                       0.154 %        Poland                    4.078 %
             Italy                         0.134 %        Romania                   7.580 %
             Netherlands                   0.154 %        Russian Federation        2.855 %
             Norway                        0.116 %        Slovak Republic           8.220 %
             Portugal                      0.027 %        Slovenia                  7.308 %
             Spain                         0.063 %        Ukraine                   5.792 %
             Sweden                        0.177 %
             Switzerland                   0.078 %
             United Kingdom                0.075 %

             Mean                          0.156 %                                  9.230 %

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare due to the trade integration of Eastern Europe.
It compares welfare in the baseline scenario under the estimated trade costs in the 2000s to a counterfactual
scenario in which each and every East European country is in autarky.




                                                     32
             Table 4. Welfare Gains, Technological Similarity, and Trade Costs

                                        (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                  Equal-Weighted        Population-Weighted        GDP-Weighted

                                                    Panel A: Western Europe

    Dep. Var.: Change in Welfare

    Technological Similarity            -0.244                  -0.060                  -0.065
                                       (0.617)                 (0.371)                 (0.378)
    Trade Costs                       -6.047***               -5.643***               -5.551***
                                       (1.386)                 (1.536)                 (1.503)
    Real GDP                          -0.456***               -0.500***               -0.491***
                                       (0.075)                 (0.094)                 (0.092)
    Constant                          12.080***               12.581***               12.276***
                                       (2.574)                 (3.052)                 (2.972)

    Observations                          17                       17                      17
    R2                                  0.704                    0.653                   0.650

                                                     Panel B: Eastern Europe

    Dep. Var.: Change in Welfare

    Technological Similarity          -0.968***               -0.858***               -0.845***
                                        (0.262)                 (0.256)                 (0.251)
    Trade Costs                          -0.182                  -0.105                  -0.108
                                        (0.373)                 (0.395)                 (0.392)
    Real GDP                          -0.347***               -0.335***               -0.336***
                                        (0.035)                 (0.037)                 (0.036)
    Constant                           8.390***                8.160***                8.173***
                                        (0.694)                 (0.726)                 (0.719)

    Observations                          14                       14                      14
    R2                                  0.889                    0.880                   0.881

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; ***: significant at 1%. All left-hand side and right-hand
side variables are in natural logs. The sample is of West European countries in Panel A, and of East
European countries in Panel B. “Equal-Weighted,” “Population-Weighted,” and “GDP-Weighted” refers
to how Technological Similarity and Trade Cost variables are averaged for each country across its trading
partners in the other region. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.




                                                   33
                                      Table 5. Percentage Changes in Cross-Regional Trade Volumes

                                                                             Source country groups
                                        Western     Non-Europe       Latin America Middle East     East and                Sub-Saharan
                                        Europe        OECD            /Caribbean    /North Africa South Asia                  Africa        Total
     Destination Country Groups

     Western Europe                                     -1.45             -2.85              -4.09             -2.91           -1.95         4.67

     Non-Europe OECD                     -0.89                            -0.25               0.30             -0.15            0.34         0.91




34
     Latin America/Caribbean             -0.83          -0.20                                -0.06             -0.21           -0.79         0.36

     Middle East/North Africa            -3.63          -1.79             -4.88                                -2.04           -8.36         3.90

     East and South Asia                 -1.41          -0.52             -1.84              -0.48                             -1.84         1.32

     Sub-Saharan Africa                  -3.59          -1.79             -8.40              -7.92             -2.10                         0.45

      Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in imports from regions in the columns to regions in the rows. The last column reports the
      percentage changes in total imports for each region in the row. That value includes the East European imports.
                                    Table 6. Welfare Gains in Western Europe, Alternative Scenarios

                                     (1)                     (2)                 (3)                    (4)                       (5)
                                West European                              Gains from EU        Gains from non-EU         Gains from Growth
                                 Integration        Gains from Trade       Eastern Europe        Eastern Europe           in Eastern Europe

     Austria                        2.728   %             4.430    %            0.329   %              0.070   %                0.055   %
     Belgium-Luxembourg             4.551   %             7.597    %            0.097   %              0.034   %                0.025   %
     Denmark                        3.369   %             5.612    %            0.150   %              0.052   %                0.016   %
     Finland                        2.133   %             3.586    %            0.156   %              0.118   %                0.019   %
     France                         1.229   %             1.950    %            0.050   %              0.024   %                0.021   %
     Germany                        1.388   %             2.680    %            0.168   %              0.058   %                0.045   %
     Greece                         1.600   %             2.727    %            0.030   %              0.120   %                0.067   %
     Iceland                        3.766   %             8.453    %            0.163   %              0.047   %                0.002   %
     Ireland                        3.923   %             9.327    %            0.096   %              0.058   %                0.054   %




35
     Italy                          1.333   %             2.155    %            0.080   %              0.054   %                0.025   %
     Netherlands                    3.874   %             7.051    %            0.092   %              0.061   %                0.040   %
     Norway                         2.181   %             3.513    %            0.110   %              0.006   %                0.016   %
     Portugal                       2.963   %             3.810    %            0.018   %              0.009   %                0.015   %
     Spain                          1.450   %             2.085    %            0.040   %              0.023   %                0.021   %
     Sweden                         2.415   %             3.741    %            0.137   %              0.040   %                0.023   %
     Switzerland                    3.061   %             5.164    %            0.051   %              0.026   %                0.018   %
     United Kingdom                 1.114   %             3.257    %            0.044   %              0.032   %                0.013   %

     Mean                           2.534 %               4.538 %               0.107 %                0.049 %                  0.028 %

     Notes: This table reports the percentage welfare changes. Column 1 reports the welfare impact of reducing the iceberg trade costs between
     West European countries from their 1960s’s levels to their 2000s levels. Column 2 reports the welfare gains from trade relative to complete
     autarky. Column 3 reports the welfare gains from trading with EU East European countries. Column 4 reports the gains from trading with
     non-EU East European countries, conditional on already trading with EU East European countries. Column 5 reports the welfare impact of
     observed productivity growth and capital accumulation in Eastern Europe between the 1990s and the 2000s.
     Table 7. Welfare Gains in Western and Eastern Europe, No Factor Reallocation

             West                        ∆ Welfare        East                    ∆ Welfare
             Austria                      0.388 %         Bulgaria                10.566 %
             Belgium-Luxembourg           0.119 %         Czech Republic           6.033 %
             Denmark                      0.170 %         Estonia                 17.251 %
             Finland                      0.240 %         Hungary                  7.860 %
             France                       0.074 %         Kazakhstan               6.777 %
             Germany                      0.213 %         Latvia                  11.931 %
             Greece                       0.136 %         Lithuania                8.911 %
             Iceland                      0.180 %         Macedonia, FYR           8.733 %
             Ireland                      0.157 %         Poland                   3.891 %
             Italy                        0.126 %         Romania                  6.848 %
             Netherlands                  0.120 %         Russian Federation       2.349 %
             Norway                       0.100 %         Slovak Republic          8.053 %
             Portugal                     0.024 %         Slovenia                 6.702 %
             Spain                        0.058 %         Ukraine                  5.263 %
             Sweden                       0.170 %
             Switzerland                  0.079 %
             United Kingdom               0.066 %

             Mean                          0.142 %                                  7.941 %

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare due to the trade integration of Eastern Eu-
rope, under the assumption that factors of production cannot reallocate across sectors. It starts with the
counterfactual scenario in which each and every East European country is in autarky, and lowers the trade
costs to their levels as of the 2000s, but assuming that factors cannot reallocate across sectors from their
counterfactual values.




                                                     36
                                 Figure 1. International Trade in Eastern Europe, 1962-2007




                     800   600
            Index 1990=100
                  400200
                     0




                                 1960        1970          1980          1990        2000       2010
                                                                  Year

                                                          Eastern Bloc           World


                                    (a) East European and World Trade, Index Number, 1990=100
            .25
            .2
            .15
            .1
            .05




                       1960                 1970          1980           1990        2000       2010
                                                                  Year


                      (b) Share of Imports from Eastern Europe in Total West European Imports


Notes: Figure 1(a) plots the total real (inflation-adjusted) exports from Eastern Europe (solid line), and
the total real (inflation-adjusted) world exports (dashed line), for the period 1962-2007. Both series are
normalized such that the 1990 value equals 100. Figure 1(b) plots the share of imports coming from Eastern
Europe in the total imports of Western Europe from the rest of the world, 1962-2007.

                                                                 37
                            Figure 2. Sectoral Similarity, Contour Plot

AUT
                                                                                                              0.9
BLX

CHE
                                                                                                              0.8
DEU

DNK
                                                                                                              0.7
ESP

FIN
                                                                                                              0.6
FRA

GBR
                                                                                                              0.5
GRC

IRL                                                                                                           0.4
 ISL

 ITA                                                                                                          0.3
NLD

NOR                                                                                                           0.2

PRT

SWE                                                                                                           0.1
  BGR CZE        EST HUN KAZ           LTU    LVA MKD POL ROM RUS SVK                     SVN UKR

  Notes: This figure displays the contour plot of sectoral Tnj correlations between West European countries
  (rows) and East European countries (columns). Darker shades indicate higher correlations.




                                                     38
                                     j
Figure 3. Benchmark Model vs. Data: πni for Eastern Europe and the Rest of the Sample




                                                          j                                         j
Notes: This figure displays the model-implied values of πni  on the y-axis against the values of πni  in the
                            j
data on the x-axis, where πni is defined as the share of spending on goods produced in country i in total
                                                                        j
sector j spending in country n (see equation 6). Solid red dots depict πni in which either n or i is an East
                                                                    j
European country. Hollow dots represent the non-Eastern Europe πni ’s. The line through the points is the
45-degree line.




                                                    39
                                                    Figure 4. Welfare Gains, Similarity, and Trade Costs


                                                                                                                                                                   AUT
                         1




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                   IRL                                                                                                   FIN




                                                                                                                                         .5
                         .5




                                                                                  AUT                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                         ITA                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                   GRC
   6Welfare (residual)




                                                                                                                   6Welfare (residual)
                                                                                        DEU                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISL




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                  ISL                                                                                     BLX                                      IRL
                                                                                   SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOR
                                                                       GBR
                         0




                                                                              NOR        ESP                                                                                                      FRA GBR
                                                                                         DNK FIN




                                                                                                                                         ï.5
                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE                   ESP
                                NLD


                                                                 BLX
                         ï.5




                                                                                                                                         ï1
                                                                                  PRT         CHE




                                                                                                                                         ï1.5
                         ï1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PRT

                               ï1                    ï.5                      0                              .5                                 ï.2                 ï.1                      0                .1                     .2
                                            GDPïweighted Correlation of T’s (residual)                                                                             GDPïweighted trade costs (residual)



                                                                                              (a) Western Europe
                         .4




                                                                                                                                         .4




                                EST

                                             KAZ                                                                                                                                BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                      LVA
                                                                                   BGR
                         .2




                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                           ROM
                                                                                                  LVA
                                      HUN
                                                                                           ROM
   6Welfare (residual)




                                                                                                                   6Welfare (residual)




                                                                               UKR                                                                                                                     UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KAZ
                                                                                                                                                             EST
                         0




                                                                                                                                                                         SVK
                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                         LTU
                                                                        CZE                                                                                              LTU
                                                                                              SVK                                                      CZE    POL

                                                                                                                                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                        RUS   POL                                                HUN
                         ï.2




                                                                                                                                         ï.2




                                                                                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MKD

                                                                                                  SVN
                         ï.4




                                                                                                                                         ï.4




                                                                                                        MKD

                               ï.4                  ï.2                   0                             .2                                      ï.2           ï.1                 0                .1              .2                .3
                                            GDPïweighted Correlation of T’s (residual)                                                                             GDPïweighted trade costs (residual)



                                                                                              (b) Eastern Europe

Notes: This figure plots the partial correlations between log welfare gains from European integration and
the log GDP-weighted sectoral similarity (left graph), after netting out trade costs and total country GDP,
and the partial correlation between log welfare gains from European integration and the log GDP-weighted
trade costs, after netting out sectoral similarity and total country GDP (right graph). The top panel depicts
these relationships for Western Europe, the bottom panel for Eastern Europe.




                                                                                                              40
   Figure 5. Eastern Europe and Rest of the World Average Comparative Advantage
                                                                                                                          23
                                                          .5
                Eastern Europe Average Distance to Frontier




                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                          19              18
                                               .45




                                                                                                                    17


                                                                                  20               25
                                                                                                   34A
                                                                                        36
                                                                                       27
                                                                                  28
                                      .4




                                                                                        31A
                                                                                        26

                                                                         29C 21
                             .35




                                                               22            24
                                                                    33
                     .3




                                                                16
                                       .25




                                                                .35           .4             .45              .5               .55
                                                                         Rest of the World Average Distance to Frontier


Notes: This figure displays the average distance to the global frontier in each sector for Eastern Europe
(y-axis) against the simple average of the distance to frontier in that sector in the world excluding Western
and Eastern Europe. The key for sector labels is reported in Table A2.




                                                                                              41
                 Figure 6. Shares of Manufacturing Imports: Model vs. Data
                .8




                                                                                          EE<ïïWE


                                                                              LA<ïïOO
                .6




                                                                                 AS<ïïOO
                                                                   ME<ïïWE
                                                                AF<ïïWE
            Model




                                                                     OO<ïïAS
             .4




                                                    WE<ïïOO
                                                 AS<ïïWE
                                                   OO<ïïWE
                                                       WE<ïïAS
                                      LA<ïïWE
                .2




                                     OO<ïïLA
                                      AF<ïïOO
                                        WE<ïïEE
                                      ME<ïïOO
                                           AF<ïïAS
                                       ME<ïïAS
                                      LA<ïïAS
                                   EE<ïïAS
                              WE<ïïME
                                EE<ïïOO
                                ME<ïïEE
                              WE<ïïLA
                             AF<ïïME
                            EE<ïïME
                             AS<ïïLA
                             AF<ïïLA
                            AF<ïïEE
                           WE<ïïAF
                             AS<ïïME
                            OO<ïïME
                             AS<ïïEE
                            ME<ïïLA
                           EE<ïïLA
                            OO<ïïEE
                          OO<ïïAF
                           AS<ïïAF
                          LA<ïïME
                          ME<ïïAF
                           LA<ïïEE
                          EE<ïïAF
                          LA<ïïAF
                0




                      0                 .2               .4                 .6                 .8
                                                        Data


Notes: This Figure displays the scatterplot of the share of manufacturing imports from each region to each
region in the data (x-axis) against the model (y-axis). For convenience, a 45-degree line is added to the plot.
Data labels: WE=Western Europe; EE=Eastern Europe; OO=non-Europe OECD countries; LA=Latin
America and the Caribbean; ME=Middle East and North Africa; AS=East and South Asia; AF=Sub-
Saharan Africa. The first label represents the importing region, the second label the exporting region (thus,
WE←EE is the share of West European imports coming from Eastern Europe).




                                                      42
            Figure 7. Changes in Sectoral Composition: Shares of Value Added


             .0015
                                                                                                                    IRL

               .001                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                       ISL
                                                                                                       SWE
             .0005                                                                                AUT DEU
                             ISL                          FIN                                          NOR
                                                                                                       GRC
                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                       BLX       NOR
                                                      ISL                                         DNK   ITA
                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                  DEUGBR
                                                                                                       FRA       DEU
                            NLD            GBR
                                           DNK
                                            FIN           AUT                           GRC
                                                                                        NOR  NOR
                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                             AUT   ITA ESP
                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                  BLX
                                                                                                  GRC
                                                                                                  CHE
                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                  FRA            AUT
                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                 BLX
                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                  ISL SWE
                            DNK
                            BLX
                            GRC       DNK
                                       ITA
                                      BLX
                                      AUT  AUT
                                           NOR
                                           SWE
                                           DEU
                                           NLD
                                           BLX  AUT       SWE
                                                          DEU
                                                          BLX       AUT  AUT
                                                                          FIN
                                                                         CHE  AUT
                                                                              FIN
                                                                              BLX
                                                                               ISL
                                                                              DEU
                                                                              SWE  BLX   ITA
                                                                                        DNK
                                                                                         FIN
                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                        PRT  DEU
                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                             BLX  ESP
                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                              ISL PRT
                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                             ESP
                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                             PRT        IRL
                                                                                                       PRT  AUT
                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                            DEU  PRT
                                                                                                                 CHE
                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                 GRC
                                                                                                                 FIN
                                                                                                                 GBR  DEU
                                                                                                                      BLX
                                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                       FIN
                                                                                                                      DNK
                    0       ESP
                            PRT
                            FRA
                            CHE
                            DEU
                             IRL
                            SWE
                            NOR
                             FIN
                            AUT
                                  ISL
                                 FRA
                                  ITA
                                 GRC
                                 PRT
                                 ESP
                                 SWE
                                 CHE
                            GBRGBR
                                 BLX
                                 NOR
                                 DEU
                                 FIN
                             ITA DNK
                                 NLD
                                 AUT  DEU
                                      GBR
                                      NLD
                                      CHE
                                      SWE
                                       FIN
                                      FRA
                                      ESP
                                       IRL
                                       ISL
                                      NOR
                                  IRL GRC
                                      PRT
                                            ISL
                                           CHE
                                            ITA
                                           FRA
                                            IRL
                                           ESP
                                           GRC
                                           PRT  DEU
                                                NLD
                                                DNK
                                                 ITA
                                                NOR
                                                 FIN
                                                SWE
                                                CHE
                                                FRA
                                                GBR
                                                BLX
                                                 IRL
                                                 ISL
                                                GRC
                                                ESP
                                                PRT   IRL
                                                     ESP
                                                     PRT
                                                      ITA
                                                     FRA
                                                     GBR
                                                     NLD
                                                     CHE
                                                     GRC
                                                     BLX
                                                     DNK
                                                     NOR
                                                     DEU
                                                          GRC
                                                          NLD
                                                           ISL
                                                          NOR
                                                          CHE
                                                          DNK
                                                          PRT
                                                           ITA
                                                          GBRGBR
                                                          ESP
                                                          FRA
                                                           IRL BLX
                                                               ESP
                                                               CHECHE
                                                                FIN
                                                               FRA
                                                                ITA
                                                               GRC
                                                               DNK
                                                               AUT
                                                               PRT
                                                               DEU
                                                               NLD
                                                                ISL
                                                               SWE
                                                               NOR
                                                                IRL  ISL
                                                                     IRL
                                                                    DEU
                                                                    FRA
                                                                    PRT
                                                                    ESP
                                                                     ITA
                                                                    NLD
                                                                    GBR
                                                                    DNK
                                                                    SWE
                                                                    GRC
                                                                     FIN
                                                                    BLX
                                                                         BLX
                                                                         DEU
                                                                          ITA
                                                                         NOR
                                                                          IRL NOR
                                                                         GRCGRC
                                                                         DNKDNK
                                                                         NLD
                                                                         FRA
                                                                         PRT
                                                                         ESP
                                                                         SWE
                                                                          ISL  ITA
                                                                              NLD
                                                                              ESP
                                                                              FRA
                                                                              CHE
                                                                              PRT
                                                                               IRL ESP
                                                                                   PRT
                                                                         GBRGBRGBRGBR
                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                   SWE
                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                   NOR
                                                                                    ISL
                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                        BLX
                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                         IRL  IRL  IRL
                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                        ISL  ISL IRL NOR
                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                            NOR
                                                                                                            BLX
                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                             IRL      CHE
                                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                      ESP
                                                                                                                      PRT
                                                     AUT
                                                     SWE            NOR                 CHE                                PRT
                                                      FIN                                ISL
            ï.0005                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                                                           ITA
             ï.001                                                                                                        NOR
                                                                                                                          BLX
                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                           ISL
                                                                                                                          DEU
            ï.0015                                                                                                         FIN

             ï.002
                                                                                                                          AUT
            ï.0025
                                                              s

                                                             ts


                                                               s


                                                                l

                                                             ts

                                                             ts


                                                               s

                                                            ng

                                                          um


                                                             al


                                                              s


                                                                l

                                                               s


                                                om ls

                                                              g

                                                             ry

                                                             al


                                                               t

                                                             er


                                                              d
                                                            re




                                                             a




                                                          en
                                                         ge




                                                          ile




                                                             t




                                                         tic




                                                           al




                                                         tin




                                                        de
                                                           a
                                                        uc




                                                           c

                                                        uc

                                                        uc




                                                          ic




                                                         er




                                                          ic
                                                          e




                                                        th
                                                       pa




                                                        hi
                                                      du




                                                       et

                                                       et
                                                       le




                                                        n




                                                       m
                                                       xt




                                                       m

                                                     as




                                                       pt
                                                      ra




                                                     pu
                                                      in




                                                     ra
                                                      O
                                                   od




                                                   od

                                                   od

                                                    lis




                                                     hi
                                                   M

                                                   M
                                                  tro
                                                  Ap




                                                   ip
                                                  Te




                                                  he




                                                 ,O
                                                  ro




                                                  M
                                                 ve




                                                  Pl




                                                 ïT
                                                 ac




                                                  d
                                                ub
                                                Pr




                                                Pr

                                                Pr




                                                qu
                                                 c

                                               ed
                                             rP




                                             Pe




                                              an
                                                C
                                             Be




                                              lic




                                             on
                                               g




                                            nd




                                              si




                                            on
                                             M
                                             P




                                            C




                                          tE
                                             o




                                             d

                                          nd
                                          rin




                                           at
                                         Ba
                                          al
                                         he




                                         re
                                         cc




                                        oo




                                          si
                                       ed




                                       ra




                                         N
                                          d




                                         al
                                         d




                                       g,
                                        ic
                                       et
                                     ra




                                      or
                                     ea




                                     an




                                      ci
                                    an




                                    itu
                                     at




                                       c
                                    ba




                                    W




                                    br
                                    in




                                    in
                                   be

                                 ïM




                                   tri

                                   re

                                  sp
                                 W

                                 Le




                                 pe




                                 rn
                                 ef




                                 nt
                                Fa
                                  g
                                To




                                ec
              od




                               ub




                              ,P

                              an
                              tin




                             on
                               R




                             ou




                             Fu
                            Pa




                            El
            Fo




                            R




                            al

                           Tr
                           in

                           e,




                           N




                          cc




                         ic
                        Pr

                        ok




                      ,A




                      ed
                      C




                    ce




                    M
                ffi
               O




                                                         (a) Western Europe

                        .02                         LVA
                                                                                            HUN
                                                                                        HUN
                                                                                        EST
                                        BGR                                                 EST
                        .01                ROM
                                           MKD      EST                         KAZ
                                                                               MKD
                                                                                        LTU
                                                                                        CZECZE
                                                                                        SVK         EST
                                    LVA EST                                     EST     KAZ SVK
                                                                                        LVAROM
                                                                                            SVN     SVK
                                                                                                    LTU
                                                                                                    SVN
                                                                                                    HUN
                                                                                                    BGR
                                        LVA
                                        LTUBGRBGRLTU                                EST SVN
                                                                                        BGR
                                                                                        POL LTUHUN
                                                                                                EST CZE
                                                                                                    KAZ
                                        SVN
                                        UKR
                                        SVKSVK     ROM
                                                    POL         EST
                                                               MKD
                                                                RUS
                                                                LTU
                                                                LVA             UKR
                                                                                LTU
                                                                                SVN
                                                                                CZECZE
                                                                                SVK
                                                                                RUS LTU
                                                                                    HUNROM
                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                        RUS POL
                                                                                            BGR
                                                                                            LVA BGR
                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                CZE
                                                                                                KAZ
                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                               MKD  POL
                                                                                                   MKD
                                                                                                    LVABGR
                            0       EST
                                UKRUKR
                                    RUS
                                    CZE
                                POLPOL
                                   ROM
                                    SVK
                                    LTU CZE
                                        RUS LTU
                                            UKR
                                            LVA
                                            CZE
                                        POLPOL
                                        HUNHUN
                                            SVNROM
                                            ESTEST
                                                LVA
                                                HUN
                                                SVN
                                                CZE
                                            RUSRUS  SVN
                                                    RUS
                                                    CZE
                                                    UKR
                                                    BGR
                                               MKDMKD
                                                UKR
                                                POL
                                                LTU
                                                KAZ     POL
                                                SVKSVKSVK
                                                        SVN
                                                        UKRUKR
                                                        CZECZE
                                                        EST
                                                        LVA
                                                        LTU
                                                       ROM
                                                        BGR
                                                    KAZKAZ
                                                    HUN     LTU
                                                        HUNHUN
                                                            KAZ
                                                            SVN
                                                            SVK
                                                           ROM
                                                            EST
                                                       MKDMKD   SVK
                                                                SVNSVN
                                                                KAZ
                                                                UKR
                                                            BGRBGR
                                                               ROM
                                                                HUN
                                                                CZE SVK
                                                                    CZE
                                                                    LTU
                                                                    LVA
                                                                   ROM
                                                                    RUS
                                                                    EST
                                                                    HUN
                                                                    KAZ
                                                                    UKR
                                                                   MKD
                                                            POLPOLPOL
                                                            LVA
                                                        RUSRUS      BGR CZE
                                                                        SVN
                                                                        SVK
                                                                       ROM
                                                                        EST
                                                                        HUN
                                                                        POL
                                                                        LVA
                                                                        LTU
                                                                        UKR CZE
                                                                            SVN
                                                                            LVA
                                                                            POL
                                                                            SVKROM
                                                                                HUN
                                                                                BGR SVN
                                                                                    SVK
                                                                                POLPOL
                                                                                    UKR
                                                                                   ROM
                                                                                    LVAMKD  UKR LTUROM
                                                                                                SVN
                                                                                                UKR
                                                                                                POL
                                                                                               ROM  UKR
                                                                                                RUSRUS  HUN
                                                                                                        SVN
                                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                                        LTU
                                                                                                        POL
                                                                                                        KAZ
                                                                                                        RUS
                                    HUNROM
                                    KAZKAZKAZ
                                    SVN
                                   MKDMKD                               BGR
                                                                       MKD  UKR
                                                                            HUN
                                                                            BGR
                                                                        KAZROM      RUS
                                                                            LTU LVAMKD
                                                                        RUSRUS      KAZ
                                                                                    BGR     KAZ
                                                                                            RUS        ROM
                                                                                                        LVA
                                LTUBGR
                                RUS
                                CZE
                                MKD
                                KAZ
                                SVK
                                BGR
                                ROM
                                HUN
                                SVN
                                LVA
                                                                            EST
                                                                            KAZ
                                                                           MKD             MKD         MKD
                                                                                                        EST
                                                                                                            RUS
                                EST
                    ï.01                                                                                    UKR
                                                                                                           MKD
                                                                                                            KAZ
                                                                                                            POL
                                                                                                           ROM
                    ï.02
                                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                                          SVK
                    ï.03                                                                                                  BGR
                                                                                                                          LTU
                    ï.04                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                                          HUN


                    ï.05
                                                                                                                          EST
                    ï.06
                                                                         s

                                                                        ts

                                                                         s

                                                                          l

                                                                         s

                                                                        ts

                                                                        ts

                                                                         g

                                                                    um


                                                                        al

                                                                         s

                                                                          l

                                                                         s

                                                          om ls

                                                                         g

                                                                       ry

                                                                        al


                                                                          t

                                                      on ther


                                                                         d
                                                                      re




                                                                        a




                                                                    en
                                                                   ge




                                                                    ile




                                                                     ct




                                                                   tic




                                                                     al
                                                                      n




                                                                   tin




                                                                  de
                                                                     a
                                                                  uc




                                                                  uc

                                                                  uc




                                                                    ic




                                                                      r




                                                                    ic
                                                                  ne
                                                                 pa




                                                                  hi




                                                   Ba ine
                                                                du




                                                                 et

                                                                 et
                                                                 le




                                                              pm
                                                                 xt




                                                                 m

                                                               as




                                                                 pt
                                                                ra




                                                              pu




                                                               ra
                                                                O
                                                             od




                                               r a rod

                                                             od

                                                               is




                                                              hi
                                                             M

                                                             M
                                                            tro
                                                            Ap
                                                            Te




                                                            he




                                                           ,O
                                                            ro




                                                            M
                                                           ve




                                                            Pl




                                                           ïT
                                                            bl




                                                           ac




                                                           ui

                                                            d
                                                          Pr




                                                          Pr




                                                           c

                                                           d
                                                       rP


                                                          P




                                                       Pe




                                                        an
                                                       Pu




                                                          C
                                                       Be




                                                        lic




                                                          q
                                                       on
                                                         g




                                                      nd




                                                        si

                                                         e




                                         ,P lM
                                                      C




                                                    tE
                                                       o




                                                       d

                                                    nd
                                                    rin




                                                     at
                                                    al
                                                   he




                                                   re
                                                   cc




                                                  oo




                                                    si
                                                 ed




                                                 ra




                                                   N
                                                    d
                        d




                                                 g,

                                                 ca
                                                  ic
                                                 et




                                                or
                                               ea




                                               an




                                                ci
                    an




                                              itu
                                               at
                                              ba




                                              W




                                              br
                                              in




                                              in
                                             be

                                           ïM




                                             tri

                                             re

                                            sp
                                           W

                                           Le




                                           pe




                                           rn
                                           ef




                                           nt
                                          Fa
                                            g
                         To




                                          ec
                   od




                                         ub




                                        an
                                        tin




                                       on
                                         R




                                       ou




                                       Fu
                                      Pa




                                      El
               Fo




                                      R




                                      al

                                     Tr
                                     in

                                     e,




                                     N




                                    cc




                                   ic
                                  Pr

                                  ok




                                 ,A




                                ed
                                C




                              ce




                              M
                          ffi
                        O




                                                         (b) Eastern Europe

Notes: This figure displays the absolute changes in the shares of value added when Eastern Europe opens
to trade, for each sector and each West European country (top panel) and each East European country
(bottom panel).


                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                               Fo                                                                                                                                     Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                       od                                                                                                                                 od
                                                                                                                                                                                            an
                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6(r/P) (%)                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6(w/P) (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Be                                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                                                                                                                       To                 ve                   ï100   ï50    0     50    100   150                                                         To              v  er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ï100   ï50    0    50     100   150
                                                                                                                                                                                            ba                  ra                                                                                                             ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                 cc                 ge                                                                                                            c             ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                      o                  s                                                                                                           co              es
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pr                                                                                                                              Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                               od                                                                                                                           od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    uc                                                                                                                            uc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ts                                                                                                                             t s
                                                                                                                                                                                        W                  Te                                                                                                                W                Te
                                                                                                                                                                                         ea                     xt                                                                                                              ea              xt
                                                                                                                                                                                                  rin                ile                                                                                                           r    in         ile
                                                                                                                                                                                                      g                   s                                                                                                               g              s
                                                                                                                                                                                       Le                  Ap                                                                                                               Le                Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                             at                 pa                                                                                                               at             pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                 he                   re                                                                                                            h                re




     cannot reallocate across sectors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    r     Pr               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P              l
                                                                                                                                                                                            W                  od                                                                                                            W             ro
                                                                                                                                                                                             oo                     uc                                                                                                           oo            du
                                                                                                                                                                                                      d                ts                                                                                                            d              ct
                                                                                                                                                                                 Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pr            s
                                                                                                                                                                                       pe
                                                                                                                                                                                          r                    od                                                                                                         pe                o
                                                                                                                                                                           Pr                    an               u  ct                                                                                          Pr           ra               du
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ct
                                                                                                                                                                                in                 d                     s                                                                                          in             nd                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                   t in                   Pr                                                                                                           tin               Pr
                                                                                                                                                                       C                g                   od                                                                                                 C           g                od
                                                                                                                                                                          ok                 an                                                                                                                  ok           an
                                                                                                                                                                             e,                   d           uc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ts                                                                                           e,            d             uc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ts
                                                                                                                                                                                   R                  Pu                                                                                                                R            Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                        ef              bl                                                                                                                ef               bl
                                                                                                                                                                                            in                 is                                                                                                            in              is
                                                                                                                                                                                               ed                hi                                                                                                             ed              hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pe              ng                                                                                                              Pe            n  g
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tro                                                                                                                                tro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                le                                                                                                                             le
                                                                                                                                                                                 R                                um                                                                                                 R                            um
                                                                                                                                                                                   ub                     C                                                                                                             ub              C
                                                                                                                                                                                          be               he                                                                                                               be             he
                                                                                                                                                                                                      m                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                                                        ra               ic                                                                                                                     ra                ic




44
                                                                                                                                                                               N                                                                                                                                    N                n




                                                                                                                                              Western Europe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Western Europe
                                                                                                                                                                              on             nd              al                                                                                                       on                d             al
                                                                                                                                                                                  ïM              Pl                                                                                                                      ïM               Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                        et           as                                                                                                                         et            as
                                                                                                                                                                                           al           tic                                                                                                                        al             tic
                                                                                                                                                                                              lic            s                                                                                                                        lic              s
                                                                                                                                                                                                  M                                                                                                                                        M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (a) Real Wages
                                                                                                                                                                                                     in                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                               O                         Ba             e  ra                                                                                          O                          Ba             e  ra
                                                                                                                                                                 ffi
                                                                                                                                                                     ce          Fa           si
                                                                                                                                                                                                 c             l                                                                                         ffi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ce          Fa            si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c             l
                                                                                                                                                                        ,A           br            M                                                                                                           ,A            br             M
                                                                                                                                                                                        ic            et                                                                                                                         ic             et
                                                                                                                                                                           cc              a               al                                                                                                      cc               a               al




                                                                                                                 (b) Real Return to Capital
                                                                                                                                                                              ou             t ed             s                                                                                                       ou              t ed             s
                                                                                                                                                                                  nt
                                                                                                                                                                                     in            M                                                                                                                      nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in             M
                                                                                                                                                                                        g,            et                                                                                                                        g,             et
                                                                                                                                                                                             C             al                                                                                                                        C              al
                                                                                                                                                                             El                 om            s                                                                                                      El                 om             s
                                                                                                                                                                     M           ec                                                                                                                          M           ec
                                                                                                                                                                       ed           tri             p                                                                                                          ed           tri              p




                                                                                                                                              Eastern Europe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Eastern Europe



                                                                                                                                                                          ic           ca             ut                                                                                                          ic            ca             ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                          in                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                             al
                                                                                                                                                                                ,P
                                                                                                                                                                                           lM                g                                                                                                       al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lM                 g
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ac                                                                                                                                      ac
                                                                                                                                                                                   re               hi                                                                                                                      re               hi
                                                                                                                                                                                       ci              ne                                                                                                                      ci               ne
                                                                                                                                                                            Tr            s io              ry                                                                                                      Tr            s io               ry
                                                                                                                                                                               an              n,                                                                                                                      an               n,
                                                                                                                                                                                   sp              O                                                                                                                       sp               O
                                                                                                                                                                                       or             pt                                                                                                                       or              pt
                                                                                                                                                                                          tE             i c                                                                                                                       tE             i c
                                                                                                                                                                              Fu                             al                                                                                                       Fu                             al
                                                                                                                                                                                  rn            qu                                                                                                                        rn            qu
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ip                                                                                                                                       ip
                                                                                                                                                                                     itu              m                                                                                                                      itu               m
                                                                                                                                                                                         re              en                                                                                                                       re              en
                                                                                                                                                                                              an              t                                                                                                                        an               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                  d                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                         N             th
                                                                                                                                                                                                            er                                                                                                                    N              th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                                                                                             on                                                                                                                                      on
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ïT                                                                                                                                      ïT
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ra                                                                                                                                        ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                       de                                                                                                                                        de
                                                                                                                                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 8. Changes in Real Wages and Return to Capital, No Factor Reallocation




     capital (bottom panel) in each sector and each country when Eastern Europe opens to trade but factors
     Notes: This figure displays the scatterplots of the changes in real wages (top panel) and real returns to
                                   Table A1. Country Coverage

             West European                                                East European
Austria              Greece                              Bulgaria                    Macedonia FYR
Belgium-Luxembourg Ireland                               Czech Republic              Poland
Switzerland          Iceland                             Estonia                     Romania
Germany              Italy                               Hungary                     Russian Federation
Denmark              Netherlands                         Kazakhstan                  Slovak Republic
Spain                Norway                              Lithuania                   Slovenia
Finland              Portugal                            Latvia                      Ukraine
France               Sweden
United Kingdom
                                           Rest of World
United States              Costa Rica             Jordan                             Philippines
Canada                     Ecuador                Kuwait                             Thailand
Japan                      El Salvador            Saudi Arabia                       Vietnam
Turkey                     Guatemala              Egypt Arab Rep.                    Ethiopia
Australia                  Honduras               Bangladesh                         Ghana
New Zealand                Mexico                 Sri Lanka                          Kenya
South Africa               Peru                   Taiwan Province of China           Mauritius
Argentina                  Uruguay                India                              Nigeria
Bolivia                    Venezuela RB           Indonesia                          Senegal
Brazil                     Trinidad and Tobago Korea Rep.                            Tanzania
Chile                      Iran Islamic Rep.      Malaysia                           Fiji
Colombia                   Israel                 Pakistan                           China

Notes: This table reports the countries in the sample.




                                                    45
                                            Table A2. Sectors


ISIC code    Sector Name                                                            αj        βj      γJ+1,j        ωj
    15       Food and Beverages                                                    0.290    0.290     0.303        0.166
    16       Tobacco Products                                                      0.272    0.490     0.527        0.014
    17       Textiles                                                              0.444    0.368     0.295        0.019
    18       Wearing Apparel, Fur                                                  0.468    0.369     0.320        0.105
    19       Leather, Leather Products, Footwear                                   0.469    0.350     0.330        0.014
    20       Wood Products (Excl. Furniture)                                       0.455    0.368     0.288        0.008
    21       Paper and Paper Products                                              0.351    0.341     0.407        0.012
    22       Printing and Publishing                                               0.484    0.453     0.407        0.004
    23       Coke, Refined Petroleum Products, Nuclear Fuel                        0.248    0.246     0.246        0.175
    24       Chemical and Chemical Products                                        0.297    0.368     0.479        0.009
    25       Rubber and Plastics Products                                          0.366    0.375     0.350        0.013
    26       Non-Metallic Mineral Products                                         0.350    0.448     0.499        0.070
    27       Basic Metals                                                          0.345    0.298     0.451        0.002
    28       Fabricated Metal Products                                             0.424    0.387     0.364        0.012
   29C       Office, Accounting, Computing, and Other Machinery                    0.481    0.381     0.388        0.062
   31A       Electrical Machinery, Communication Equipment                         0.369    0.368     0.416        0.028
    33       Medical, Precision, and Optical Instruments                           0.451    0.428     0.441        0.041
   34A       Transport Equipment                                                   0.437    0.329     0.286        0.179
    36       Furniture and Other Manufacturing                                     0.447    0.396     0.397        0.066
    4A       Nontradeables                                                         0.561    0.651     0.788

             Mean                                                                  0.414    0.393     0.399        0.053
             Min                                                                   0.244    0.243     0.246        0.002
             Max                                                                   0.561    0.651     0.788        0.209

 Notes: This table reports the sectors used in the analysis. The classification corresponds to the ISIC Revision
 3 2-digit, aggregated further due to data availability. αj is the value-added based labor intensity; βj is the
 share of value added in total output; γJ+1,j is the share of nontradeable inputs in total intermediate inputs;
 ωj is the taste parameter for tradeable sector j, estimated using the procedure described in Section A.3.
 Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.




                                                       46
