                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           REVISING COMMITMENTS:
              FIELD EVIDENCE ON THE ADJUSTMENT OF PRIOR CHOICES

                                             Xavier Giné
                                           Jessica Goldberg
                                            Dan Silverman
                                              Dean Yang

                                         Working Paper 18065
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18065


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




Niall Keleher, of Innovations for Poverty Action, was instrumental to the design and implementation
of this study. We thank him for his important contributions to this project. We also thank James Andreoni,
Stefano DellaVigna, Pascaline Dupas, Yoram Halevy, Vivian Hoffmann, Glenn Harrison, Pam Jakiela,
Damon Jones, David I. Levine, Stephan Meier, Ted Miguel, Matthew Rabin, and participants in several
seminars for their many helpful comments. We thank Lasse Brune, Jason Kerwin, and Prachi Jain
for excellent research assistance. This research was funded by the Gender Action Plan and the Research
Committee of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, Dan Silverman, and Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Revising Commitments: Field Evidence on the Adjustment of Prior Choices
Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, Dan Silverman, and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 18065
May 2012
JEL No. D81,D91,O10

                                             ABSTRACT

The very poor in developing countries often make intertemporal choices that seem at odds with their
individual self-interest. There are many possible reasons why. We investigate several of these reasons
with a lab-in-the-field experiment in rural Malawi involving large stakes. We make two contributions.
First, we construct a new dependent variable: revisions of prior choices regarding the allocation of
future income. This allows us to directly examine intertemporal choice revision and its determinants.
In particular, this dependent variable permits a novel test for the existence of self-control problems:
we find that revisions of money allocations toward the present are positively associated with measures
of present-bias from an earlier baseline survey, as well as the (randomly assigned) closeness in time
to the first possible date of money disbursement. Second, we investigate other potential determinants
of revision, aside from self-control problems. We find little evidence that revisions of money allocations
toward the present are associated with spousal preferences for such revision, household shocks or the
financial sophistication of respondents.


Xavier Giné                                         Dan Silverman
The World Bank                                      Department of Economics
1818 H Street N.W.                                  University of Michigan
Mail Stop MC 3-307                                  Ann Arbor MI 48109-1220
Washington, D.C. 20433                              and NBER
xgine@worldbank.org                                 dansilv@umich.edu

Jessica Goldberg                                    Dean Yang
University of Maryland                              University of Michigan
Department of Economics                             Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
3115G Tydings Hall                                  and Department of Economics
College Park, MD 20742                              735 S. State Street, Room 3316
goldberg@econ.umd.edu                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                    and NBER
                                                    deanyang@umich.edu
1.      Introduction
      Intertemporal tradeoffs are central to many economic decisions. As a result, wellbeing
depends importantly on the ability to make and execute plans about choice over time. This is
perhaps especially true among the poor in developing countries, whose decisions about
consumption smoothing and about investment in small businesses, agricultural inputs, education,
and health are often critical to their wellbeing.
      Because intertemporal choices have such important consequences for the poor, there is
special concern about the quality of their decisions in this domain. Many point to evidence of
incomplete consumption smoothing, a lack of saving, inadequate use of inexpensive agricultural
and health inputs, or the widespread rejection of fair crop insurance, and are puzzled. When it
comes to intertemporal choice, it often appears as though the poor are not pursuing their own
best interest, often with profound consequences.
      A long tradition in development economics suggests that this appearance of suboptimal
choice may often be misleading. There are many reasons why, given the incompleteness of
markets and information in poor countries, it may be optimal to have consumption be unsmooth,
to do little saving, or to miss opportunities to invest in high-return inputs.1 Yet, in recent years,
analysts have brought renewed attention and tools of analysis to study the role played by
self-control problems. This attention is motivated, in part, by the fact that self-control problems
appear common in developed economies, and there is no reason to think that the very poor would
be immune. The new focus on self-control is also motivated by evidence that people often fail to
execute their stated plans for important intertemporal choices. For example, when we asked
farmers in Malawi how much fertilizer they planned to use in the upcoming planting season, a
large majority (85%) said they planned to use some. Eight months later, when we asked them
how much they actually used, half said they used less than they had planned; and most of those
used less than half of what they planned. In addition, a growing literature shows substantial
demand for, and consequences of, commitment devices designed to overcome problems of
self-control.2
      In this paper, we investigate several potential sources of failure to pursue what appear to be
individually optimal intertemporal choices. More specifically, we study the reasons why, after

1
  Much of the seemingly puzzling evidence regarding intertemporal choices of the poor, and several explanations
for it, are nicely summarized in Banerjee and Duflo (2011).
2
  Ashraf et al (2006), Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2011), Dupas and Robinson (2011), Brune et al (2011).

                                                                                                                  1
they make choices about future consumption, people often want to revise those choices. The
paper makes two contributions. First, we test for the presence of self-control problems using a
novel and robust method. Second, we provide a quantitative analysis of this and other motives
for the adjustment of prior choices.
      Applied research most often models self-control problems as the result of present-biased
(hyperbolic or quasi-hyperbolic) time discounting. This modeling strategy is founded, in part, on
evidence of non-constant time discounting. Several studies can be interpreted to show that time
discount rates decline as tradeoffs are pushed into the temporal distance.3 In particular, many of
experimental studies document “static” preference reversals: under commitment, subjects choose
the larger and later of two rewards when both are distant in time, but prefer the smaller and
earlier one as both rewards draw nearer to the present.
      Interpreted as present-biased time discounting, these static preference reversals have many
implications. Most important, when utility is time-separable, present-biased time discounting
implies time-inconsistency; the choices (plans) that a person makes now about consumption at a
later date are different from the choices she would make when that date arrives. Self-control
problems and a demand for commitment may thus emerge. The important consequences of this
time-inconsistency have been studied in many different contexts.4
      While the study of self-control problems emerging from (quasi-) hyperbolic time
discounting is now voluminous, gaps remain. Most relevant for this paper, there is to our
knowledge no direct field evidence that static preference reversals are associated with
time-inconsistency. Indeed, other than Halevy (2011), who performed a classroom-based study
with approximately 150 college students, there have been no lab or field studies where the
revision of previous decisions is the dependent variable of interest. Instead, prior work has either
studied the static preference reversals themselves, the stability of time preferences, or the
relationship between static preference reversals and the demand for commitment.5

3
  See Ainslie (1992), Thaler (1991) and papers in Loewenstein and Elster (1992), for reviews of this evidence.
4
  Early contributions include Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1997) and O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999). See
DellaVigna (2009) and Bryan, Karlan and Nelson (2010) for recent reviews of empirical applications.
5
  See Frederick et al. (2002) for a review of the literature on static preference reversals and Meier and Sprenger
(2010) on the stability of time preferences. Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006) find that women in the Philippines whose
survey responses indicate present-bias have higher demand for a commitment savings device. Brune, Giné,
Goldberg, and Yang (2011) do not find a relationship between measures of hyperbolic discounting and demand for a
commitment savings device among male tobacco farmers in Malawi. Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2011) show
in a field experiment that self-control problems lead workers to exert less effort than they themselves would like,
and demand commitment devices to motivate themselves.

                                                                                                                  2
      The demand for commitment is, like time-inconsistency, a signature prediction of
hyperbolic discounting models. But studies that focus on the demand for commitment may
understate self-control problems. First, demand for commitment requires some sophistication on
the part of respondents: individuals who are naïve about their self-control problems should not
want to limit their future choices. Second, the design of commitment devices may be imperfect,
further dampening observed demand (Beshears et al., 2011).
      Testing the central mechanism linking static preference reversals to self-control problems –
a correlation between them and the revision of prior choices – is important because the static
reversals allow several interpretations, only some of which lead to problems of self-control.6
Some static preference reversals may, for example, reflect predictable changes in the marginal
utility of consumption.7 A consumer who made static preference reversals for this reason would
not exhibit time-inconsistency. In addition, some static preference reversals may reflect
inattention, confusion about tradeoffs, or responses to perceived experimenter demands.8 It is
unclear whether consumers who make such choices under commitment would also tend to revise
them later if the commitment is relaxed. Furthermore, even if preferences under commitment
were well-described by changing time discount rates, the simple act of making a plan may
importantly limit what would otherwise be important problems of self-control.9 Concerns about
self-image and the importance of following through might trump the effects of changing time
discount rates. In this case, again, static preference reversals under commitment would not
predict time-inconsistent behavior.
      A corollary of the lack of research on the relationship between static preference reversals
and the revision of prior choices is that we have little experimental evidence about the relative
importance of other explanations for the revision of prior choices. In this paper, we examine
three additional determinants of revision. The first is social pressure: the influence of spouses,


6
  Halevy (2011) distinguishes between time-consistency, time-invariance, and stationarity, making clear that static
preference reversals are identified with non-stationarity but need not imply time-inconsistency.
7
  This observation has been made by Andersen et al. (2008), Andreoni and Sprenger (2010) and Noor (2011), who
note that proper inference about time discounting requires information about the curvature of the utility function.
8
  The correlation between test scores, cognitive load and short-term patience in Benjamin et al. (2006) lends some
support to this conjecture.
9
  Academic psychology points to the important effects of making plans or setting goals on self-control and
self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997). Evidence of the importance of planning is also seen in Ameriks et al. (2003). This
idea is also broadly consistent with economic models of costly self-control such as Gul and Pesendorfer (2001),
Ozdendoren et al. (2009), and Fudenberg and Levine (2010), in which consumers may both seek commitment and,
yet, not always exhibit time-inconsistency.

                                                                                                                      3
relatives, and others in one’s social network. Especially in rural communities, individuals in
developing countries are often obliged to share their income with relatives and friends,10 and
such pressure may be an important factor behind the revision of previous decisions and an
apparent inability to pursue privately optimal choices.11 Second, shocks such as deaths, illness,
or unexpected changes in income could change the optimal time path of consumption, making
revisions desirable. Third, individuals could make mistakes in their original decisions, and seek
to revise them upon realizing the error.
      A better understanding of the relative importance of these four potential determinants of
revision – present-biased preferences, social pressure, shocks, and mistakes – has important
policy implications. Most directly, this understanding is crucial for the design and welfare
analysis of commitment devices. If social pressure affects revision, then this may reveal an
additional benefit of commitment devices: preventing future plans from being subverted or
undone by others who may have different preferences.12 If shocks drive revision, policy-makers
must confront the important cost that commitment devices can impose by reducing individuals’
abilities to deal with the unexpected (cf. Amador et al., 2006). If mistakes are an important
source of revisions, then this may also mean that commitment devices can be harmful, as
mistakes cannot later be corrected. Thus, if social pressure, shocks, or mistakes turn out to be
important determinants of revisions, then commitment devices could be designed either to shield
resources from one’s social network, while maintaining access for oneself, or to allow access in
the case of emergency or verifiable error.
      To investigate these issues, we implemented a lab-in-the-field experiment that takes
revision of a previous decision as the key dependent variable of interest. Our sample consists of
several hundred wife-husband pairs in rural Malawi, who were interviewed separately and who
made independent decisions. We elicited intertemporal choices by adapting Andreoni and
Sprenger’s (2011) convex time budget (CTB) method, with large real stakes (roughly a month’s
wages). Individual subjects chose an allocation of money to be disbursed at two points, 61 and



10
   See, e.g., Platteau, 2000; Maranz, 2001; Anderson and Baland 2002; Ligon, Thomas, and Worall, 2002; Hoff and
Sen, 2006; Baland, Guirkinger and Mali, 2011; Jakiela and Ozier, 2011.
11
    Ashraf (2009) and Schaner (2011) experimentally document strategic behavior between spouses related to
financial decisions.
12
    The effect of social pressure would be different from those of social learning. With the latter, commitment may
prevent optimal adjustment to the arrival of new information from others.

                                                                                                                      4
91 days, in the future.13 A subset of these subjects were revisited some time prior to t=61 and
given the opportunity to revise the allocation between t=61 and t=91. The extent of this revision
is our dependent variable. We examine correlates of this revision decision corresponding to each
of the four potential determinants of revision outlined above. Surveys at the baseline and revision
stages measured household wealth, income, and expenditures as well as the participants’
expectations for each of these variables.
      In addition, we implemented a complementary test of hyperbolic discounting models in our
experimental context: average revisions toward sooner should be larger the shorter the time lag
between the revision decision and the first disbursement date (t=61). We randomized the number
of days prior to t=61 when each experimental subject had to make the revision decision.14
      We find that initial allocations usually adhere to the law of demand; individuals allocated
more income to later periods when offered higher rates of return to waiting. We interpret this to
indicate that experimental subjects mostly understood the choices they were making and made
them in a way that economic theory has some hope of explaining. We also find that “static”
preference reversals are frequent, but only slightly more likely to be “present”-biased (as
opposed to “future”-biased). This finding largely contrasts other studies using the multiple price
list (MPL) method, but is consistent with Andreoni and Sprenger’s (2011) findings that UC San
Diego students exhibit no present-bias on average.
      Turning to revision behavior, we find that revisions are common, often substantial in size,
and shift money both sooner and later. We find support for “present”-biased preferences as a
driver of revisions: subjects shift more money toward sooner when: (1) their initial allocations
are “present”-biased, and (2) the time lag to disbursement is shorter (when the revision decision
is made six or fewer days prior to day t=61). In contrast, we find no evidence that social pressure
importantly affects revision decisions. We estimate, with considerable precision, that
respondents’ revisions are not much higher when one’s spouse’s sooner allocations are larger
than one’s own, or when the subject lives with many other relatives in the village. Similarly, we
find little evidence that shocks or financial sophistication (a proxy for mistakes in initial
allocations) strongly predict revisions, though here the standard errors on our estimates are
sufficiently large that we cannot reject a null hypothesis of large effects.

13
   These dates fell within Malawi's annual hungry season, just prior to the annual harvest, when food stocks are at
their lowest and consumption smoothing is a paramount concern.
14
   The revisit date was drawn randomly from a uniform distribution of 2-16 days prior to day t=61.

                                                                                                                      5
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents details of the
experimental design, the sample of participants and the setting of the experiment. Section 3.1
presents the results of stage one of the experiment and choices under commitment. Section 3.2
discusses the results of stage two and choices upon revisiting. In section 4 we discuss some prior
studies of intertemporal choice and explain our contribution to the literature. Section 5 offers
some conclusions and suggests avenues for work.


2.     The Experiment
     The experiment proceeded in two stages and was conducted with approximately 1,100
households (2,200 individuals) in rural Malawi. The timeline of the experiment is presented in
Figure 3. In stage one, we adapted the methods of Andreoni and Sprenger (2011) to elicit choices
under commitment. The head of household and his spouse each made several independent
choices about the allocation of a substantial amount of money over time. Each choice was an
allocation of an endowment between two periods, one “sooner” and one “later.” Participants
were paid a return on the part of the endowment that was saved for later. Each participant made
10 allocation choices: one choice for each of five different rates of return in two different time
frames, one in the near future (the “near” time frame) and one in the more distant future (the
“far” time frame). Choices regarding the near time frame allocated money between tomorrow
and 30 days from tomorrow. Choices regarding the far period allocated money between 60 days
and 90 days from tomorrow. All choices were incentivized. Participants knew that either the
household head or his spouse would be randomly selected to have one of his or her choices
implemented, also selected at random. The stakes were high. On average, the total allocation
amounted to approximately a month’s wages for a worker in rural Malawi. Stage one was
implemented in the middle of the rainy season, a time of planting and cultivating, not harvesting.
At this time of year, cash income is very low, and will be low for the next few months, after
stage two is completed.
     Stage two of the experiment applied only to those households whose implemented choice
concerned the more distant future. At a randomly selected day in the two weeks prior to the
arrival of the first disbursement of their money in the far period (61 days after the first stage was
implemented), the household was unexpectedly revisited. At that visit, the household member
whose choice was implemented was reminded of the decision he or she made at stage one, 45-60

                                                                                                     6
days earlier under commitment. That previous choice was made clear and salient. Then, facing
the same rate of return, the participant was allowed to revise the original allocation decision.
That decision (revised or unrevised) was then implemented with certainty. Surveys at both stages
measured household wealth, income, and expenditures as well as the participants’ expectations
for each of these variables.
       We now turn to a description of the setting and its advantages for the experiment, followed
by a more detailed description of the two stages of the experiment.


2.1 The Setting
       As a setting for experimental study of intertemporal choice, rural Malawi has a number of
advantages. Most important, financial markets are thin there, especially during the rainy season
when the entire experiment was conducted. As a consequence, participants lack effective
methods for smoothing the large amounts of new consumption made possible by the experiment.
       The farmers in our study have virtually no cash during the rainy season; and borrowing
substantial cash in rural Malawi during the rainy season is not merely expensive, it often appears
impossible. Similarly, short-term saving is difficult due to limited banking institutions, and
familial or social demands for what appears like excess cash.15,16 This lack of borrowing and
saving opportunities is important because it sharply reduces the smoothing opportunities that
confound efforts to elicit time preferences in developed economies. In economies with thick
financial markets and low transaction costs, answers to the questions asked in typical
time-preference experiments should, in theory, bracket only the market rates of return that
participants face, and reveal very little about their “true” preferences regarding consumption
(Fuchs, 1982).17 To the extent that rural Malawi in the rainy season approximates autarchy,


15
   Data from a 2008 nationally representative survey in Malawi indicates that only 26 percent of respondents use a
formal financial product, and around 60 percent had never heard of a savings account (FinScope, 2008).
16
   Longer-run saving instruments are more common, typically in the form of agricultural inputs, such as livestock.
17
   To illustrate, suppose that outside of the lab a participant can borrow or save at market rate r and faces no
financial transaction costs. A typical experiment asks the participant to choose between $ x sooner
or $1  re  x later, where re denotes the rate of return implied by the later option. The participant may view this as a
choice between Option A,      $ x sooner and access to the interest rate r , and Option B, $1  re  x later and access to
the interest rate r. If re  r , then the set of allocations of consumption between sooner and later is strictly larger
under option B than under option A. Thus, for any monotonic preferences, option B is preferred. Analogously, if
 re  r , then A is preferred for any monotonic preferences.

                                                                                                                         7
smoothing is made much more difficult. This is especially true for the participants in our
experiment because the stakes are so large and involve cash rather than grain or other
consumption goods that they likely have in store. It is thus difficult for respondents to draw
down stores in anticipation of the arrival of the large influx of cash. In sum, studying
intertemporal allocations in rural Malawi provides data that, in principle, is closer to the
theoretical concepts of interest: preferences over the time-allocation of consumption.
        Another advantage of this particular group of rural Malawians is that they had been
involved in a previous field experiment and were familiar with the team of enumerators and
experimenters.18 This may have contributed to the low (less than 10 percent) attrition rate
between phase one and two, about 45 to 60 days later.
        Rural Malawi also has disadvantages as a location for experiments on time preference.
First, participants have low levels of formal education and may therefore find the somewhat
abstract experiment difficult to grasp, or view it differently than we would expect. Participants
make a living from seasonal crops, so they are uncommonly familiar with the problem of
smoothing consumption over time. But, because we asked them to make choices in an unfamiliar
context, it is natural to worry about participants’ ability to understand the experiment as an
economic decision. For this reason, our analysis takes special care to evaluate the consistency of
participants’ choices with a basic feature of rational economic decision-making: the law of
demand.19 We interpret the degree of consistency with the law of demand as a measure of
participants’ understanding of the trade-offs involved in their decisions.
        In addition, we avoided some asymmetries in the way people received the experimental
payments between the “near” and “far” time frames by delivering two vouchers, one for the
“sooner” period (either the day after the visit or 60 days from then) and one for the “later” period
(30 days from the day of the visit or 90 days from then, depending on the time frame)
redeemable for cash from an office set up for this purpose in a nearby town. Put differently, if
payments had been made in cash during the experiment, then allocations to the “sooner” period
in the “near” time frame could have been favored (relative to allocations in the “far” time frame)
if participants mistrusted the experimenters or if the relatively poor infrastructure in the area
resulted in substantial transaction costs to redeeming the “later” period voucher. However,


18
     The previous commitment savings experiment is described in Brune, Giné, Goldberg, and Yang (2011).
19
     See Choi et al. (2007, 2011).

                                                                                                          8
because payments were deliberately made available no sooner than one day after the choices
were made, we cannot study preferences regarding consumption in the present; and we cannot
observe the consequences of changes in time discounting that occur as just as intertemporal
tradeoffs are made strictly later than the present. To the extent that changes in time discounting
are largest then, we would expect any relationships between choice under commitment and
revision behavior to be attenuated.20


2.2      The Sample
      Participants in the experiment were drawn in January and February 2010 from a population
of rural households in central Malawi who grow tobacco as their main cash crop. In the
2008-2009 growing season, these farmers were under contract with (the subsidiaries of) two
large tobacco companies. The companies organized the farmers into clubs that range in size from
three to 43 members. To facilitate timely revisiting, we limited our sample to those farmers
located near a main trading center in the town of Mponela (population 13,670), and who lived in
six traditional authorities (TAs) in the Dowa and Ntchisi districts. To allow relatively easy access
to participants and to facilitate their access to the cash disbursements, we included all farmers in
these TAs that were 2008-09 members of clubs in which the median club member lives 25
kilometers or less from the disbursement office, located in Mponela.21 Finally, to facilitate study
of interactions within the household, we further restricted our sample to farmers who were part
of a married couple.
      These sample restrictions leave us with 1,268 targeted farmer households. A total of 1,071
households (84.4%) and 2,142 respondents were successfully interviewed at baseline. A subset
of 661 respondents (randomly selected from the full set of baseline respondents in a manner
described in section 2.4 below) make up the stage two sample to be revisited.
      Table 1 provides some summary statistics of baseline survey responses. In the full sample
(Panel A), the median respondent is 46 years old, has four years of formal education, lives in a
village with 120 inhabitants, including two relatives other than his or her spouse. There is,

20
    The method of delaying early payments by one day (known as “front end delay” payment) has been used in the
literature by Pender (1996), Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom (2008) and Bauer, Chytilova and Morduch
(2010), among others.
21
    Scheduling for the stage one visit was done by stratifying scheduling across agricultural zones. Within a zone, the
order in which clubs were visited was randomly assigned. Scheduling was done on a club-by-club basis in order to
facilitate field work since members of the same club often live within the same village or in neighboring villages.

                                                                                                                     9
however, considerable variation in these demographic variables despite being drawn from the
same population of tobacco farmers in central Malawi.
      The summary statistics reveal important features of participants’ wealth and income. When
compared to typical households from low-income countries, the households in the sample are
poor. In the central Malawi region we study, however, tobacco farmers have similar poverty and
income levels to those of non-tobacco-producing households.22 At the time of the baseline
survey, the median participant’s household has zero balances in a formal bank, and the 90th
percentile of the bank balance distribution is just 700 Malawi Kwacha (henceforth MK), or
approximately US$4.67.23 The survey also inventoried the household’s non-cash assets
including livestock and agricultural and household durables; and participants were asked to
estimate how much they could earn by selling those assets. When we include the self-reported
value of these assets, we find that the median household held just 4,446 MK of wealth and the
90th percentile held 25,800 MK.
      Since the baseline was conducted during the rainy season, several months would elapse
before the cash crop or primary staple (maize) would be ready to be harvested in mid-April or
early May. The summary statistics bear this out. The median household expects virtually no
income between the interview date and April 2010.


2.3     Stage One: Choices Under Commitment
      Figure 3 presents the timeline of the experiment. Upon initiating the interview, the
household head and his spouse were physically separated. Then, after a few basic questions
regarding demographics, each made five independent choices regarding the allocation of
2000MK between tomorrow (“sooner”) and 30 days from tomorrow (“later”).
      More precisely, each participant was presented with a small bowl containing 20 beans
(tokens) and two empty dishes, dish A and dish B . One token allocated to dish A corresponded to
100MK tomorrow. One token allocated to dish B corresponded to 100MK  (1  r ) 30 days from
tomorrow, where r is the rate of return for waiting 30 days. The rate of return took on five
different values: 0.10, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1.00. The rates of return rose, in order, with each of

22
   Based on authors’ calculations from the 2004 Malawi Integrated Household Survey (IHS), individuals in tobacco
farming rural households in central Malawi live on PPP$1.48/day on average, while the average for central
Malawian rural households overall is PPP$1.51/day.
23
   At the time of the study, the relevant exchange rate was roughly 150 MK per US dollar.

                                                                                                             10
the five allocation choices; and participants knew that would happen. For each rate of return,
the participant set out an allocation of tokens to the dishes, the tokens were translated into
Malawi kwacha, and the total was written above each dish on a whiteboard. Having seen the
allocation in kwacha, the participant had the opportunity to adjust the allocation. This process
was repeated until the participant indicated that she was ready to move on to the next allocation
choice.
        After completing the first five choices, the participant answered a series of other questions
from the baseline survey. (See Appendix A for details.) Then, using the same elicitation method
with cup, beans, and dishes, the participant again made five independent choices regarding
2000MK, while facing different rates of return for waiting. This time, each of the five choices
concerned the allocation of money between 60 and 90 days from tomorrow (the “far” time
frame). Figure 1 presents a schematic of the method used to elicit intertemporal choices under
commitment.
        The interruption between the five choices in the near period and the five choices in the far
period was intentional. We sought to avoid having participants choose the same allocations in
both time frames simply for the sake of being (or appearing) consistent. In addition, the order in
which the time preference sections of the questionnaire were administered was, in fact, randomly
assigned between households within tobacco clubs. With 50 percent probability, a participant
was first asked to make decisions about the allocation of money in the “near” time frame,
between tomorrow and 30 days from tomorrow. Otherwise, a participant was first asked to make
decisions about allocations in the “far” time frame, between 60 and 90 days from tomorrow.
Controlling for any effects of these alternative orders does not affect the results, and the order in
which time frames were presented does not predict choices.
        Before making their choices, each participant knew that one member of the couple would
be randomly chosen to have one of his or her choices implemented (also randomly selected). The
randomization was performed on site, by rolling dice. Implementation took the form of a
voucher, redeemable at the disbursement office in Mponela. The voucher indicated the allocation
(some amount at time t and another amount at time t  30 ) and was issued to the member of the
couple who was randomly chosen. Identity of the recipient was established with a name and a
fingerprint placed on the voucher.24

24
     Giné, Goldberg, and Yang (forthcoming) find that fingerprinting is an effective means of economic identification

                                                                                                                  11
2.4      Stage Two: Revisiting the Decision
      In stage one of the experiment, one of each household’s 20 decisions (10 of the husband’s
and 10 of the wife’s decisions) was randomly selected to be implemented. If the selected
decision concerned an allocation in the near time frame, between tomorrow and 30 days from
tomorrow, which happened with probability one-third by design, then the experimental
intervention was finished for that household. The chosen individual in the household redeemed
its allocation and was not interviewed again. Stage two of the experiment was only carried out
with those households whose randomly selected decision concerned an allocation in the far time
frame, between 60 and 90 days from tomorrow.
      In stage two, this group of households was unexpectedly revisited. The targeted date for
revisiting was randomly selected from the interval between 16 and 2 days prior to the first
possible disbursement of funds in the far period. Thus, these households were targeted to be
revisited between 45 and 59 days from their baseline interview. Revisits occurred even if the
household chose an allocation involving no disbursement of funds at 61 days from their
interview.25 Revisit dates occurred in March and April 2010.
      At the revisit, the household head and his spouse were physically separated and the survey
of wealth, income and expenditure was performed again. After the interview was conducted, the
participant whose choice had been selected to be implemented was again presented with a cup
containing 20 tokens. This time, however, four dishes were placed in front of the participant:
dishes A, B, A and B. Dishes A and B contained a total of 20 tokens allocated to reflect the
participant’s original decision at baseline. Dishes A and B were empty. The participant was told
that the first set of dishes showed his or her baseline choice; an allocation between what was
effectively one to 16 days from the revisit and 30 days from then. This information was verified
with the voucher that was issued at baseline. The participant was also reminded of the rate of


in the context of lending in rural Malawi.
25
    In all that follows, we focus on the randomly-assigned targeted lag (in days) to first disbursement, since it is
exogenous to farmer actions. We made the first attempt to revisit each respondent on the date implied by the
randomly-assigned target lag. In some cases, the actual lag was smaller (closer to the disbursement date) than the
targeted lag, because some farmers could not immediately be located and had to be found thereafter. The actual lag
is, as expected, highly correlated with the target lag; the correlation coefficient is 0.99. 84.9% of respondents were
revisited with exactly the targeted lag, and 97.4% were revisited no more than two days after their target date. The
maximum difference in the sample between target lag and actual lag is six days. Actual lags spanned the range of 16
to one days prior to first disbursement.

                                                                                                                   12
return for waiting that applied at baseline, and the tokens on dishes A and B were translated into
kwacha using whiteboards.
     The participant was then asked to allocate the 20 tokens in the cup between the empty
dishes A and B, where the same rate of return for waiting applied. The allocation to the second
set of dishes was again translated into kwacha and the participant was asked if he or she wanted
to adjust the allocation. This process was repeated until the participant indicated he or she was
finished. Then a new set of vouchers were issued (regardless of whether the allocation was
revised), and the interview was concluded. Figure 2 presents a schematic of this revising
procedure.
     The revising procedure is intended to measure the presence and magnitude of revisions of
individuals’ previous choices. We therefore made the original allocation decision salient and
unambiguous. The procedure is also designed to balance the consequences of implicit
experimenter demands or connotations of a right answer. The participant must actively choose an
allocation by placing tokens in the dishes, and the status quo is thus discouraged. The mere fact
that we revisited the household and allowed a revision might also imply that some change is
appropriate (otherwise, why would we allow it?). However, because the original allocation is set
out just next to new allocation, there should be no difficulty replicating the original allocation
and perhaps some mild, but implicit encouragement to do so. Especially given the rural setting,
and the difficulty of double blind protocols, we cannot hope to eliminate the consequences of
implicit experimenter demands. Instead we designed the experiment to limit the biases they
might generate.
     The conceptual key to the revising procedure is that participants recall, with perfect
accuracy, the allocation they chose at baseline. We then seek to quantify the extent to which they
deviate from that allocation, and learn more about why they deviate. In this way, the experiment
is importantly different from an experiment designed to evaluate the stability of preferences
regarding a delay of fixed length of time (Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom, 2005). If that were the
goal, we would not have reminded participants of their original choice and we would have
repeated the elicitation method after a fixed length of time had elapsed. Instead, we make the
original choice unambiguous and randomly choose the delay from a two week interval.
     The two randomizations carried out in stage two -- the implemented choice, and the revisit
date -- generated exogenous variation in two independent variables that will be of interest in the

                                                                                                     13
regression analysis. First, the implemented choice generated exogenous variation in the interest
rate that applied to the revision decision. The second is the targeted revisit date itself. Consistent
with the fact that these two variables were randomly assigned, both the implemented interest rate
and targeted days to first disbursement are for the most part uncorrelated with key baseline
respondent and household characteristics.26


3.       Results
        In this section we first describe the results from stage one of the experiment, and we define
key variables from the choices made under commitment used in the analysis of revision behavior
in stage two.


3.1      Stage One: Choices Under Commitment
3.1.1    Theoretical Framework
        To guide interpretation and fix ideas, consider first a canonical, deterministic problem of
choice over time. In that problem the decision-maker solves

                                   max                   U c 
                          c  c1 , c 2 ,.., cT R T

                     s.t. kt 1  kt  ct 1  r)                                                (1)
                          k0  k , kT  0 .                                                        (2)

        The consumer thus chooses a bundle of consumption, c , the elements of which are indexed
by time, to maximize the utility function U . The choice of c is restricted to a feasible set
defined by the intertemporal budget constraints (1) and the boundary conditions (2), where r is
the interest rate, and k t is the stock of savings at time t . The usual assumptions are (i)

Monotonicity ( U is increasing in each element of c ) which implies that other things equal more
is preferred to less, (ii) Diminishing marginal utility ( U is concave in c ) and so smoother


26
    Appendix Table 1 presents results of regressions of a number of key baseline variables on an indicator for days to
first disbursement (targeted) being less than or equal to six (Panel A) and on the implemented interest rate (Panel B).
(The specification of the target lag as an indicator is chosen to be consistent with the specification in the main
regressions of Table 6, and is discussed further below.) In each panel, the coefficient on the randomized
right-hand-side variable is not statistically significantly different from zero for 10 out of the 12 dependent variables.
Having two out of 12 coefficients turn up significant is close to what would have occurred by chance, and all these
variables (and others) will be included as controls in the regression analyses below. Results are similar when these
regressions are run with alternative specifications for the randomized right-hand-side variables, such as linear days
to first disbursement or dummies for each discrete implemented interest rate.

                                                                                                                      14
allocations tend to be preferred and (iii) Impatience, that is, other things equal, consumption is
preferred sooner rather than later. Given a feasible set, choices about the allocation of
consumption over time are driven by all three of these usual assumptions.
         We will interpret participants’ choices under commitment in stage one, as solving a special
version of the canonical model, where U is time separable. Abstracting from the discrete nature
of the choice set, we will interpret stage one decisions as solving, for each rate of return r :
                                   max               ut ct    t ut  30 ct  30 
                               ct , ct 30 R 2
                                    c                                                    (P)
                           s.t. ct  t  30  2000 MK
                                    1 r
         Note that flow utilities and the time discount factors need not be time-invariant.
Time-varying flow utilities allow for the possibility of predictable changes in the marginal utility
of consumption. Time-varying time discount factors allow for the possibility that, as has often
been observed, time discount rates depend on the intertemporal distance to the trade-off. While
this framework is deterministic, our analysis makes use of survey evidence regarding the real-life
uncertainty that participants face.
         Notice that, absent additional assumptions, the specification in the problem defined above
is not identified. It is trivial to show that for any collection ut , ut  30 ,  t  that reconcile the

choice data, there is another collection u t , u t  30 ,  t  also consistent with the data.


3.1.2       Adherence to the Law of Demand (Monotonicity)
         We have just argued that the preference parameters of the problem above are not identified.
However, additive separability and montonicity of the flow utilities make a strong prediction. If
participants solve the problem above, then the allocation to the later period, measured in kwacha,
should increase with the rate of return to waiting r . To see why this is true, it is useful to think
of    11r    as the price of consumption later in terms of consumption sooner. When r goes up, the
price of later consumption goes down. The result is an income effect creating incentives to
increase consumption in both periods, and a substitution effect that is positive for consumption in
the later period. Thus both income and substitution effects lead to increased consumption
(kwacha) in the later period.27


27
     The allocation to the earlier period can go up or down depending on whether the income or substitution effect

                                                                                                                     15
      As a first step, we evaluate the extent to which participants’ choices are consistent with this
basic prediction of rational choice with time-separable, monotonic utilities. We view this as a
logical pre-condition for interpreting the choices under commitment as revealing preferences in
the context of a canonical model. To the extent that choices are inconsistent with the law of
demand, it suggests either that participants did not understand the trade-offs involved in their
decisions very well, or that the canonical model is poorly suited for interpreting and making
predictions about their behavior.
      Since each participant made ten intertemporal allocation decisions, we evaluate adherence
with the law of demand by dividing these decisions into pairs, where each element of the pair is a
choice regarding an allocation of kwacha over the same two dates. The first element of the pair is
the allocation chosen when facing rate of return r. The other element is the allocation chosen
when facing rate of return r , the next lowest rate of return. For each participant there are eight
such pairs, four for each of the two time frames.28 A total of 2,142 participants completed the
baseline survey and stage one of the experiment. The data thus contain 17,136 pairs of decisions
where r increases by one increment; of these, 13,859 (81%) were such that the allocation to the
later period increased with r. Thus, approximately 81% of pairs were consistent with this basic
prediction of rational choice with monotonic, time-separable utility. In addition, the typical
deviation from consistency is fairly modest in size. The median violation could be made
consistent with a reallocation of less than two tokens.
      It is instructive to compare this percentage of consistent pairs with one generated from a
simulation where the same sample of participants make choices purely at random (see Appendix
B for details). Results from the simulation suggest that the percentage of consistent pairs is
significantly lower at 57%. We therefore interpret the results to indicate that, on average,
participants understood the trade-offs they were facing and that the time-separable version of the
canonical model is reasonable for describing average behavior.
      The average rates of adherence with the law of demand do, however, mask some important
heterogeneity. Table 2 presents the distribution of participants by the number of times they
increased their later allocation with a single increase in the rate of return r. Recall, there are
eight such pairs for each participant and thus the number of times a participant can be consistent

dominates.
28
   Note that a subject who did not change his or her allocation of tokens within a pair would still appear consistent
with this prediction; the allocation to the later period would increase with r.

                                                                                                                    16
by this measure ranges from zero to eight. Column 1 of Table 2 shows that, measured in this
way, 31.3% of participants are always consistent and 75.7% are consistent at least three quarters
of the time. At the other end of the spectrum, 10.2% of the sample violated this form of
consistency at least half the time. We will return to investigate the correlates of this
heterogeneity below.
        For comparison purposes, column 2 of Table 2 reports the simulated distribution of
consistent choices if participants were to choose consumption randomly. According to column 2,
virtually nobody is always consistent under random choice and only 16.9% are consistent at least
three quarters of the time.


3.1.3    Intertemporal Trade-offs Under Commitment
        With greater confidence that most participants understood the trade-offs involved in their
choices, and that the canonical model is a reasonable description of their behavior, we further
examine decisions under commitment. Table 3 presents some summary statistics of these
choices, displayed separately by time frame -- tomorrow vs. 30 days from tomorrow (near) and
60 and 90 days from tomorrow (far). More precisely, Table 3 describes the distribution of
allocations to the later period, in kwacha.
        Several features of this distribution are worth noting. First, participants typically reveal a
willingness to balance allocations between the two periods that is consistent with the canonical
model described in Section 3.1.1. For example, when facing a rate of return to waiting of 50%,
the median choice allocates 1,950MK to later and, thus, 700MK to sooner. A minority of
allocations (12% to 23%) are corner solutions. This willingness to locate at an interior allocation
is consistent with participants not having, or not realizing they have, meaningful smoothing
opportunities. The tendency toward interior solutions also points, in the absence of very high
rates of time discounting, to the importance of diminishing marginal utilities of income.
        A second important feature of this distribution is the heterogeneity in preferences that it
reveals. In the nearer time frame, the tenth percentile allocates just 750MK (6 of 20 tokens) to
the later period when the rate of return is 25%. The 90th percentile allocates all of its endowment
to the later period. This heterogeneity is to some extent predictable with observable
characteristics of the participants. Table 4 shows the results of a regression of the difference
between the natural log of the allocation to sooner and later on the rate of return r and


                                                                                                         17
observable characteristics of the participants. These results provide some evidence that,
conditional on the rate of return, those with more wealth at baseline allocate more to later, as do
those with more relatives who live in the village. There is also some weak evidence that those
who scored higher on the word recall test and the financial literacy questions allocate more of
their endowment to later, but that those who score higher on the Raven’s test allocate less of their
endowment to later. Measured in this way, we find no evidence that education has a significant
relationship with patience in this domain.
        The estimates in Table 4 have the advantage of being easily interpreted in terms of a simple
economic model of intertemporal choice. If we adopt the canonical model in Section 3.1.1 and
                                                  1 
assume stationary, isoelastic utilities ( u (c)  1c  ), then the coefficient on r is an estimate of 1 .

The disadvantage of this specification is that it excludes corner allocations, where the log of
consumption at one time or the other is undefined. Analysis of a levels specification gives
qualitatively similar results (available upon request) with more evidence of a positive correlation
between word recall and the willingness to postpone consumption.


3.1.4    Static Preference Reversals
        A third important feature of the distribution choices displayed in Table 3 is its apparent
stability across time frame. Comparing the top and bottom halves of Table 3 shows that the
distribution of allocations to later is not dramatically altered by the change in time frame. For
example, the mean allocation to later when facing a 25% rate of return is 1,536MK when the
trade-off is between tomorrow and 30 days from tomorrow. The analogous number is 1,565MK
when the trade-off is pushed 60 days into the future. This average stability is, however,
somewhat misleading. It both overstates the stability of individual choices across time frames
and masks heterogeneity in individual tendencies to shift allocations forward or back, depending
on frame.
        Each participant makes five pairs of decisions where each element of a pair differs only in
the time frame. Of the total of 10,710 such pairs, just 2,927 (27%) are identical and just 4,895
(46%) differ by a token or less. Thus, in more than half of all such pairs the elements are
substantially different from each other. There is a relatively modest tendency for these static
preference reversals to be “present”-biased. Of the 5,815 pairs that differ by strictly more than a
token, 3,061 (53%) allocate more to the sooner date when the trade-off is between 1 and 30 days.

                                                                                                         18
The remaining 47% of these preference reversals allocate more to the later date when the
trade-off is between 1 and 30 days from tomorrow.29 Consistent with the “magnitude” effect,
static preference reversals are more common at lower rates of return for waiting.30 When the rate
of return for waiting is 10%, just 41% of pairs differ by a token or less.
      In this way, the results of stage one of the experiment indicate that static preference
reversals are common, but that “present”-biased reversals are only somewhat more common than
those in which participants appear less patient as intertemporal trade-offs are pushed into the
temporal distance. There is evidence, however, that these static reversals are not merely noise.
Among those participants who exhibit static reversals, a substantial fraction (18%) is
“present”-biased in at least four of five decisions. Simulations of purely random choice indicate
that the percentage of individuals with at least four of five “present”-biased pairs would be less
than 8%. In addition, the tendency to be consistent or “present”-biased is somewhat predictable
with observable characteristics of the participants.
      Table 5 presents the results of regressions that relate a participant’s tendency to be
consistent or “present”-biased to observable characteristics. In each column the dependent
variable is either the fraction of pairs of decisions in which the participant was dynamically
consistent or the fraction the participant was present-biased. The first column of Table 5
indicates that males and those with greater maize stores tend to be more dynamically consistent.
Column 3 of Table 5 indicates that these variables have similar relationships (with opposite
signs) with fraction present-biased, though these relationships are not statistically significant.
      Columns 2 and 4 reveal an important relationship. There is a strong association between
adherence to the law of demand as described in section 3.1.2 and static preference reversals as
measured here. Those with a higher share of pairs of choices that adhere to the law of demand
(as in Table 2) are much more likely to make dynamically consistent choices.31 This link
suggests that the tendency to exhibit static preference reversals may be attributable, in part, to a



29
   When choices are generated at random, only 4.77% are equal and 13.85% differ by one token or less. As
expected, preference reversals are equally split between present and future biased (43% each).
30
   The magnitude effect refers to the finding that individuals appear more present-oriented when the stakes are
smaller. See, e.g., Thaler, (1981) Loewenstein (1987) and Benzion et al. (1989).
31
   Note there is no mechanical reason why these two measures must be linked. The first regards the response of
allocations to changes in r , within time frame. The second regards consistency of allocations, given r , across time
frames. For example, a subject who always violated the law of demand could be perfectly dynamically consistent,
simply by replicating his non-monontonic allocations in both time frames.

                                                                                                                    19
poor understanding of the choice environment and the trade-offs involved. We pursue this
hypothesis further as we examine the revision behavior in stage two of the experiment.


3.2        Stage Two: Undoing Commitment
        Having described some basic features of preferences under commitment, we now examine
the relationship between revision behavior in stage two of the experiment, on the one hand, and
preferences under commitment and other participant characteristics on the other. Our goal is to
evaluate, quantitatively, the importance of time preferences relative to other motives for revision.


3.2.1      Qualitative Features of Revision Behavior
        Because this is, to our knowledge, a first attempt to study revision behavior in a field
experiment, we begin with a simple description of the choices upon revisiting. Recall that stage
two of the experiment applies only to those households whose randomly selected choice was an
allocation between 61 and 91 days from the baseline interview. The randomization was designed
to favor (with two-thirds probability) the later time frame, so we aimed to revisit 722 respondents
and present them with a revision opportunity. Of these we were successful in collecting revision
choice data from 661 (91.6%).
        A first observation about revisions is that they are common. While the experiment made the
original choice clear and salient, 65% of participants (432) made some adjustment to their
allocation decision.32 It could be that implicit experimenter demands caused some participants to
feel as though some change was expected of them. However, a large majority (87%) made a
reallocation involving a shift of at least two tokens, and 64% made a reallocation involving a
shift of at least 4 tokens. Figure 4 presents a histogram of changes in the participants’ allocations
to sooner (t=61) upon revisiting, excluding those who made no change (who represent 35% of
observations), and illustrates the frequency of relatively large revisions.
        A second observation about the revisions distribution is that revision decisions shift the
allocation of income forward and backward in time with nearly equal frequency. Of the 432
participants who made some adjustment to their allocation decision, 52% shifted income toward
sooner and 48% shifted income toward later. As the histogram also indicates, the adjustments
that moved allocations toward later tended to be more modest in size. Of these, approximately

32
     When we simulate random choices, only 4.7% individuals (one in 21) would not adjust their allocation decision.

                                                                                                                 20
56.5% involve the shifting of at least 4 tokens, and just 15.5% involve shifting 10 tokens or
more. The comparable numbers for adjustments that moved allocations toward sooner are 70.2%
and 25.8%.


3.2.2    Who Revises?
        Having described some basic features of revision behavior, we move on to consider the
correlates of these choices. Of primary interest is the extent to which revision behavior is related
to preferences under commitment, proximity to the first disbursement of cash, and to measures of
financial sophistication, shocks, and social pressure.
        Table 6 presents the results of ordinary-least squares regressions relating revision behavior
to variables capturing all these potential determinants as well as baseline characteristics. In each
column, the dependent variable is the change to sooner allocations upon revisiting (in Malawi
kwacha). In the example depicted in Figure 2, the dependent variable would take the value
200MK (as two tokens were added to the time t dish, compared to the original allocation).
        In the first column of the table, the right-hand side variables are restricted to baseline
characteristics and the implemented interest rate. The coefficient on the implemented interest
rate is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. Respondents revise less towards
sooner at higher rates of return. Coefficients on baseline characteristics indicate that males and
younger individuals (those aged 56 or below) revise more towards sooner, while those in the
highest education categories (primary and more than primary) revise less towards sooner.
Baseline maize stores and wealth have little power to predict revisions.
        In column 2, we investigate the predictions of hyperbolic time-discounting models. We
take two approaches to this investigation. First we evaluate the central prediction of hyperbolic
discounting models: if “present”-biased static preference reversals are due to hyperbolic
discounting, then these static reversals should be correlated with “present”-biased
time-inconsistency (revisions toward sooner).
        In adopting this first approach, we want a non-parametric measure of an individual’s
tendency to make “present”-biased static preference reversals.33 A simple measure would
calculate the number of times (or the fraction) out of a possible five that a respondent made a

33
   An alternative approach would parameterize the utility function in problem (P) and estimate its parameters for
each individual. The primary disadvantage of this method is that identification must rely on functional form
assumptions. Absent such assumptions, the utility function in (P) is not identified.

                                                                                                                    21
“present”-biased preference reversal.34 This would be an appropriate measure in a deterministic
model of choice, where the error term of the regression captures unobserved heterogeneity in
preferences. If, however, we allow for error in the implementation of “true” preferences, another
measure is preferred. The preferred measure takes four of the five pairs of decisions where each
element of a pair differs only in the time frame and calculates the fraction of those pairs in which
the participant exhibited “present”-biased static preference reversals.35 We exclude from this
measure the pair of choices associated with the implemented interest rate. Appendix Table 2 of
the appendix provides analogous results where our preferred measure is replaced on the
right-hand-side with the fraction of all five pairs of choices in which the respondent exhibited a
“present”-biased static preference reversal.
      We view the measure that excludes the pair of choices associated with the implemented
interest rate as more conservative and prefer it for that reason. We take this view because
simulation analyses (discussed in Appendix B) indicate that a model of choice with error
introduces a mechanical positive relationship between present bias for the implemented choice
and revisions toward sooner. To see why, consider a respondent that makes allocations
completely at random in both the baseline and in the revisit. Now think about choices that exhibit
“present”-bias. By definition, the allocation to sooner in the far time frame is lower than that for
the near time frame. Under random choice then, the individual is likely to allocate more tokens to
sooner upon revisiting and therefore, “present”-biased individuals are mechanically more likely
to revise towards sooner.36 An analogous effect applies to future-biased static preference
reversals and revisions toward later. Crucially, however, these spurious relationships do not exist
when constructing the measures of bias from the non-implemented choices.
      This non-parametric approach to measuring “present”-bias and revision behavior may
understate the importance of hyperbolic discounting for prior choice revision if, as one would
expect, “present”-bias is positively correlated with an overall reluctance to delay consumption. In
this case, “present”-biased static preference reversals would be positively correlated with larger
initial allocations to sooner that, by definition, leave less room for revisions toward sooner. For

34
   This is, for example, the measure of present-bias in Ashraf et al. (2006).
35
   To allow for respondent error, we consider it a reversal only if the allocations differ by at least two tokens.
Results are quantitatively similar if we reduce the tolerance to just one token.
36
   We are grateful to Pascaline Dupas for suggesting this argument to us. The argument is similar to the one put
forth by Becker (1962) to show that even individuals choosing consumption bundles at random would generate
downward sloping aggregate demand. See the discussion in Appendix B for further details.

                                                                                                                     22
this reason, we also condition on a non-parametric measure of patience: the total number of
tokens the subject allocated to sooner, summing over the 9 baseline allocations (out of 10),
excluding the implemented choice.
      Our second approach to investigating the predictions of hyperbolic time discounting makes
use of the random timing of revisit. In column 2 of Table 6 we include on the right-hand-side of
the regression an indicator for the targeted lag to first disbursement being less than or equal to
six days.37 This variable is included to test the basic prediction that if individuals have
hyperbolic preferences, they will shift more towards the present the closer they are to the time of
consumption. We chose an indicator of six days or less, which captures a third of the revisited
sample, in order to balance concerns about power (which might argue for a specification that is
linear in the targeted lag) against the prediction of a non-linear relationship between targeted lag
and revision that comes from a model of hyperbolic time discounting.
      The results of column 2 provide evidence consistent with hyperbolic time discounting. The
coefficient on the indicator for 6 or fewer days to first disbursement is positive and statistically
significant at the 5% level.38 In addition, the coefficient on fraction present biased is positive,
and statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level. As anticipated, the
non-parametric measure of general impatience is negatively correlated with the size of revisions
toward sooner; those who initially allocated more to sooner have less scope for revising further
in that direction.
      In column 3 we add to the regression variables intended to measure financial
sophistication, which is likely to capture for the extent to which mistakes in initial allocations
help explain revisions toward sooner. The point estimates of the coefficients on these variables
typically have a negative sign, suggesting that those with greater sophistication tend to shift
consumption toward later upon revision. But the standard errors on these estimates are so large
that we cannot reject a null hypothesis of either large positive or large negative effects.39
      In column 4 we add two variables to the regression representing shocks experienced during
the time elapsed since the baseline survey. The point estimates on both death in the family and
on the shortfall in expected income have the expected signs (negative shocks lead to more


37
   In section 3.2.3 below we explore alternative specifications of the target lag variable.
38
   This coefficient remains stable across specifications of the table, reflecting the fact that it was randomly assigned
and therefore uncorrelated on average with other variables.
39
   The set of financial sophistication variables are also not jointly significant at standard levels of confidence.

                                                                                                                     23
revision toward sooner) but, again, the standard errors are so large that we cannot reject a null
hypothesis of an economically large correlation with revisions toward sooner.40 Adding these
measures of shocks does not much influence the coefficients on other variables.
       In column 5, we add to the regression measures of social pressure. The first variable is
one’s spouse’s allocation to sooner minus one’s own, averaged across the 9 baseline allocations
(out of 10), excluding the implemented choice.41 This variable should capture pressure to revise
one’s allocation toward sooner coming from one’s spouse.42 The second variable is simply the
number of relatives one reports having in the village, which should proxy for pressures to share
with a wider social network. Both variables enter the regression positively, consistent with the
pressure leading to less saving. However, the effects are precisely estimated to be economically
small; we can reject a null hypothesis of large positive correlations with revisions toward sooner.
       In column 6, we add several baseline characteristics of one’s spouse to the regression
(coefficients omitted for brevity).43 We include these variables to gauge the extent to which any
of the results we have described so far may simply be due to the influence of omitted spousal
variables, a concern particularly relevant for the coefficient on the spousal allocation variable in
column 5. We see no evidence that this is the case. The coefficients on the variables of greatest
interest do no much change with the inclusion of the spousal variables.
       In sum, the patterns in the first 6 columns of Table 6 provide support for a model of
hyperbolic discounting as an account of some respondents’ behavior. Revisions toward sooner
are larger when individuals make their revision decision closer to the funds disbursement date,
and individuals whose allocations under commitment in the baseline survey are more
“present”-biased choose to re-allocate more towards sooner when that commitment is broken
upon revisiting. By contrast, we estimate quite precisely little effect of social pressure on the
tendency to revise. Finally we find no evidence that variables representing financial


40
    Deaths affect approximately 2% of households, and shocks to income tend to be small. Households expected and
received virtually no cash income over the relevant period. More than the usual care should therefore be used in
extrapolating these results to other settings in which consumers face greater risk.
41
   As with the present-bias ratio, we exclude the implemented choice from this calculation because our simulation
analysis indicates that its inclusion leads again to a spurious positive relationship. See Appendix B for details.
42
    Notice that revisions towards the spousal allocation could happen unwillingly, as the result of pressure from the
spouse (Ashraf, 2009 and Schaner, 2011), or willingly, for example if the respondent forgot about a future expense
at the time of the baseline allocation that was later pointed out by the spouse.
43
   These variables are: fraction present biased across all choices, indicators for age category, indicators for education
category, word recall, Raven’s score, financial literacy score, and fraction of decisions consistent with law of
demand.

                                                                                                                      24
sophistication or shocks have statistically significant or robust relationships with revision
behavior. In this way, the results provide no support for the idea that mistakes in initial
allocations (which should be more prevalent for those with lower financial sophistication) are
important determinants of revision over this horizon.
        The right-hand-side variables that are statistically significantly related to revision are also
economically substantial. Table 7 presents a summary of magnitudes of these key relationships,
using the coefficients from Table 6, column 6. A useful benchmark is the impact of a
50-percentage point reduction in the rate of return to waiting 30 days, which leads to a 107.41
MK increase in revisions toward sooner. In comparison, a one-standard-deviation increase in the
measure of present-bias is associated with 41.88 MK higher revisions toward sooner, making
one’s revision decision within six days of day t=61 raises revisions toward sooner by 124.57.


3.2.3    Discussion and additional analyses


Future bias vs. “present” bias
        Our analysis has so far focused on the predictions of hyperbolic discounting models. This is
natural given the laboratory evidence and well-developed theory surrounding them and other
models of present-bias. Future bias is, however, also possible. Models of future bias would imply
that respondents would shift allocations toward later as the intertemporal tradeoffs draw near.
Column 7 of Table 6 considers this possibility and replacing the fraction present biased variable
with an analogously-defined “fraction future biased” variable.
        Contrary to a theory that attributes future-biased static preference reversals to non-constant
time discounting, the coefficient on fraction future biased choices is actually positive; though it
is relatively small and far from being statistically significantly different from zero at
conventional levels. The results are very similar when we include the implemented choice in the
measure of future bias (Appendix Table 2). There too we see no evidence that future-biased
static preference reversals predict revisions toward later upon revisiting. One interpretation of
this finding is that the future biased static preference reversals capture predictable changes in the
marginal utility of income, more than some form of non-constant discounting. More generally,
the future-biased preference reversals appear to be driven by mechanisms that do not induce
time-inconsistency.


                                                                                                      25
Alternate specifications of target lag
          In all regressions of Table 6, the variable for targeted days to first disbursement upon
revisiting is specified as an indicator variable for six days or less. Here we elaborate on the
justification for this specification.
          First, we note that specifying the variable as a linear relationship leads to a similar result. If
we replace the indicator target lag variable with a linear variable for targeted days to first
disbursement in the specification of Table 6, column 6, the coefficient on the linear target lag
variable is -10.09 and has a standard error of 5.34 (significant at the 5% level).44
          It turns out, however, that the linear relationship just described masks the fact that the
underlying relationship between the target lag and revisions is better described as a non-linear
function. To see this, we again estimate the specification of Table 6, column 6, but now we
specify the target lag as separate indicator variables for each of the 14 distinct values of the
target lag from two to 15 days prior to first disbursement (the omitted indicator is 16 days).
Rather than show a regression table, in Figure 5 we graphically present the estimated coefficients
on the target lag indicators. The solid line graphs the series of point estimates, and the upper and
lower dashed lines bound the upper and lower 95% confidence intervals.
          Point estimates on the indicators for days two through six are all large in magnitude, each
exceeding 100 MK, and show no obvious time pattern. In contrast, nearly all the coefficients on
the indicators for higher target lags are substantially smaller in magnitude and several are below
or just at zero. (The exception is the coefficient on the indicator for 11 days, 151 MK. This is
probably a chance occurrence, and the coefficient is not statistically different from zero at
standard confidence levels.) Due to lack of power, most of the individual coefficients are not
statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels (although the coefficients on
the indicators for days four and six are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10%
level).
          All told, the relationship appears to be best summarized by a step function with a positive
effect for days two to six prior to disbursement, and zero effect thereafter.


          Attrition

44
     All other coefficients in the regression remain essentially identical to those reported in Table 6, column 6.

                                                                                                                     26
       We attempted to revisit 722 individuals with complete baseline data. We were successful at
revisiting 661 (91.6%). This high revisit success rate helps ameliorate concerns over selection
bias, but it is still important to ascertain the extent to which key right-hand-side variables are
related with attrition, and to think through any resulting directions of bias.
       Table 8 presents regressions of an indicator for inclusion in the sample on key
right-hand-side variables. The sample is the 722 individuals we attempted to revisit, so the mean
of the dependent variable is the revisit success rate, 0.916.Individuals targeted for revisit six days
or less prior to first disbursement are 10.8 percentage points less likely to be included in the
revisit sample. This reflects the simple fact that our survey team had less time to find individuals
whose target revisit date was close to the disbursement date.45,46
       An important question is whether the key results (in Table 6) on the impact of days to first
disbursement on revisions could be driven entirely by selection, since both these variables are
statistically significantly related to revisit success. Given the sizes of the effects in Table 6, this
turns out to be implausible.
       Consider the coefficient in column 6, Table 6 on the indicator for targeted days to first
disbursement less than or equal to six, which is 124.57. This variable leads to 10.8 percentage
points lower inclusion in the sample. For differential selection on this variable to fully explain
the coefficient in column 6, Table 6, revision towards sooner of individuals selecting out of the
sample due to having days to first disbursement less than or equal to six would have to have been
lower by 1,117.67 MK.47 A change in revisions of this magnitude would be extremely large,


45
   The closest randomized target date was two days prior to first disbursement, and the cutoff date for actual revisits
was set at 1 day prior to first disbursement. Revisits on or after that date would be nonsensical, since the "sooner"
disbursement could already have been made (if the respondent redeemed the voucher immediately on the
disbursement date).
46
   In addition, individuals with higher word recall are less likely to be included in the sample. Two additional words
recalled (about one and a half standard deviations) leads to a 3 percentage point lower likelihood of revisit success.
Revisit success was higher for individuals who are younger who had lower baseline wealth.
47
   Let there be two types of individuals: type 1, who we always successfully revisit, and type 2, who are only
successfully revisted if days to first disbursement is >6. So when days to first disbursement is greater than six, the
sample is composed of both types 1 and 2, while otherwise it is only composed of type 1. Let 1 and 2 be mean
revision for type 1 and 2 individuals, respectively. We observe 1, and the problem is to estimate the value of 2
such that there is actually no “effect” of days to first disbursement <=6, and all the observed effect in Table 6 is due
                                                  1   1
to selection. The formula for 2 is  2                              , where  is the coefficient on days to first disbursement less
than or equal to six in the table (124.57), is the revisit success rate for type 1 individuals (0.861),  is the reduction
in the revisit success rate due to revisiting 6 or fewer days to first disbursement (0.108), and 1 is the mean revision
for type 1 individuals (mean revision for those with days to first disbursement <=6, 150.0). The formula gives 2 =
-967.67. So 1 - 2 = 150.0 - (-967.67) = 1117.67.

                                                                                                                                   27
amounting to roughly the difference between the 10th percentile (-600 MK) to the 83rd
percentile (500 MK) of the revision distribution, or about two standard deviations. It is highly
unlikely that all the individuals selecting out of the sample would have had revisions this
different from other individuals who were successfully revisited.
       While it is very unlikely that the estimate of the impact of days to disbursement from
column 6, Table 6 is due entirely to selection, selection may still lead to bias in this estimate. In
Appendix Table 4 we present results of an exercise intended to bound the size of this possible
bias, running regressions analogous to that of column 6, Table 6 but where observations that
were previously not included due to attrition are now included, and where we make several
different assumptions as to the value of the dependent variable for the newly-included
observations.48 At the top of each column is our assumption regarding revision on the part of
attrited observations. Across columns 1 through 7, we assume initial allocations to sooner are
revised in the amounts (respectively) of 600, 400, 200, 0, -200, -400, and -600.49 Looking across
columns, the stability of coefficient estimates on particular independent variables provides a
sense of the sensitivity of coefficients to a range of assumptions on how attrited individuals
would have revised their allocations.
       When assuming positive revisions toward sooner for the attrited observations, the
coefficient on the indicator for days to first disbursement less than or equal to six becomes larger
in magnitude, reflecting the fact that this variable is positively correlated with attrition. For the
same reason, assuming negative revisions toward sooner for attrited observations leads the
coefficient on this variable to become smaller in magnitude. The results indicate that the
coefficient on the indicator for days to first disbursement less than or equal to six in Table 6 is
robust to a wide range of assumptions on attriter revisions, except when attriter revision is
assumed to be as much as -600: in this case the coefficient declines enough in magnitude to
become statistically insignificant. We view an assumption that attriters revise as much as -600
MK vis-a-vis their initial allocations as farfetched; this change amounts to more than one
standard deviation of the revision distribution.
48
   The only other difference vis-a-vis the regression in column 6, Table 6 is that we exclude the shock variables
"death in family" and "shortfall in expected household income" from the right-hand-side of the regression, since
these were also measured upon revisit.
49
   We of course do not allow revisions to go beyond corners, imposing the restriction that revised allocations to
sooner must stay within the [0,2000] range. For example, in column 1, where we are assuming that revised
allocations are 600 MK higher than attrited individuals' initial allocations, if an individual initially allocated 1700
MK to sooner, we only allow the revised allocation to sooner to go to 2000 MK (not 2300 MK).

                                                                                                                          28
Males vs. females
     In Table 9 we explore whether estimated effects differ across males and females in the
sample, estimating regressions analogous to column 6, Table 6, but where the sample is
restricted to females (column 1) and males (column 2). We also present p-values of the F-test
that coefficients on each presented right-hand-side variable differ across the female and male
regressions.
     Owing to smaller sample sizes, some coefficients do not achieve conventional statistical
significance levels, such as those on fraction present-biased (for both genders) and on the days to
first disbursement indicator (for females). But coefficient magnitudes are similar to those in the
gender-pooled sample of column 6, Table 6.
     For nearly all variables, coefficients are not statistically significantly different across the
male and female samples, with a few exceptions. The coefficient on the Raven’s test score is
negative and statistically significantly different from zero among males, and is significantly
different from the corresponding (positive) coefficient among females. In the female sample,
coefficients on the schooling indicators are negative (indicating that higher schooling leads to
less revision towards sooner), statistically significantly different from zero, and statistically
significantly different from the corresponding coefficients in the male regression (or nearly so).
The male coefficients on schooling, on the other hand, are positive, but none are statistically
significantly different from zero. Another result that emerges is that the coefficient on the death
in the family indicator is large and positive for females, smaller in magnitude and negative for
males, and marginally statistically significantly different across the male and female regressions
(p-value 0.106).


4.     Related Literature
     There is a long tradition of evaluating time preferences from observational choices over
time. Hausman (1979), Lawrance (1991) and Warner and Pleeter (2001) are prominent
examples. In this tradition, the analyst observes the (implicit) price consumers are willing to pay
in order to move consumption forward in time. In Hausman (1979), for example, a time discount
rate is inferred from the price elasticity of demand for long-run energy efficiency in household
appliances. The early contributions to this literature assumed that time discount rates were


                                                                                                       29
constant with respect to time. More recently, observational data has been used to estimate
potentially non-constant time-discount functions. This literature, which restricts itself to
estimating quasi-hyperbolic discount functions, includes Paserman (2008), Fang and Silverman
(2009) and Laibson et al. (2007). We depart from this literature by adopting experimental
methods for eliciting intertemporal choices and working with non-parametric measures of
patience and “present”-bias.
     The experimental literature on time preference is large. Frederick et al. (2002) offer a
review. More recent examples include, Andersen et al. (2008), Benhabib, et al. (2010), and
Andreoni and Sprenger (2011). As noted above, we adapt to our field environment the methods
that Andreoni and Sprenger (2011) developed for use in the lab. A key advantage of their design
is that, with a convex choice set, it permits the relatively rapid collection of information on
intertemporal choice in the face of several different rates of return. The method thus allows
analysis of the consistency of choice with the law of demand as well as quantitative measures of
the degree of dynamic inconsistency.
     Most recently, experimental studies of time preference have been taken into the field, often
in developing countries. Prominent examples include Harrison et al. (2005), Ashraf et al. (2006),
and Tanaka et al. (2009). Two such field experiments are closely related to ours and thus merit
special consideration. The first, Ashraf et al. (2006), asked a sample of 1,777 in the Philippines
hypothetical time preference questions on a survey. Later, a subset of this sample was offered a
commitment saving product. Women who exhibited present-biased preference reversals on the
survey questions were, as predicted by theory, more likely to take up the commitment saving
product. Our paper differs from this prior study, most importantly, by studying directly the link
between incentivized intertemporal allocation decisions and revision of prior choices. We
measure the extent of preference reversals, as well as the basic consistency of choice with
rational economic models, and thus provide a quantitative assessment of the mechanisms behind
time inconsistency and the demand for commitment. The second closely related paper, Harrison
et al. (2005), elicited time preferences from 253 participants in Denmark. Of this sample, 97
were later revisited and, importantly, asked to perform the same time preference experiment
again. Our experiment is distinguished from Harrison et al. (2005) by, among other things,
making a participant’s original choice clear and salient. In our view, both studies ask important
and interesting questions. However, our goal is not to evaluate the stability of time preference,

                                                                                                    30
but rather to measure revisions of intertemporal plans and to shed light on the determinants of
such revisions.


5.      Conclusion
      The consequences of making low quality intertemporal choices can be dire, especially
among the poor in developing countries. Low-income farmers can go hungry for long periods if
they fail to make good smoothing decisions. They can fail to rise out of extreme poverty if they
miss opportunities to make high return investments. We conducted an experiment among
Malawian farmers to investigate why their intertemporal choices may appear not to serve their
individual self-interest. More precisely, we provide the first field evidence on the causes and
correlates of decisions to revise prior intertemporal choices. The experiment allowed subjects to
make an intertemporal allocation of substantial funds they would receive at two future times 30
days apart. This future 30-day period was timed to occur during a period of low income and low
food stores, and thus consumption smoothing of substantial amounts of future income is very
difficult. Several weeks later, prior to the first disbursal of funds, we revisited study participants
and allowed them to revise their previous allocations over the same 30-day period. We examine
these revisions of allocations for evidence of self-control problems as well as other potential
mechanisms behind intertemporal choice revision.
      We provide new evidence for the existence of self-control problems. Revisions of
allocations toward the present are positively associated with measures of “present”-bias from an
earlier baseline survey, as well as the (randomly assigned) closeness in time to the first possible
date of money disbursement.50 These results complement existing evidence for self-control
problems that are based on demand for commitment devices (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2006, and
Beshears et al., 2011). In contrast to pre-existing work on demand for commitment devices, our
approach has the advantage of allowing even naïve individuals (who are not aware of their
self-control problems) to contribute to estimates, since naïve as well as sophisticated respondents
can display revision behavior. In addition, analysis of revision behavior avoids problems of low
demand that may arise if commitment devices are poorly designed.




50
  This result is reminiscent of Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan’s (2011) finding that worker effort increases as a
worker’s randomly-assigned payday comes closer.

                                                                                                                    31
     While only a minority of our sample exhibits “present”-biased static preference reversals,
the correlation between these reversals and revision of prior choices toward sooner is relatively
large. In addition, with considerable statistical precision, we find no evidence that respondents’
revisions tend to move in the direction of their spouses’ preferences for such revision. Similarly,
though with less precision, we find no evidence that mistakes or shocks are important predictors
of the decision to revise prior choices about intertemporal allocations.
     These results thus suggest cautious optimism about the prospects for improving the lives of
the very poor in developing countries by alleviating their problems of self-control. By providing
evidence of the relative importance of time-inconsistency, the results support the view that, if we
privilege an individual’s preferences at moments relatively far from the present, the benefits of
commitment may be substantial and the costs, in terms of reduced flexibility, may be slight. This
view should be tempered, however, by two important caveats. First, our findings show that
“present”-bias, as evidenced by static preference reversals, is far from ubiquitous in this
population. Many of the participants in the experiment exhibited, at most, just a modest tendency
to be “present”-biased. Policy design must take account of this heterogeneity; efforts to help
some with their legitimate self-control problems must avoid saddling others with commitments
they do not need. Second, and related, our experiment was conducted during the lean season
when little income is generated. This makes ours an unlikely context for finding that income
fluctuations influence revision. It is possible that income shortfalls may influence revision
behavior in other parts of the Malawian agricultural year, such as in the post-harvest months. Our
findings should therefore be tested for robustness using similar research designs in other time
periods and contexts.

     Appendix A: Variable definitions

      The key dependent variable we analyze is change in sooner allocation upon revisiting
(MK), which is respondent’s allocation to later period (t=91) in revisit survey minus allocation to
later period (t=91) in baseline survey. All other variables are from either the baseline survey, the
revisit survey, or from administrative (project) data.

         A.1 Variables collected in baseline survey

      Present-biased ratio is fraction of choices where allocation to sooner in near period is more
than 100MK higher than allocation to sooner in far period (comparing choices in near and far
periods for same interest rate). In all regressions this variable excludes the implemented interest

                                                                                                    32
rate from the calculation, but summary statistics are also included for all choices including the
implemented interest rate.
      Future-biased ratio is fraction of choices where allocation to sooner in near period is more
than 100MK lower than allocation to sooner in far period (comparing choices in near and far
periods for same interest rate). In regressions this variable excludes the implemented interest rate
from the calculation.
      Fraction of decisions consistent with law of demand is fraction (out of 8) of pairs of
adjacent choices (adjacent in interest rates) where allocation to later rises in rate of return.
      Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK) is spousal allocation to the sooner period
minus corresponding allocation for respondent, for all choices excluding the randomly-chosen
implemented choice.
      Implemented interest rate is rate of return to waiting 30 days for funds for the respondent’s
randomly-selected choice (out of 10 choices made).
      HH total in bank is total value of balances in formal banks reported at baseline (in
thousands of MK).
      HH total cash is total value of cash held at home reported at baseline (in thousands of MK).
      HH items is total value of physical household items and assets owned, reported at baseline
(in thousands of MK).
      HH animals is total value of livestock owned, reported at baseline (in thousands of MK).
      Total HH wealth is sum of HH total in bank, HH total cash, HH items, and HH animals (in
thousands of MK).

     A.2 Variables collected in revisit survey

      Indicator for death in family indicates death in respondent’s own household in the time
since the baseline survey (reported in revisit survey).
      Shortfall in expected household income is expected household income minus actual
household income, where expectation is reported in baseline and actual is reported in revisit
survey. Both expectation and actual income reports refer to same period (time between baseline
and revisit survey), reported in revisit survey.

     A.3 Variables from administrative (project) data

       Days to first disbursement at revisit (targeted) is randomized target number of days prior to
first far period disbursement that revisit survey is planned. Randomization assigns days from 2 to
16 in unit intervals with equal probability.
       Days to first disbursement at revisit (actual) is actual number of days prior to first far
period disbursement that revisit survey is carried out.
       Indicator for days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6 equal to 1 if days to first
disbursement at revisit (targeted) is less than or equal to 6, and 0 otherwise.

     Appendix B: Simulations of stochastic choice

     In this section we assess the adherence of subjects’ optimizing behavior to the canonical
model of Section 3.1.1 by comparing their choices to those of hypothetical subjects that choose
randomly. Given that more than two thirds of individuals choose allocations that deviate at least

                                                                                                 33
once from the law of demand, and that more than 90% make at least one different allocation in
the “near” compared to the “far” time frame, random choice seems a natural alternative model of
behavior as it can explain both features of the data.51
      The interest in random choice model is twofold. First, it can be used to alleviate the
concerns raised in Section 2.1 about the low levels of literacy of the subject pool. In particular,
we assess whether our results can be generated by individuals that do not understand the
experimental protocols and that in the extreme, choose randomly. Second, as we explain in more
detail below, we use the results from the random choice model to justify the construction of
certain variables used in the analysis of Table 6.
      We generate 1,000 random samples of 2,285 subjects who choose allocations with a
probability of 1/21. That is, all possible allocations ([2000,0], [1900, 100(1+r)], … [0,
2000(1+r)]) are chosen with probability 1/21. To construct spousal controls, individuals are
matched with their real life spouses and their (random) choices are used to generate the relevant
variables. For each sample of random choices we run the specifications of columns 6 and 7 of
Table 6 and for each coefficient in the regression, we report its mean and construct the 95%
confidence interval non-parametrically using the 25th and 975th coefficient.
      Appendix Table 3 reports the results. We compare coefficients obtained using real data
(odd numbered columns) to simulated or random choice data (even numbered columns).
Columns 1 and 2 compute the “Fraction Present Biased” variable using all pairs, including the
one associated with the implemented interest rate. The variable “Spouse minus own allocation to
sooner” is also computed using all interest rate pairs. Columns 3 and 4, in contrast, exclude the
pair of the implemented interest rate in both variables. All regressions include all the regressors
of columns 6 and 7 of Table 6. They are not reported since by definition they are uncorrelated
with the random choices.
      The results from columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table 3 are remarkable. When all pairs are
included, the coefficient on “Fraction Present Biased” using simulated data is almost three times
larger than the coefficient when using the real experimental data. Both coefficients are large and
significant at conventional levels, suggesting that a null that the coefficient is zero is rather
uninformative.
      The reason for the large coefficient using simulated data is a mechanical relationship
between “present bias”- like behavior under the implemented interest rate and revisions to the
sooner period. Intuitively, in the second stage of the experiment, an individual that exhibits
“present bias” will, by definition, have chosen in the far time frame an allocation to sooner that is
lower than that of the near time frame. Thus, even under random choice, the probability that the
revised allocation to sooner is larger than the (below average) original allocation is relatively
high -- hence the mechanical positive relationship between revision to sooner and “present bias”.
An analogous argument can be made to explain the mechanical negative relationship between
revisions to sooner and “future bias”.
      Of course, there should be no relationship between random choices under interest rates
other than the implemented one and revision behavior under the implemented interest rate. This
therefore suggests the construction of the variables “Fraction Present Biased and “Spouse minus

51
   Other models based on changes in expected income between the “near” and “far” time frame would only be
consistent with individuals being either always or never dynamically consistent. If an individual expects a windfall
between the near and far time frame, he or she would appear more patient in the far time frame under all interest
rates. These models cannot explain why some individuals are dynamically consistent under some interest rates but
not others.

                                                                                                                   34
own allocation to sooner” excluding the choices under the implemented interest rate.
      Indeed, the coefficient on “Fraction Present Bias” in column 4 is small and insignificant
albeit with a rather large confidence interval. This small coefficient stands in contrast with that of
column 3, replicating column 6 of Table 6.
      Columns 5 to 8 study the relationship between future bias and revision behavior. As
expected, column 6 displays the mechanical negative relationship between “Fraction Future
Biased”, computed using all interest rates and the change in the allocation to sooner. However,
this relationship disappears in column 8 when the choices under the implemented interest rate are
excluded.


       References

      Ainslie, G., Picoeconomics: The Strategic Interaction of Successive Motivational States
Within the Person (Cambridge [England]; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
      Amador, Manuel, Angeletos, Marios, and Werning, Ivan (2006). “Commitment vs.
Flexibility.” Econometrica 74(2), 365-396.
      Ameriks, J., A. Caplin and J. Leahy (2003) Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity to
Plan. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, pp. 1007-1047.
      Andersen, Steffen, Glenn Harrison, Morten Lau and Elisabet Rustrom (2008). Eliciting
Risk and Time Preferences, Econometrica 76(3), 583-618.
      Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger (2011). “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
Budgets,” working paper, UC San Diego.
      Ashraf, Nava (2009), “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An
Experimental Study in the Philippines,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 1245-1277.
      Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan and Wesley Yin (2006). Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
form a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2),
635-672.
      Baland, J. C. Guirkinger and C. Mali (2011). “Pretending to be poor: borrowing to escape
forced solidarity in credit cooperatives in Cameroon,” Economic Development and Cultural
Change, Vol. 60, No. 1, pp. 1-16.
      Bandura, Albert (1997). Self Efficacy: The Exercise of Control, W.H. Freeman &
Company, New York.
      Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilova and Jonathan Morduch (2010) “Behavioral Foundations of
Microcredit," IZA Discussion Paper 4901.
      Becker, Gary S. (1962). “Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory” Journal of Political
Economy 70 (1): 1-13.
      Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin and Andrew Schotter (2010). Present-bias, Quasi-Hyperbolic
Discounting, and Fixed Costs. Games and Economic Behavior 69(2), 205-223.
      Benson, Todd, "Area-specific fertilizer recommendations for hybrid maize grown by
Malawian smallholders: A manual for field assistants." Mimeo, Maize Commodity Team,
Chitedze Agricultural Research Station, Malawi, August 1999. Available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/fertilizeruse/documentspdf/IsFertApReadings/MAIZE
study fert recs _Benson.pdf
      Benzion, Yuri, Rapoport, Amnon, and Yagil, Joseph, “Discount Rates Inferred from
Decisions: An Experimental Study,” Management Science, 35, 1989, pp. 270-284.

                                                                                                   35
      Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Jung Sakong (2011).
"Self Control and Liquidity: How to Design a Commitment Contract." Mimeo, Stanford
University.
      Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg and Dean Yang (2011). Commitments to
Save: A Field Experiment in Rural Malawi. Mimeo, University of Michigan.
      Bryan, Gharad, Dean Karlan and Scott Nelson (2010). Commitment Devices. Mimeo. Yale
University.
      Choi, Syngjoo, Ray Fisman, Douglas Gale and Shachar Kariv (2007). Consistency and
Heterogeneity of Individual Behavior Under Uncertainty, American Economic Review 97(5),
1921-1938.
      Choi, Syngjoo, Shachar Kariv, Wieland Muller, and Dan Silverman (2011). Who Is (More)
Rational? Mimeo, University of Michigan.
      DellaVigna, Stefano (2009). Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field. Journal
of Economic Literature, 47(2), 315-372.
      Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman (2009). Time-Inconsistency and Welfare Program
Participation: Evidence from the NLSY, International Economic Review, 50(4), 1043-1077
      FinScope (2008), “FinScope Malawi 2008”. Available at:
http://www.finscope.co.za/documents/2009/Brochure_Malawi08.pdf
      Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein and Ted O’Donoghue (2002). Time Discounting
and Time Preference: A Critical Review, Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351-401.
      Fuchs, Victor R. (1982). Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study, in Victor R.
Fuchs, editor, Economic Aspects of Health. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 93-120.
      Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine (2006). A Dual Self Model of Impulse Control,
American Economic Review 96 (5), 1449-1476.
      ____, (2010) Timing and Self-Control, mimeo, Harvard University Department of
Economics.
      Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001). Temptation and Self-Control,
Econometrica, 69 (6), 1403-1435.
      Giné, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg and Dean Yang (forthcoming). Credit Market
Consequences of Improved Personal Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.
American Economic Review.
      Halevy, Yoram (2011), “Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance,” working
paper, University of British Columbia.
      Harrison, Glenn W., Morten Lau and Elisabet Rustrom (2005). Dynamic Consistency in
Denmark: A Longitudinal Field Experiment, Mimeo, Georgia State University.
      Hausman, Jerry A. (1979) Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
Energy-using Durables. Bell Journal of Economics 10(1): 33-54.
      Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2011), “Self-Control at Work,”
working paper, Harvard University.
      Laibson, David (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2), pp.443-77.
      Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto and Jeremey Tobacman (2007). Estimating Discount
Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
      Loewenstein, George (1987). Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption,
Economic Journal 97, pp. 666-684.
      Loewenstein, George, and Jon Elster, Choice Over Time (Russell Sage: New York, 1992).

                                                                                           36
      Meier, Stephan, and Sprenger, Charles (2010). “Stability of Time Preferences.” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 4756.
      Noor, Jawwad (2011). Time Preference: Experiments and Foundations, mimeo, Boston
University.
      O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, (1999) Doing It Now or Later, American Economic
Review 89 (March), 103-124.
      Ozdenoren, Emre, Stephen Salant, and Dan Silverman, (2009) Willpower and the Optimal
Control of Visceral Urges, forthcoming in the Journal of the European Economic Association.
      Paserman, Daniele (2008). Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation
and Policy Implications. Economic Journal, 118(531), 1418-1452.
      Pender, John L. (1996). “Discount rates and credit markets: Theory and evidence from
rural India.” Journal of Development Economics 50(2), 257-296.
      Schaner, Simone, “Intrahousehold Preference Heterogeneity, Commitment, and Strategic
Savings: Theory and Evidence from Kenya,” working paper, Dartmouth College, 2011.
      Strotz, Robert H. (1956). Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,
Review of Economic Studies 23, 165-180.
      Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin Camerer and Quang Nguyen (2010). Risk and Time Preferences:
Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam. American Economic Review 100(1)
557-71.
      Thaler, Richard. H., “Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency,” Economics
Letters, 8, 1981, pp. 201-207.
      Thaler, Richard T., (1991). Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency, in
Richard H. Thaler, ed.. Quasi Rational Economics. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 127-33.
      Warner, John T. and Saul Pleeter (2001). The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from
Military Downsizing. American Economic Review 91(1): 33-53.
      World Bank (2006). Malawi Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment. Washington, DC.




                                                                                         37
Table 1: Summary Statistics

Variable                                                                                            N            Mean           Std. Dev              Min       10th pctile      50th pctile       90th pctile            Max
Panel A: Baseline sample (stage 1)
Change in Allocation to Sooner between Periods Averaged Across All Interest Rates (M             2142         15.69561         302.6607             -2000              -280                 0             340             2000
Fraction Present Biased, All Interest Rates                                                      2142        0.2858077        0.2710615                  0                0               0.2              0.6               1
Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates                                          2142         0.284197        0.2844093                  0                0             0.25             0.75                1
Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                                              2142        0.8087652        0.1785346             0.125               0.5            0.875                 1               1
Fraction of All Tokens Allocated to "Sooner"                                                     2142        0.3696156        0.1900493                  0              0.1            0.389            0.578
Implemented Interest Rate                                                                        2142        0.6230159         0.327678                0.1              0.1             0.75                 1                  1
Demographics
   Male                                                                                          2142        0.4995331        0.5001165                 0                 0                0                1                1
   Respondent's Own Age                                                                          2142         46.47059           14.0189               18                28               46               65               95
   Age 35 or under                                                                               2142        0.2432306        0.4291334                 0                 0                0                1                1
   36-56 years old                                                                               2142        0.5060691        0.5000799                 0                 0                1                1                1
   Respondent's Spouse's Age                                                                     2142         46.47806         14.04391                18                28               46               65               95
   Years of Schooling                                                                            2142         4.474323         4.196598                 0                 0                4                8               77
   Some Primary School                                                                           2142        0.6092437        0.4880338                 0                 0                1                1                1
   Primary School                                                                                2142        0.1507937        0.3579312                 0                 0                0                1                1
   More than Primary School                                                                      2142        0.0723623        0.2591473                 0                 0                0                0                1
   Have Adequate Maize                                                                           2142        0.2161531         0.411716                 0                 0                0                1                1
   Number of Relatives in Village                                                                2142         4.636788         8.630064                 0                 0                2               10              132
   Total Number of People in Village                                                             2142         177.0808         258.4724                 0                35              120              320             4000
Aptitude Questions
   Words Recalled - First Time                                                                   2142         4.810924         1.314317                  0                3                5                 6                 10
   Number Correct on Raven's Matrices                                                            2142         1.527544         0.921454                  0                0                2                 3                  3
   Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                                          2142        0.7329599        0.9850003                  0                0                0                 2                  3
Wealth and Income
   Total HH Wealth                                                                               2142         11448.53         27312.69                40             1020             4446            25800           695025
   HH Total in Bank                                                                              2142         447.8565         2358.961                 0                0                0              700            54000
   HH Total Cash                                                                                 2142         156.2605         1353.264                 0                0                0              100            34000
   HH Items                                                                                      2142         6217.828         19736.89                 0              600             2346            11625           588290
   HH Animals                                                                                    2142         4626.581         10776.44                 0                0             1250            12150           123600
   Expected Income (in period between baseline and revisit)                                      2142         1758.147         6306.995                 0                0               50             4470           137700

Panel B: Revisit sample (stage 2)
Change in Sooner Allocation upon Revisiting (MK)                                                  661         61.42209         595.9793             -2000              -600                 0             900             2100
Indicator: Change in Sooner Allocation Upon Revisiting is Negative                                661        0.3131619        0.4641308                  0                 0                0                1               1
Indicator: Change in Sooner Allocation Upon Revisiting is Positive                                661        0.3403933        0.4742003                  0                 0                0                1               1
Fraction Present Biased, All Interest Rates                                                       661         0.303177        0.2818858                  0                 0              0.2              0.8               1
Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates                                           661        0.2991679        0.2949115                  0                 0            0.25             0.75                1
Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                                               661        0.8127837        0.1725235               0.25            0.625            0.875                 1               1
Fraction of All Tokens Allocated to "Sooner"                                                      661        0.3616238        0.1849919                  0            0.111            0.378            0.567
Days to First Disbursement at Revisit (Targeted)                                                  661         9.217852           4.42353                 2                 3              10               15                  16
Days to First Disbursement at Revisit (Actual)                                                    661           8.97882        4.450009                  1                 3                9              15                  16
Indicator: Days to First Disbursement (Targeted) is 6 days or less                                661        0.3252648        0.4688285                  0                 0                0                1                  1
Implemented Interest Rate                                                                         661        0.5811649        0.3206835                0.1               0.1            0.75                 1                  1
Shocks
   Death in Family                                                                                661        0.0226929        0.1490353                 0                 0                0                0                1
    Shock to Expected HH Income                                                                   661         114.2061         714.5865             -2985               -90                0              350            13735
Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                                                        661         712.2542         488.8929                 0                 0              700             1400             2000

Notes: Both baseline and revisit datasets are at individual level. Baseline dataset (Panel A) composed of wife-husband pairs interviewed separately in Jan-Feb 2010. Revisit dataset (Panel B) constructed by first randomly
choosing 2/3 of households surveyed at baseline and then randomly choosing either husband or wife within household. Revisit interviews occurred in Mar-Apr 2010, with target revisit date randomly chosen to fall between
46 to 59 days after baseline interview (16 to 2 days prior to first "far" period disbursement at day 61).
         Table 2: Number (of 8) Positive Changes in Later Allocation with Increase in r



                                                                                 Simulated
      Number of Consistent Pairs                    Real Data                       Data
                                                        (1)                          (2)
                   0                                  0.00%                        0.00%
                   1                                  0.28%                        0.04%
                   2                                  0.61%                        1.56%
                   3                                  1.96%                       12.08%
                   4                                  7.38%                       33.92%
                   5                                 14.05%                       35.49%
                   6                                 21.48%                       14.77%
                   7                                 22.97%                        2.05%
                   8                                 31.28%                        0.09%

Notes: Table presents share of individuals whose allocations in 8 pairs of choices (with adjacent
interest rates) are consistent with law of demand. Data in column (1) are from baseline sample (for
details, see Table 1). Data from columns (2) come from simulations described in Appendix B.
Table 3: Allocations to Later, in Malawi Kwacha, by Time Frame and Rate of Return


                                                                                           Percentiles                          Percent at
                                           Mean      Std. Dev       10th         25th         50th       75th         90th       a corner
Near period
   t+30 at r=10%                            1295.9        524.8         660         1100         1320       1650         2090         13%
   t+30 at r=25%                            1535.8        602.1         750         1250         1500       1875         2500         14%
   t+30 at r=50%                            1930.5        734.0        1050         1500         1950       2550         3000         16%
   t+30 at r=75%                            2256.8        885.1        1050         1750         2275       2975         3500         17%
   t+30 at r=100%                           2713.7       1045.4        1200         2000         2800       3600         4000         22%

Far period
   t+90 at r=10%                            1306.7        518.7         660         1100         1320       1650         2090         12%
   t+90 at r=25%                            1565.4        590.0         875         1250         1500       2000         2500         14%
   t+90 at r=50%                            1922.9        733.2         900         1500         1950       2400         3000         16%
   t+90 at r=75%                            2306.5        872.0        1225         1750         2275       2975         3500         18%
   t+90 at r=100%                           2757.1       1030.8        1400         2000         2800       3800         4000         23%

Notes: Data are from baseline sample (for details, see Table 1). Table presents allocations to "later" date (either t=30 or t=90) for each
of 10 choices presented to respondents. Baseline interview is at t=0. First set of 5 choices is in "near" period, when allocations are
between t=1 and t=31. 2nd set of 5 choices is in "far" period, when allocations are between t=61 and t=91. Rates of return to waiting
until "later" date (interest rates) take on values of 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%. Allocations between sooner and later date must be
made in 100MK increments, out of total budget of 2000MK.
Table 4: Determinants of Change in ln(c) From Sooner to Later
Ordinary least-squares estimates




Dependent variable: Change in ln(c) from sooner to later


                                                                delay of 1 vs. 31 days              delay of 61 vs. 91 days

Interest rate (r)                                          0.948***                 0.949***    0.935***                0.937***
                                                           (0.029)                 (0.029)      (0.029)                 (0.029)
Male                                                                                 0.026                               0.024
                                                                                   (0.040)                              (0.042)
Age 35 or under                                                                      0.061                               0.061
                                                                                   (0.056)                              (0.058)
36-56 yrs old                                                                        0.056                               0.041
                                                                                   (0.044)                              (0.047)
Some primary school                                                                  0.008                              -0.012
                                                                                   (0.047)                              (0.050)
Primary school                                                                      -0.038                               -0.087
                                                                                   (0.072)                              (0.072)
More than primary school                                                             0.030                               -0.010
                                                                                   (0.097)                              (0.089)
Have adequate maize                                                                  0.020                               0.046
                                                                                   (0.047)                              (0.046)
log(Baseline wealth)                                                                 0.021                               0.033**
                                                                                   (0.015)                              (0.015)
Words recalled                                                                       0.022                               0.022
                                                                                   (0.014)                              (0.015)
Raven's Tests Correct                                                               -0.027                              -0.039*
                                                                                   (0.020)                              (0.021)
Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                                 0.020                               0.032
                                                                                   (0.026)                              (0.025)
Number of relatives in the village                                                   0.005*                              0.007**
                                                                                   (0.002)                              (0.002)
Constant                                                   0.384***                 0.224**     0.414***                 0.279**
                                                           (0.030)                 (0.084)      (0.030)                 (0.089)

N                                                           8937                     8937        8931                     8931
Adjusted R-squared                                           0.09                        0.09     0.08                    0.09
Table 5: Determinants of Fraction Consistent or Fraction Present-biased


                                                                                        Dependent variable:

                                                                  Fraction consistent                       Fraction present-biased


Male                                                           0.029*              0.026*                  0.001               0.002
                                                              (0.015)            (0.014)                  (0.013)             (0.013)
Age 35 or under                                               -0.029              -0.006                   0.017               0.008
                                                              (0.021)            (0.020)                  (0.018)             (0.018)
36-56 yrs old                                                 -0.021              -0.020                   0.009               0.008
                                                              (0.017)            (0.015)                  (0.015)             (0.014)
Some primary school                                           -0.032*             -0.032*                  0.031*              0.031**
                                                              (0.019)            (0.016)                  (0.016)             (0.016)
Primary school                                                -0.036              -0.023                   0.017               0.012
                                                              (0.027)            (0.024)                  (0.023)             (0.022)
More than primary school                                      -0.068**            -0.069**                 0.046               0.046
                                                              (0.034)            (0.030)                  (0.031)             (0.030)
Have adequate maize                                            0.032*              0.027*                  -0.007             -0.005
                                                              (0.018)            (0.016)                  (0.015)             (0.015)
Baseline wealth (100s of MK)                                  -0.000              -0.000                   -0.000             -0.000
                                                              (0.000)            (0.000)                  (0.000)             (0.000)
Words recalled                                                 0.004               0.002                   0.002               0.003
                                                              (0.006)            (0.005)                  (0.005)             (0.005)
Raven's Tests Correct                                         -0.001               0.005                   -0.006             -0.009
                                                              (0.008)            (0.007)                  (0.007)             (0.007)
Financial Literacy Questions Correct                           0.008              -0.003                   -0.004             -0.000
                                                              (0.009)            (0.008)                  (0.007)             (0.007)
Number of relatives in the village                             0.001               0.000                   0.001               0.001
                                                              (0.001)            (0.001)                  (0.001)             (0.001)
Adherence to law of demand ratio [0,1]                                            0.744***                                    -0.277***
                                                                                 (0.038)                                      (0.033)
Constant                                                      0.456***           -0.143***                0.252***            0.474***
                                                              (0.032)            (0.041)                  (0.028)             (0.039)


N                                                               2142                2142                      2142              2142
Adjusted R-squared                                              0.00                0.18                    -0.00               0.03


Note: Dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the fraction of the five choices pairs that were dynamically consistent. Dependent
variable in columns 3 and 4 is the fraction of choice pairs that exhibited present bias. Unit of observation is individuals included in the
baseline sample. All allocations made in Jan-Feb 2010.
Table 6: Determinants of revisions toward sooner
Ordinary least-squares regressions


Dependent variable: Change in sooner allocation upon revisiting (MK)

                                                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
Preferences under commitment
              Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates                      136.306*      133.262       133.597       134.466      148.669*
                                                                                           (81.913)     (82.419)      (82.544)      (83.533)      (82.106)
                Fraction "Future Biased", Non-Implemented Interest Rates                                                                             81.460
                                                                                                                                                    (90.885)
                Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner"                               -517.953*** -523.255** -507.387** -484.155** -476.630** -474.870**
                                                                                           (143.819) (185.534) (187.296) (206.813) (227.564) (228.706)
                Indicator: days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6                        107.921** 110.331** 112.775** 113.104** 124.569** 124.237**
                                                                                            (50.291)    (50.675)   (50.914)   (51.033)   (51.138)   (51.197)
Financial sophistication
              Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                                        -29.964       -13.687       -13.839       -26.708       -31.727
                                                                                                       (175.034)     (175.757)     (175.831)     (175.075)     (178.077)
                Words recalled                                                                            -1.873        -1.232        -1.120        -0.221         1.149
                                                                                                        (19.059)      (18.968)      (19.090)      (19.085)      (19.299)
                Raven's Tests Correct                                                                    -28.327       -28.828       -28.785       -21.150       -23.431
                                                                                                        (28.474)      (28.680)      (28.584)      (29.031)      (29.254)
                Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                                      13.689        12.246        11.933        21.929        24.583
                                                                                                        (28.442)      (28.264)      (28.463)      (28.533)      (28.441)
Shocks
                Death in the family (indic.)                                                                            69.045        70.659        63.620        76.080
                                                                                                                     (205.495)     (205.555)     (204.582)     (204.909)
                Shortfall in expected hh income (MK)                                                                     0.049         0.048         0.045         0.045
                                                                                                                       (0.042)       (0.042)       (0.039)       (0.037)
Social pressure
               Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                                                                             0.014         0.047         0.034
                                                                                                                                     (0.064)       (0.081)       (0.080)
                Number of relatives in the village                                                                                    1.059         1.777         1.811
                                                                                                                                     (3.508)       (3.398)       (3.346)
Rate of return to waiting
               Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                     -143.004*   -222.627** -219.830** -211.211** -209.808** -214.823** -198.757**
                                                                                (78.279)    (81.287)   (81.362)   (81.356)   (82.042)   (82.398)   (82.700)

Baseline characteristics
              Male                                                               125.169** 101.800** 103.931** 106.341** 101.039*     55.018    65.022
                                                                                 (49.851)  (49.488)   (51.698)  (51.561)  (53.196)  (61.402)  (61.254)
                Age 35 or under                                                  198.798** 181.737** 177.816** 175.745** 175.145** 274.587** 284.957**
                                                                                 (71.742)  (71.257)   (71.515)  (71.968)  (72.490) (110.102) (109.770)
                36-56 yrs old                                                    117.670** 111.136** 114.283** 117.301** 115.631** 176.259** 175.243**
                                                                                 (54.887)  (54.764)   (54.258)  (54.399)  (56.237)  (64.895)  (64.866)
                Some primary school                                               -66.952   -75.753    -70.217   -68.240   -69.187   -28.764   -17.569
                                                                                 (70.212)  (68.797)   (71.864)  (70.170)  (70.687)  (72.040)  (72.289)
                Primary school                                                  -159.166* -160.924* -155.726* -163.630* -165.420* -123.579    -114.183
                                                                                 (85.954)  (84.696)   (91.235)  (90.493)  (90.649)  (92.800)  (92.611)
                More than primary school                                       -215.094** -217.068** -202.690* -205.617* -206.031* -132.108   -127.624
                                                                               (105.964) (104.938) (117.169) (115.693) (115.753) (119.426) (120.370)
                Have adequate maize                                                35.744    25.040     28.679    25.645    23.730     6.327     1.060
                                                                                 (56.325)  (55.110)   (55.840)  (56.737)  (57.724)  (57.737)  (57.919)
                Total HH Wealth                                                    -0.122    -0.125     -0.126    -0.130    -0.128    -0.124    -0.123
                                                                                  (0.089)   (0.086)    (0.085)   (0.084)   (0.085)   (0.089)   (0.091)
Controls for:
                Spousal characteristics                                            -           -             -             -             -            Y             Y

                R-squared (adj.)                                                  0.02        0.05          0.04          0.04          0.04         0.05          0.04
                N                                                                  661         661           661           661           661          661           661
                P-value for test that financial sophistication variables are                                0.87          0.88          0.88         0.90          0.85

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individual included in revisit sample. Spousal characteristics controls are: fraction present biased for all choices, indicators for age
category, indicators for education category, word recall, ravens score, financial literacy score, and fraction of choices adhering to law of demand.
Table 7: Relative magnitudes of estimated empirical relationships
                                                                                                      Effect on
                                                                                                     revisions to
Independent variable                                                Hypothetical shift              sooner (MK)


Implemented rate of return {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                        50 percentage point reduction      107.41

Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates             0.28 increase (1 std. dev.)        41.88

Days to first disbursement <=6 (indic.)                             From 0 to 1                        124.57


Note: Calculations use coefficients in Table 6, column 6.
Table 8: Determinants of inclusion in revisit sample
Ordinary least-squares regressions


Dependent variable: Indicator for inclusion in revisit sample

Preferences under commitment
                     Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates                      0.002
                                                                                                (0.035)
                        Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner"                             -0.031
                                                                                                (0.097)
                        Indicator: days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6                    -0.108***
                                                                                                (0.025)
Financial sophistication
                        Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                       0.001
                                                                                                (0.076)
                        Words recalled                                                           -0.015*
                                                                                                (0.008)
                        Raven's Tests Correct                                                     0.019
                                                                                                (0.013)
                        Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                      0.005
                                                                                                (0.014)

Social pressure
                        Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                               -0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
                        Number of relatives in the village                                        0.001
                                                                                                (0.002)

Rate of return to waiting
                        Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                              0.057
                                                                                                (0.036)

Baseline characteristics
                        Male                                                                      0.036
                                                                                                (0.030)
                        Age 35 or under                                                           0.080*
                                                                                                (0.044)
                        36-56 yrs old                                                            -0.037
                                                                                                (0.031)
                        Some primary school                                                      -0.034
                                                                                                (0.029)
                        Primary school                                                           -0.055
                                                                                                (0.045)
                        More than primary school                                                 -0.056
                                                                                                (0.045)
                        Have adequate maize                                                       0.007
                                                                                                (0.027)
                        Total HH Wealth                                                         -0.000***
                                                                                                (0.000)
Controls for:
                        Spousal characteristics                                                    Y

                        R-squared (adj.)                                                           0.05
                        N                                                                          722

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individuals targeted for inclusion in revisit sample. Dependent variable has
mean of 0.916. Right-hand-side variables are identical to column 6, Table 6, except for omission of shock
variables ("death in family" and "shortfall in expected household income"), because shock variables are not
available for attriters. See Table 6 for other notes.
Table 9: Differential effects by gender
Ordinary least-squares regressions



Dependent variable: Change in sooner allocation upon revisiting (MK)

                                                                                                                                      P-value, F-test of equality
                                                                                                                                         of male and female
                                                                                                       (1)             (2)                     coeffs.
                                                                                                    Females           Males

Preferences under commitment
                        Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates                      146.272         74.368                     0.668
                                                                                                   (131.641)       (103.937)
                            Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner"                           -574.401*        -358.159                    0.610
                                                                                                   (308.257)       (289.898)
                            Indicator: days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6                    98.383          150.110**                   0.613
                                                                                                   (73.870)         (70.653)
Financial sophistication
                            Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                     -179.273         76.300                     0.469
                                                                                                   (253.169)       (245.775)
                            Words recalled                                                          -13.195          29.513                     0.295
                                                                                                   (25.317)         (31.948)
                            Raven's Tests Correct                                                   22.948           -74.859*                   0.089
                                                                                                   (40.633)         (40.493)
                            Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                    16.390           26.613                     0.868
                                                                                                   (50.038)         (35.834)

Shocks
                            Death in the family (indic.)                                            439.160         -225.526                    0.106
                                                                                                   (324.192)       (252.689)
                            Shortfall in expected hh income (MK)                                     0.049            0.030                     0.807
                                                                                                    (0.048)          (0.062)

Social pressure
                            Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                               0.059            0.034                     0.873
                                                                                                    (0.106)          (0.119)
                            Number of relatives in the village                                       2.436            3.166                     0.924
                                                                                                    (6.539)          (4.047)

Rate of return to waiting
                            Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                            -246.449**       -172.933                    0.659
                                                                                                   (122.160)       (113.389)

Baseline characteristics
                            Age 35 or under                                                         211.545         268.544                     0.803
                                                                                                   (151.803)       (170.091)
                            36-56 yrs old                                                            57.127         231.260**                   0.218
                                                                                                   (115.427)        (81.522)
                            Some primary school                                                    -173.450*        159.125                     0.029
                                                                                                    (99.354)       (114.448)
                            Primary school                                                          -297.863*        21.749                     0.134
                                                                                                   (172.610)       (125.290)
                            More than primary school                                               -518.915**       205.562                     0.003
                                                                                                   (175.580)       (164.006)
                            Have adequate maize                                                     28.599            -5.537                    0.774
                                                                                                   (84.406)         (83.629)
                            Total HH Wealth                                                          -0.337*          -0.040                    0.144
                                                                                                    (0.173)          (0.107)
Controls for:
                            Spousal characteristics                                                    Y                Y

                            R-squared (adj.)                                                           0.06            0.04
                            N                                                                          325             336

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individual included in revisit sample. Column 1 restricts to females in revisit sample. Column 2 restricts to males in revisit
sample. See Table 6 for other notes.
Appendix Table 1: Tests of baseline balance with respect to randomized independent variables
Ordinary least-squares regressions


                      Dependent variable:                  Fraction    Fraction of    Fraction of      Words       Raven's Tests    Financial    Spouse minus Number of            Male            Age          Years of       Have          Total HH
                                                           Present     all tokens      Decisions      Recalled       Correct         Literacy         own       Relatives in                                   Education      Adequate        Wealth
                                                        Biased, Non- allocated to     Consistent                                    Questions     allocation to the Village                                                    Maize
                                                        Implemented     "sooner"      with Law of                                    Correct     sooner (MK)
                                                        Interest Rates                 Demand


Panel A
          Indicator: days to first disbursement             -0.008      -0.035**         -0.009         0.026          0.062          -0.074        80.415*         -0.381         0.067          -0.030          -0.144         0.002       -58.843***
             (targeted) <=6                                (0.022)       (0.016)        (0.015)        (0.117)        (0.074)        (0.080)        (41.852)       (0.573)        (0.041)        (1.145)         (0.263)        (0.036)       (13.074)

          R-squared                                        0.0002        0.0078         0.0007         0.0001         0.0010          0.0013         0.0057         0.0006         0.0039         0.0000         0.0004         0.0000         0.0169
          N                                                  661           661            661            661            661             661            661            661            661            661            661            661            661


Panel B
          Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}       -0.033      -0.120***       0.034*        0.448***         0.075          0.012        129.492**        -1.205         -0.083         -0.996          0.558          -0.058        12.668
                                                           (0.033)       (0.021)        (0.020)        (0.164)        (0.109)        (0.116)        (61.027)       (0.887)        (0.061)        (1.620)         (0.381)        (0.052)       (22.587)

          R-squared                                        0.0016        0.0432         0.0040         0.0113         0.0007          0.0000         0.0070         0.0027         0.0028         0.0006         0.0031         0.0019         0.0004
          N                                                  661           661            661            661            661             661            661            661            661            661            661            661            661

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individual included in revisit sample. In Panel A, each column presents results from regression of given dependent variable on indicator for days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6 and a constant. Panel B is similar
but independent variable is interest rate on randomly-chosen choice. Constant term included in each regression but not reported.
Appendix Table 2: Determinants of revisions toward sooner (using all first-stage choices in measure of present bias)
Ordinary least-squares regressions


Dependent variable: Change in sooner allocation upon revisiting (MK)

                                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)
Preferences under commitment
  Fraction Present Biased, All Interest Rates                                         228.165**     223.450**       224.583**      222.907**      231.639**
                                                                                      (83.387)      (83.721)        (83.845)       (84.961)       (84.062)
   Fraction "Future Biased", All Interest Rates                                                                                                                   -28.740
                                                                                                                                                                 (96.067)
   Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner"                                       -611.757*** -638.390*** -621.955*** -636.684**             -642.477**     -655.987**
                                                                                      (143.257)   (183.522)   (185.344)   (207.005)              (227.876)      (231.722)
   Indicator: days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6                                106.374**   107.778**   110.152**   110.601**              122.925**      121.264**
                                                                                       (49.971)    (50.380)    (50.624)    (50.711)               (50.846)       (50.941)
Financial sophistication
   Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                                                -65.595        -48.868        -48.832        -62.645       -129.462
                                                                                                    (173.256)      (173.867)      (174.149)      (173.680)      (176.896)
   Words recalled                                                                                      -3.836         -3.255         -3.081         -1.943         -0.056
                                                                                                     (18.868)       (18.783)       (18.895)       (18.944)       (19.120)
   Raven's Tests Correct                                                                              -28.042        -28.494        -28.897        -21.144        -23.867
                                                                                                     (28.240)       (28.439)       (28.361)       (28.753)       (29.044)
   Financial Literacy Questions Correct                                                                15.036         13.641         13.422         22.704         24.433
                                                                                                     (28.200)       (28.032)       (28.231)       (28.347)       (28.399)

Shocks
  Death in the family (indic.)                                                                                        63.533         64.467         54.700         59.404
                                                                                                                   (201.166)      (201.237)      (200.063)      (202.298)
   Shortfall in expected hh income (MK)                                                                                0.048          0.048          0.045          0.044
                                                                                                                     (0.042)        (0.042)        (0.039)        (0.038)

Social pressure
  Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                                                                                         -0.008         0.016          -0.007
                                                                                                                                    (0.063)        (0.081)        (0.080)
   Number of relatives in the village                                                                                                 0.641         1.350           1.685
                                                                                                                                    (3.534)        (3.411)        (3.370)

Rate of return to waiting
  Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                           -143.004*     -221.012**    -218.117**     -209.918**     -210.107**     -214.513**      -201.219**
                                                                         (78.279)      (79.852)      (79.857)       (79.890)       (80.395)       (80.866)        (81.629)

Baseline characteristics
  Male                                                                    125.169**       93.117*       94.908*        97.301*        94.531*       45.118         58.023
                                                                          (49.851)      (49.190)      (51.375)       (51.267)       (52.848)      (61.260)       (61.218)
   Age 35 or under                                                        198.798**     173.360**     168.468**      166.410**      165.692**     257.924**      276.352**
                                                                          (71.742)      (70.424)      (70.629)       (71.122)       (71.616)     (109.252)      (108.997)
   36-56 yrs old                                                          117.670**     103.998*      106.826**      109.789**      108.649*      167.891**      174.537**
                                                                          (54.887)      (54.437)      (53.968)       (54.104)       (55.936)      (64.667)       (64.474)
   Some primary school                                                     -66.952       -80.885       -74.591        -72.889        -73.590       -32.968        -19.185
                                                                          (70.212)      (68.428)      (71.473)       (69.835)       (70.245)      (71.550)       (71.919)
   Primary school                                                        -159.166*     -165.150*     -160.071*      -167.942*      -167.910*      -125.995       -119.342
                                                                          (85.954)      (84.526)      (91.190)       (90.487)       (90.522)      (92.481)       (92.385)
   More than primary school                                             -215.094**    -221.735**     -206.839*      -209.943*      -209.953*      -138.196       -124.736
                                                                        (105.964)     (104.187)     (115.766)      (114.392)      (114.341)      (117.758)      (118.912)
   Have adequate maize                                                      35.744        27.044        30.226         27.371         26.348         9.009          3.314
                                                                          (56.325)      (54.929)      (55.680)       (56.568)       (57.542)      (57.571)       (57.837)
   Total HH Wealth                                                          -0.122        -0.136        -0.138*        -0.143*        -0.143*       -0.138         -0.128
                                                                           (0.089)       (0.085)       (0.084)        (0.083)        (0.084)       (0.087)        (0.089)
Controls for:
  Spousal characteristics                                                   -             -              -              -              -              Y              Y

   R-squared (adj.)                                                        0.02          0.06           0.06           0.06           0.05           0.06            0.05
   N                                                                       661           661            661            661            661            661             661
   P-value for test that financial sophistication variables are joint                                   0.85           0.86           0.86           0.88            0.78

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individual included in revisit sample. Spousal characteristics controls are: fraction present biased for all choices, indicators for age
category, indicators for education category, word recall, ravens score, financial literacy score, and fraction of choices adhering to law of demand.
Appendix Table 3: Random vs Real choice
Ordinary least-squares regressions

Dependent variable: Change in sooner allocation upon revisiting (MK)

                                                                            (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)

                                                                            Real          Simulated           Real           Simulated           Real          Simulated           Real           Simulated
Hyperbolic preferences
  Fraction Present Biased [0,1]                                         249.559***          705.308
                                                                         (83.269)       [ 467.5, 948.9]
   Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rate                                                   148.669*           0.763
                                                                                                            (82.106)      [ -225.6, 225.6]
   Fraction Future Biased [0,1]                                                                                                               -36.064           -707.562
                                                                                                                                              (96.468)      [ -936.4, -475.6]
   Fraction Future Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rate                                                                                                                          81.460            -2.150
                                                                                                                                                                                 (90.885)      [ -220.6, 211.8]
   Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner" [0,1]                  -536.245**      -1997.214                                             -534.990**      -1994.620
                                                                        (225.933) [ -2734.4, -1218.4]                                         (229.755) [ -2738.1, -1210.8]
   Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner", non-Implemented Interest Rate                        -476.630**               52.466                                           -474.870**          52.622
                                                                                                      (227.564)           [ -672.1, 821.8]                                      (228.706)      [ -678.2, 826.9]
Financial sophistication
   Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                    -66.484
                                                                           66 484       133 243
                                                                                        133.243         -26.708
                                                                                                         26 708               387 200
                                                                                                                              387.200         -141.406
                                                                                                                                               141 406          132 721
                                                                                                                                                                132.721         -31.727
                                                                                                                                                                                 31 727            387 245
                                                                                                                                                                                                   387.245
                                                                        (173.956)   [ -313.8, 567.6]  (175.075)           [ -69.7, 851.3]     (176.978)   [ -2738.1, -1210.8] (178.077)        [ -69.1, 855.3]

Social pressure
   Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                         0.068                 0.004                                               0.052            0.005
                                                                     (0.078)            [ -0.28, 0.30]                                         (0.077)       [ -0.28, 0.31]
   Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK), non-Implemented Interest Rate                                   0.047           0.004                                                0.034           0.004
                                                                                                             (0.081)       [ -0.28, 0.28]                                         (0.080)       [ -0.28, 0.29]

Rate of return to waiting
   Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                         -211.245***          -0.292         -214.823**          1.785         -196.598**          0.232          -198.757**          1.690
                                                                         (80.386)      [ -162.9, 174.5]     (82.398)      [ -170.5, 188.3]    (81.303)      [ -164.3, 178.7]     (82.700)      [ -169.6, 188.7]

Controls for:
  Spousal characteristics                                                    Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y

   N                                                                        661              661              661               661              661              661              661               661

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is individual included in revisit sample. The standard error appears below the coefficient in regressions using the real experimental data (odd numbered columns). The 95%
confidence interval appears below the coefficient of regressions using simulated data in square brackets. All regressions include regressors in specifications of columns 6 and 7 of Table 6. Column 3 replicates
column 6 in Table 6, and column 7 replicates column 7 in Table 6.
Appendix Table 4: Bounds on bias due to selection into revisit sample
Ordinary least-squares regressions


Dependent variable: Change in sooner allocation upon revisiting (MK), with missing values replaced

                                                                       (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)

         Assumed value of dep. var. is initial sooner allocation
                                          (from baseline) plus:       600          400           200             0            -200          -400           -600

Preferences under commitment
  Fraction Present Biased, Non-Implemented Interest Rates           128.167*     128.883*     130.469*       132.055*      132.728*       133.421*      134.957*
                                                                     (77.442)     (76.090)     (75.361)       (75.287)      (75.596)       (76.359)      (77.430)
   Fraction of all tokens allocated to "sooner"                    -436.945**   -436.561**   -440.802**     -445.044**    -477.131**     -509.346**    -536.364**
                                                                    (211.300)    (208.731)    (207.571)      (208.102)     (208.913)      (211.017)     (214.267)
   Indicator: days to first disbursement (targeted) <=6            186.583***   163.094***   139.984***     116.874**      98.301**        81.699*        65.853
                                                                     (47.515)     (46.559)     (46.109)       (46.186)      (46.628)       (47.459)      (48.625)
Financial sophistication
   Fraction of Decisions Consistent with Law of Demand                -34.842     -44.799       -52.448        -60.096       -57.933        -51.484       -46.324
                                                                    (164.039)   (161.676)     (160.420)      (160.504)     (161.691)      (164.079)     (167.401)
   Words recalled                                                      2.475       0.497         -2.120         -4.736        -7.451         -9.697       -11.989
                                                                     (18.397)    (18.026)      (17.766)       (17.660)      (17.688)       (17.843)      (18.108)
   Raven's Tests Correct                                              -24.665     -21.867       -19.092        -16.317       -12.267         -9.746        -7.343
                                                                     (27.296)    (26.848)      (26.575)       (26.538)      (26.712)       (27.022)      (27.505)
   Financial Literacy Questions Correct                               16.160      17.605        19.945         22.284        22.590         21.876        20.373
                                                                     (26.525)    (26.054)      (25.787)       (25.790)      (26.020)       (26.435)      (27.025)

Social pressure
  Spouse minus own allocation to sooner (MK)                          0.051       0.051         0.049          0.048         0.044          0.040         0.039
                                                                     (0.076)     (0.074)       (0.073)        (0.073)       (0.074)        (0.075)       (0.077)
   Number of relatives in the village                                 1.077       1.176         1.309          1.443         1.727          1.992         2.206
                                                                     (3.026)     (2.975)       (2.963)        (2.990)       (3.053)        (3.133)       (3.231)

Rate of return to waiting
  Implemented interest rate {.1,.25,.5,.75,1}                      -230.269*** -221.468*** -213.910*** -206.353*** -197.841***           -189.933**    -182.470**
                                                                     (75.891)    (74.982)    (74.545)    (74.726)    (75.285)             (76.167)      (77.380)

Baseline characteristics
  Male                                                                35.006       41.182       47.175        53.169         58.183         63.646        69.313
                                                                     (57.670)     (56.390)     (55.689)      (55.604)       (55.820)       (56.473)      (57.536)
   Age 35 or under                                                 215.170**    225.589**    238.516**      251.442**     265.987***     276.074***    285.344***
                                                                    (104.801)    (103.398)    (102.580)     (102.463)      (102.939)      (103.902)     (105.434)
   36-56 yrs old                                                   172.320***   164.944***   157.798***     150.651**     147.654**      146.538**     146.049**
                                                                     (62.679)     (61.184)     (60.220)      (59.832)       (59.985)       (60.639)      (61.785)
   Some primary school                                                 -8.462      -15.371      -22.003       -28.635        -34.033        -37.969       -40.672
                                                                     (69.275)     (68.528)     (68.173)      (68.248)       (68.546)       (69.273)      (70.425)
   Primary school                                                     -69.299      -81.755      -95.003      -108.252       -115.371       -119.645      -123.560
                                                                     (88.697)     (87.037)     (86.084)      (85.977)       (86.414)       (87.382)      (88.978)
   More than primary school                                           -94.619     -106.603     -118.530      -130.457       -136.848       -139.054      -138.669
                                                                    (114.071)    (113.232)    (112.962)     (113.335)      (114.121)      (115.183)     (116.411)
   Have adequate maize                                                 3.870        3.828        3.763         3.697          3.400          3.178         3.063
                                                                     (53.182)     (52.068)     (51.414)      (51.292)       (51.582)       (52.303)      (53.379)
   Total HH Wealth                                                     0.035        0.010        -0.014        -0.039        -0.065*      -0.092***     -0.101***
                                                                      (0.044)      (0.040)      (0.037)       (0.035)        (0.034)        (0.034)       (0.038)
Controls for:
  Spousal characteristics                                              Y            Y             Y             Y              Y             Y              Y

   R-squared (adj.)                                                  0.0475       0.0439       0.0412         0.0387        0.0395         0.0411         0.0415
   N                                                                   722          722          722            722           722            722            722

Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Dependent variable constrained to remain within 0 or 2000 range. Right-hand-side variables are identical to column 6, Table 6, except for omission of shock
variables ("death in family" and "shortfall in expected household income"), because shock variables are not available for attriters. See Table 6 for other notes.
Figure 1: Schematic of the Preference Elicitation Method; Example with r=0.25


          800MK                                     1500MK




          Dish (A)                                     Dish (B)
     Allocation to time t                      Allocation to time t+30


                                 Bowl with
                                 20 Tokens
Figure 2: Schematic of the Revising Procedure; Example with r=0.25


             1000MK                                    1250MK




            Dish (A’)                                   Dish (B’)
     (Re)allocation to time t                  (Re)allocation to time t+30



            800MK                                     1500MK




            Dish (A)                                      Dish (B)
  Original allocation to time t   Bowl with   Original allocation to time t+30
                                  20 Tokens
            Figure 3: Timeline of Interviews, Choices, and Disbursement of Funds

                     “Near” period                                                     “Far” period




   First (“sooner”)               Second (“later”)                    Third (“sooner”)              Fourth (“later”)
possible disbursement          possible disbursement               possible disbursement         possible disbursement
       of funds                       of funds                            of funds                      of funds




 t=    01                               31             46                        61                       91



     Stage 1:                                                   Stage 2:
Baseline interview                                           Revisit interview
 and committed                                               and (un)revised
choices regarding                                           choices regarding
  t=1 vs. 31 and                                               t=61 vs. 91
    t=61 vs. 91
Figure 4: Distribution of Change in Sooner Allocation Upon Revisiting



               8.0e-04
               6.0e-04
            Density
           4.0e-04
               2.0e-04
               0




                         -2000                -1000              0              1000                                                2000
                                            Change in sooner consumption upon revisiting

Notes: Observations with no change in allocation excluded from histogram. Initial allocations made in Jan‐Feb 2010. Revisions made in Mar‐Apr 2010 in a
      revisit targeted at a randomized 2‐16 days prior to date of first disbursement in "far" period. (Date of first disbursement in far period is day t=61 from
      initial visit in Jan‐Feb 2010.)
Figure 5: Impact of targeted days before disbursement on revisions toward sooner
                                                                       500


                                                                       400
     Change in allocation toward sooner (MK), relative to 16‐day lag




                                                                       300


                                                                       200


                                                                       100


                                                                         0
                                                                              2   3       4     5      6       7        8       9        10       11       12       13        14   15

                                                                       ‐100


                                                                       ‐200


                                                                       ‐300


                                                                       ‐400
                                                                                                                Days to first disbursement

                                                                                  Coefficient       Upper 95% confidence interval             Lower 95% confidence interval


Notes: Figure plots coefficient (and 95% confidence interval) on indicator variables for each separate value of days to first disbursement (omitted category
      is 16 days to first disbursement). Dependent variable is change in allocation to sooner upon revisiting (in MK). Other right‐hand‐side variables are as
      in Table 6, column 6.
