NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF HOUSING WEALTH ON COLLEGE CHOICE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE HOUSING BOOM
Michael F. Lovenheim
C. Lockwood Reynolds
Working Paper 18075
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18075
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

We wish to thank John Bound, Charlie Clotfelter and Caroline Hoxby for helpful comments on this
paper as well as seminar participants at Cornell University, MIT, the University of Texas - Dallas,
the University of Akron, the National Bureau of Economic Research Household Finance Meeting,
and the American Education Finance Association Annual Meeting. We are additionally grateful to
Jen Doleac for excellent research assistance. We thank the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research (SIEPR) and the Pew Charitable Trust Economic Mobility Project for financial support;
all errors, omissions and conclusions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Michael F. Lovenheim and C. Lockwood Reynolds. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Housing Wealth on College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom
Michael F. Lovenheim and C. Lockwood Reynolds
NBER Working Paper No. 18075
May 2012
JEL No. I21,I23,J24,R31
ABSTRACT
The higher education system in the United States is characterized by a large degree of quality heterogeneity,
and there is a growing literature suggesting students attending higher quality universities have better
educational and labor market outcomes. In this paper, we use NLSY97 data combined with the difference
in the timing and strength of the housing boom across cities to examine how short-run home price
growth affects the quality of postsecondary schools chosen by students. Our findings indicate a $10,000
increase in a family’s housing wealth in the four years prior to a student becoming of college-age increases
the likelihood she attends a flagship public university relative to a non-flagship public university by
2.0 percent and decreases the relative probability of attending a community college by 1.6 percent.
These effects are driven by relatively lower and middle-income families. We show that these changes
are due to the effect of housing wealth on where students apply, not on whether they are admitted.
We also find that short-run increases in home prices lead to increases in direct quality measures of
the institutions students attend. Finally, for the lower-income sample, we find home price increases
reduce student labor supply and that each $10,000 increase in home prices is associated with a 1.8%
increase in the likelihood of completing college.
Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
135 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
C. Lockwood Reynolds
Department of Economics
Kent State University
P.O. Box 5190
Kent, OH 44242
creynol9@kent.edu

1

Introduction

The higher education system in the United States is characterized by a large degree of stratiﬁcation across sectors in both resources and student outcomes. The labor market returns to
graduating from an elite public or private institution are high and have grown substantially
over time (Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999; Black and Smith, 2004, 2006; Hoekstra, 2009;
Andrews, Li and Lovenheim, 2011).1 The higher level of resources at elite public and private
institutions also translate into more favorable student outcomes, including higher completion
rates (Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010) and lower time to degree (Bound, Lovenheim and
Turner, forthcoming). Furthermore, there is considerable evidence that the type of institution
in which students initially enter the postsecondary education system aﬀects the likelihood of
graduation and future wages.2
Given these large returns to college quality, little work has been done examining how students
make decisions about which college to attend and, in particular, what role household ﬁnances
play in this decision. There is ample evidence that low-income students are under-represented
at elite private and state ﬂagship universities (Bowen, Kurzweil and Tobin, 2005; Pallais and
Turner, 2006 and 2007). Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), previous
work has estimated sizable income gradients in the two-year, four-year decision as well as in
four-year college quality (Belley and Lochner, 2007; Kinsler and Pavan, 2010)3 and has shown
that higher income students attend schools with higher SAT scores (Light and Strayer, 2000).
There also is evidence that students are highly responsive to college quality diﬀerences among
institutions (Long, 2004; Avery and Hoxby, 2004). Though informative of many of the factors
that inﬂuence college choices, there still is a poor understanding of the causal eﬀect of household
resources on the college quality decisions of students.
1 Dale and Krueger (2002) ﬁnd no return to attending a higher average SAT university overall but show sizeable impacts for
students from lower-income families. All of the studies estimating the returns to education quality are subject to identiﬁcation
concerns (Hoxby, 2009), but the identiﬁcation assumptions across studies vary suﬃciently that the sum total of the evidence points
strongly to a signiﬁcant earnings return to college quality.
2 For evidence on the negative eﬀect of beginning college at a two-year school, see Reynolds (2009), Kurlaender and Long (2009),
and Rouse (1995). Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) also show that even conditional on institutional resources, BA completion
rates are much lower at community colleges and less selective four-year public schools than at elite public and private institutions.
Light and Strayer (2000) show similar negative eﬀects on the likelihood of graduating from attending schools lower in the SAT
score distribution, although they additionally highlight the importance of “match quality” between the quality of the school and
the academic preparation of the student.
3 In contrast to Belley and Lochner (2007), Lovenheim and Reynolds (2011) show less evidence of income gradients in the twoyear, four-year margin in the NLSY97. Much of this diﬀerence can be attributed to the diﬀerent models used and the decision to
include or exclude high school graduates from the analysis.

1

This paper examines how household resources inﬂuence the quality of postsecondary schools
in which students enroll, focusing speciﬁcally on the role of housing wealth because of the central
importance of this form of wealth to the majority of families. For most American families, the
home is the largest single asset, and for many households it is their only substantial asset.
For example, in the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances, 48% of homeowners had less than
$10,000 in non-housing assets. Among homeowners with AGI less than $75,000, the median
non-housing wealth amount was $6,300. Median home equity among these households was
$80,000. In contrast, for households with AGI over $125,000, median non-housing wealth was
$146,600 and median home equity was $293,500. Thus, for the lower and middle class, housing
wealth is an extremely important component of total resources. An additional reason to focus
on housing wealth is that there has been substantial variation in home prices in recent years
that we argue generates exogenous variation in household ﬁnances.
We use a virtually identical source of variation in home prices as Lovenheim (2011) and
Lovenheim and Mumford (forthcoming), which exploits diﬀerences across cities over time in
the size and timing of the housing boom to identify how housing wealth inﬂuences postsecondary choices. Lovenheim (2011) shows that students who came of college age in areas that
experienced recent large home price increases are more likely to go to college, while Lovenheim
and Mumford show that female homeowners who experience home price growth are more likely
to have a child. Although both of these papers exploit the same source of home price variation
as used in this analysis, we make several contributions to the existing literature. First, we focus
on identifying the impact of housing wealth on the quality of schools students attend (i.e., the
intensive margin) rather than on the extensive margin. We estimate the eﬀect of housing wealth
on the likelihood a student attends a ﬂagship public university, a private university or a twoyear college, all relative to the likelihood of enrolling in a non-ﬂagship public university. This
is the ﬁrst paper to explicitly estimate how family resources aﬀect students’ choices between all
of the diﬀerent types of schools available to them, rather than focusing only on the two-year,
four-year margin or on the extensive margin of college enrollment. Second, both Lovenheim
(2011) and Lovenheim and Mumford (forthcoming) use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID). While the PSID has detailed housing wealth data, it does not contain rich information

2

on college enrollment timing or on pre-collegiate academic ability. The current analysis uses
the NLSY97, which allows us to examine how sensitive the results in Lovenheim (2011) are to
the inclusion of student ability measures as well as to the use of another sample. Third, our use
of the NLSY97 allows us to dig more deeply into the ways in which housing wealth inﬂuences
postsecondary choices and student outcomes. We estimate the eﬀect of home price variation
on student application decisions, the delay between high school and college, BA receipt and
student labor supply while enrolled in college. These outcomes provide a more complete picture
of how wealth in general and housing wealth in particular aﬀect students’ paths through the
postsecondary system.
Finally, the majority of previous work examining college choices and family resources estimates conditional income gradients (e.g., Kinsler and Pavan, 2010). Instead, we use quasiexperimental variation in home prices generated by the most recent housing boom to identify
the eﬀect of household wealth on college choice. Our approach allows one to assess the validity of the assumption made in the income gradient literature that income is conditionally
exogenous. Furthermore, how housing wealth variation inﬂuences the intensive margin of college choice is of high policy interest in its own right given the evidence suggesting large labor
market and educational returns to attending diﬀerent types of colleges combined with the large
ﬂuctuations in home prices in the United States over the past decade. The decision of where to
go to college may be at least as important for future labor market outcomes as is the decision
of whether to attend college,4 so identifying how family resources in general and housing wealth
in particular aﬀect college choices on the intensive margin is of central importance.
We quantify the eﬀect of individual-level home price growth that is driven by MSA-level home
price changes on college choice using restricted-use NLSY97 data that provide detailed information on post-secondary institutions attended and the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)
in which the student’s family lived in 1997 as well as AFQT scores and student demographic
characteristics. We estimate multinomial logit models among homeowners of the likelihood of
attending a ﬂagship state university, a private university or a community college, with nonﬂagship public four-year schools as the omitted category, as a function of home price growth in
4 For example, both Hoekstra (2009) and Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg (1999) ﬁnd earnings returns from attending more elite
public universities on the order of 25%. Kane and Rouse (1995) also show substantial earnings penalties of attending a community
college relative to a four-year school.

3

the four years prior to a student turning 18. We also control for a detailed set of student background characteristics that include AFQT scores and state ﬁxed eﬀects. Our empirical strategy
is to compare the college choices of students within states or cities who come of college age in
diﬀerent years and thus who experience housing price increases of varying magnitudes when
they are in high school. The main identifying assumptions are that housing price changes at
the state or MSA level as well as initial home price and homeownership status are conditionally
exogenous. We present detailed evidence that our results are robust to these assumptions.
We ﬁnd that home price variation aﬀects college quality. A $10,000 increase in home prices
in the four years prior to turning 18 increases the relative probability of attending a public
ﬂagship by 0.0019 percentage points, or 2.0 percent, and decreases the probability of attending
a community college by 0.0059 percentage points, or 1.6 percent. We split our sample into
three income groups and ﬁnd that the eﬀect of short-run housing wealth changes on enrollment
decisions is largest for students from lower and middle-class households earning less than $75,000
per year. Similar to Lovenheim (2011), we also ﬁnd that home price changes aﬀect the extensive
margin of college enrollment, and we show these results are robust to including controls for precollegiate academic ability.
The changes in college sector choices we ﬁnd suggest that students are reacting to home price
changes by altering application and enrollment decisions. Using application data, we show that
home price changes lead to increases in the total number of applications and to applications to
both ﬂagship and non-ﬂagship four-year schools. However, conditional on applying, there is no
strong relationship between home price changes and admission, which suggests that the college
sector eﬀects we estimate are coming from changes in student behavior, not from changes in
institutional admissions decisions.
The eﬀect of home price changes on selection across sectors leads to increases in observable
institutional quality and resources for aﬀected students. These eﬀects also are largest for
families with household income below $75,000 per year. Finally, we present evidence that
short-run housing price growth in the time period prior to children being of college age is
positively associated with the likelihood of obtaining a BA for the lowest-income households in
our sample, increasing BA attainment rates by 1.8% for each $10,000 increase in home prices

4

during high school. We also ﬁnd student labor supply is negatively aﬀected by home family
price growth, which together with the school quality eﬀect likely drives the BA result.
The sum total of the evidence presented in this paper indicates that the quality of colleges
students attend is aﬀected by short-run variation in families’ housing wealth. This ﬁnding
has important implications given the collapse of the housing market in many areas and the
severe reduction in home price growth in others. To the extent decisions about where to attend
inﬂuence the likelihood of graduation, which both we and previous literature present evidence
they do, the burst of the housing bubble could have long-run consequences for the national
stock of college-educated labor.

2

Data

2.1

NLSY97 Data

The data we use for this analysis come from the restricted-access National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), which is a nationally-representative survey of children age 12 through
18 in 1997. Respondents are interviewed initially in 1997 and then yearly thereafter until 2008,
which is the most recent follow-up available.
The NLSY97 data contain detailed family background and student demographic information,
including parental education levels, family income in 1997, and home value. For mother’s and
father’s education, we include dummy variables indicating highest level of schooling completed:
no high school diploma, high school diploma (or GED), some college, and BA or more. One
of the major advantages of the NLSY97 is that respondents were given the Armed Forces
Qualifying Test (AFQT) in 1997, which is a comprehensive test of cognitive skills. Together
with controls for parental education and income, these test scores allow us to control for the
ability level of students, which is correlated with college choices and potentially with housing
price growth.
The NLSY97 data include a signiﬁcant amount of item non-response. For example, 10.8%
of the sample do not have a valid father’s education level, approximately 16.6% of the sample
is missing family income information and 23% of respondents do not have valid AFQT scores.
Many previous analyses drop respondents without valid income and AFQT scores (e.g., Belley
5

and Lochner, 2007; Cameron and Taber, 2004; Carneiro and Heckman, 2002). However, if such
information is not missing at random conditional on the observables in the model, dropping
these observations can bias the estimates. Thus, we use the multiple imputation by chained
equation (MICE) method developed by Van Buuren, Boshuizen, and Knook (1999).5 The credibility of multiple imputation with the NLSY97 is enhanced by the large volume of observable
characteristics with which to impute missing values. In addition to all of the covariates used
in our empirical analysis, we use MSA-level means of all covariates, college type attended,
high school GPA, the PIAT math exam scores and household income when students are 17.
Another value of multiple imputation is that no respondents are dropped due to item nonresponse, which yields a larger sample size for our analysis. Estimates that drop those with
missing income and AFQT scores are similar and are available upon request.
We further limit our sample to those who are under 18 in 1997 and who attend college within
two years of high school graduation.6 In the NLSY97, 8.7% of respondents who attend college
do so more than 2 years post-high school graduation. The reason we condition on attending
college within two years of high school graduation is so we can more directly link home price
changes while respondents are in high school to their subsequent college choices. Given the
small number of students who delay attendance beyond two years, this restriction has little
eﬀect on our results and conclusions. Finally, throughout most of this analysis, we restrict
our data to include only the 78.5% of our sample who are homeowners in 1997. We include
this restriction because homeowners and renters are likely to have diﬀerent responses to home
price increases, with renters becoming worse oﬀ when local home prices rise. Our estimates
are virtually identical when we include renters, which is supported by the evidence we present
below that renters do not alter their college choices in response to home price changes.
2.2

Measuring Housing Prices

The main variable of interest in this analysis is the four-year home price change of students’
families prior to the student turning 18. We focus on this variable rather than on home price
5 We use the STATA module “ICE” (Royston, 2004) to implement the MICE procedure. MICE is an iterative imputation method,
whereby missing values of all variables are ﬁrst randomly ﬁlled in using the posterior distribution. Then, a cycle of regressions
is estimated using each variable with missing responses as a dependent variable and replacing the previously missing information
with the predicted values. A cycle of ten was used for each imputation, and the imputation was done ﬁve separate times, with the
reported results representing averages over the results estimated on each imputed data set.
6 Less than half a percent of the sample is 18 in 1997, so this restriction has negligible consequences for our results.

6

levels because the price of a home can bear little relationship to the amount of equity a family
has in a home.7 Since all home price changes are capitalized into equity, and because we lack
direct home equity measures, we examine the four-year change in home prices during the high
school years.
In the NLSY97, housing information only is collected in 1997. We take the self-reported 1997
home prices reported by the parents and calculate predicted home values in each calendar year
using the MSA-level Conventional Mortgage Housing Price Index (CMHPI). The CMHPI is a
home price index created from all mortgages securitized by Fannie-Mae and Freddie-Mac for
repeat-sale, single family homes. It is a widely used home price index in the housing literature
and provides a consistent measure of the MSA-average home price change in each year. Since
migration tends to occur across cities with similar home price growth rates (Sinai and Souleles,
2009), the 1997 MSA-level home price growth is likely to be an accurate measure of the actual
city-level home price growth experienced by each household. The home price of homeowner i
in MSA m in year t is calculated as:
P̂imt = Pim1997 ∗

CM HP Imt
.
CM HP Im1997

(1)

Note that this method does not allow any within-MSA variation in home price growth rates
in a given year. Instead, all growth rate variation is coming from diﬀerential home price
changes across MSAs and within MSAs over time. We calculate the four-year change in home
price for each homeowner in 1997 as P̂imt − P̂imt−4 . Because our home price change measure
requires information about aggregate MSA-level home prices, we additionally limit the sample
to respondents who live in an identiﬁed MSA. Our ﬁnal analysis sample contains 2,801 students.8
7 Both Lovenheim (2011) and Lovenheim and Mumford (forthcoming) ﬁnd little behavioral response to home price levels but
show that families respond to variation in home price changes. This ﬁnding is consistent with the importance of measuring housing
wealth, not simply housing prices.
8 An alternative method of measuring home price changes would be to use the within-MSA percentage change in home prices
only. Measuring home price growth in this way leads to similar results (see Appendix Table A-1), but we favor the measure given
by equation (1) because it relates postsecondary decisions to ﬁnancial gains rather than to percentage gains in home prices. Using
dollar values also is more common in the literature on home prices and education decisions (e.g., Lovenheim, 2011; Dynarski, 2003),
so this measure of housing wealth change allows our estimates to be more directly comparable to those in existing studies.

7

2.3

Institutional-level Data and Student Outcomes

We categorize students into four mutually exclusive sectors of higher education: non-ﬂagship
public four-year schools, ﬂagship public universities, private four-year institutions and community colleges. Each student’s assignment is not a function of her state of residence in 1997, as
we do not distinguish between out-of-state and in-state attendees. However, we also investigate
whether housing wealth changes aﬀect the likelihood of out-of-state college attendance.9 Assignment to institution type is based on the UNITID code of the ﬁrst postsecondary institution
at which a student enrolled after high school. Only college attendees therefore are included
in our main sample. This restriction could bias our estimates, as college enrollment is responsive to housing wealth changes (Lovenheim, 2011). We show evidence below that including
non-attendees has little eﬀect on our estimates, so we exclude non-attenders from our main
analysis in order to have a consistent sample for the multinomial logit analysis and for the
analysis that uses observed college quality measures (for which there is no information among
non-attendees).10
For each initial institution attended by a respondent, we merge in a set of mean institutional
quality characteristics using Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) data
from 1997 through 2003, corresponding to the years in which respondents turn 18 in our sample.
We construct averages over time of all measures within institutions in order to guard against
the possibility that institutional quality responds to home price variation. While there is no
evidence in the data that this is so, we also present estimates using lagged quality measures
that demonstrate any such relationship is not driving our results.
The quality measures we use are 25th and 75th percentile of institutional SAT scores,11
faculty-student ratios, total expenditures per student, instructional expenditures per student,
9 Previous work has demonstrated that there are capacity constraints at ﬂagship institutions – when demand increases, students
ﬂow into less selective universities and community colleges (Bound and Turner, 2007). To the extent that home price increases
generate demand increases, total enrollment at less selective schools should increase by more than at ﬂagship universities. However,
the composition of ﬂagship students may change to favor those with more recent housing wealth growth. Such capacity constraints
should mute somewhat any eﬀect of home price growth on ﬂagship enrollment, because these schools are less likely to increase total
enrollment slots when demand increases. We ﬁnd eﬀects on the ﬂagship margin despite such capacity constraints.
10 In three states, there is not a designated ﬂagship university. In California, the University of California system is considered a
ﬂagship system, but we assign University of California at Berkeley and University of California at Los Angeles as the two ﬂagship
universities in the state. In Texas, there are two ﬂagship universities – University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M – College
Station. Finally, in New York, we assign the statutory colleges of Cornell University as the ﬂagships as well as State University of
New York at Binghamton, the latter because it has the highest average SAT score and graduation rate of all the SUNY schools.
11 For those schools only supplying ACT scores, ACT scores were converted to SAT equivalents using the top-value of the SAT
interval in the concordance tables developed by the ACT.

8

institutional graduation rate, and posted tuition and fees.12 We use multiple measures of collegiate resources and quality because no one variable constitutes an accurate proxy for quality
(Black and Smith, 2006). Table 1 presents means of these measures by our four higher education sectors, which are undergraduate-enrollment weighted averages across all higher education
institutions in the IPEDS surveys. Focusing on the ﬁrst two columns, there is a clear quality diﬀerence between ﬂagship public schools and non-ﬂagship public four-year schools. The
ﬂagship institutions have higher SAT scores, with a 71 point diﬀerence in the 75th percentile.
Faculty-student ratios are 54% higher in the ﬂagship public schools, and both total and instructional expenditures per student are substantially larger as well. These large resource and
quality diﬀerences across schools, even within the public four-year sector, are consistent with
the high returns to attending a ﬂagship public university found in previous studies (Hoekstra,
2009; Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999) and reinforce the importance of understanding how
students select across diﬀerent types of institutions.
Critically, the ﬂagship public institutions also are more expensive to attend, with an in-state
tuition diﬀerence of $1,210 per year and an out-of-state tuition diﬀerence of $4,104 per year.
Although this calculation omits ﬁnancial aid, these means suggest students must pay more to
access the higher quality and resources available at the state’s ﬂagship university.
There also are substantive diﬀerences across public and private schools as well as between
two- and four-year schools that are evident in Table 1. Due to sample size limitations, we do
not split the private sector by selectivity. For the direct resource measures, the four-year private
schools on average are very similar to the public schools. However, they are signiﬁcantly more
expensive. The two-year sector is characterized by much lower resources per student but also
by a lower cost of attendance than the four-year sector. Focusing on the public sector, moving
from a community college to a non-ﬂagship institution to a ﬂagship university, which describes
the relevant choice set for most students, entails signiﬁcant increases in per-student resources
and institutional quality while raising attendance costs through higher tuition.
12 Henceforth,

“tuition” refers to tuition and fees.

9

2.4

Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive statistics of the analysis variables for the full analysis sample and by income group
are presented in Table 2. Low income are households with family income under $75,000, middle
income are households with total real income between $75,000 and $125,000 and high income
households are those with real income above $125,000.13 Although the low-income group extends high up into the income distribution, it outlines the group of middle-class students whose
families likely qualify for little aid and thus for whom diﬀerences in college costs probably are
the most relevant.
The mean four-year home price change among homeowners in the sample is $53,310, with
a standard deviation larger than the mean. These tabulations underscore the large variation
in home prices that occurred over this time period. While these increases were largest for
the highest income households, both lower and middle income homeowners experienced large
relative home price increases of about $33,890 and $49,890, respectively.
Table 2 also shows the distribution of attendance patterns across the four sectors of higher
education we examine. Within the four-year sector, public non-ﬂagship schools enroll the
largest proportion of students, followed by the private sector and then the ﬂagship publics. For
example, while 33.0% of attendees enroll in a non-ﬂagship public school, only 9.4% enroll in a
ﬂagship. The largest single sector is comprised of community colleges, at 37.8%. Enrollment
trends across the income distribution largely conform to expectations, with community college
enrollment declining with family income and ﬂagship enrollment rising. For the lowest income
sample, ﬂagship enrollment is 4.7%, while for the highest income sample it is 18.7%, a fourfold
increase across groups. The income diﬀerences in college selection patterns lead to signiﬁcant
disparities in institutional quality and resource measures, which also are shown in Table 2.
Some of these diﬀerences likely are due to the positive correlations among family income,
AFQT scores, parental education and admission to higher-quality schools, but they are at least
suggestive of a role for family resources in aﬀecting where students enroll in college.
13 All

ﬁnancial variables in this analysis are inﬂated to real $2007 using the CPI-U.

10

3

Empirical Methodology

A straightforward human capital model predicts that students will enroll in the school that
maximizes their net rate of return. With perfect access to credit, changes in family resources
should not aﬀect this decision – students are able to borrow at their internal rate of return to the
investment. However, because one cannot collateralize human capital, it may not be possible
to borrow at one’s rate of return, which creates the possibility for a binding credit constraint
to aﬀect college choice. Changes to parental resources through changes in home values thus
could impact the types of schools students choose to attend. If there is consumption value to
schooling, and in particular to college quality, then home price changes also can inﬂuence college
enrollment through an income eﬀect, regardless of whether there are liquidity constraints. The
goal of this analysis is to identify the causal eﬀect of short-run home price changes on students’
college enrollment decisions. This is an important policy parameter independent of whether it
is driven by liquidity constraints or an income eﬀect, especially given recent large ﬂuctuations
in the housing market.
The time period of our analysis, which uses home price variation over the period 1993
(four years prior to the 17-year-old cohort turning 18) to 2003 (when the 12-year-old cohort
turns 18), is particularly appropriate to identify the eﬀect of housing wealth on the college
choices of students because it coincides with a large increase in home prices in many areas.
Between 1993 and 2003, the CMHPI increased by 121% nationally and did so unevenly across
cities. Furthermore, housing wealth also became much more liquid over this time period. This
increased liquidity has been well documented by researchers and in the popular press; towards
the turn of the millennium, it became much easier for families to extract the wealth from their
homes using cash out reﬁnances, home equity loans, and home equity lines of credit. Home
equity extractions as a percent of per-capita income rose from 2.16 in 1990 to 11.67 in 2004,
an increase of over 439 percent (Greenspan and Kennedy, 2005). Thus, if enrollment decisions
are sensitive to housing wealth ﬂuctuations, it should be most apparent in the time period we
are studying.
In order to test whether home price changes in the four years prior to a child becoming of
college age aﬀects her decision of where to enroll, we estimate multinomial logit models of the

11

following form:
∗
h
P (jimsc
= jimsc ) = β0 + β1 ∆Pimc
+ γXi + αZsc + δWmc + θs + ψc + ϵimsc ,

(2)

where i indexes family, m indexes MSA, s indexes state and c indexes cohort. The cohort of each
respondent is deﬁned by age in 1997. The variable ∆Pih is the four-year real home price change
in the time period prior to the respondent turning 18. The vector X is comprised of the set of
individual and family background characteristics listed in Table 2, W is a vector of MSA-bycohort macroeconomic variables, and Z is a vector of state higher education provision measures
that are presented in Table 2 as well. Equation (2) also contains state ﬁxed eﬀects (θ) and cohort
ﬁxed eﬀects (ψ). Note that because cohorts are deﬁned as of 1997, one can interpret the cohort
ﬁxed eﬀects as year ﬁxed eﬀects that describe national economic and higher education conditions
when respondents ﬁrst become eligible for college enrollment. The state ﬁxed eﬀects control for
the fact that student selection into diﬀerent types of postsecondary schools is systematically
diﬀerent across states in a way that may be correlated with short-run home price changes.
Ideally, we would control for MSA ﬁxed eﬀects, but with only 2,801 observations, we were not
able to achieve convergence in the multinomial logit model with these ﬁxed eﬀects. We show
below using direct resource and quality measures that using state instead of MSA ﬁxed eﬀects
reduces the estimated eﬀect of housing price changes.14 This ﬁnding suggests that using state
ﬁxed eﬀects rather than MSA ﬁxed eﬀects actually understates the true relationship between
home price changes and college quality selection.
Equation (2) is estimated using the four school type categories discussed in Section 2.3.
For all estimates, the non-ﬂagship public sector is the omitted category. The parameter of
interest in this analysis is the marginal eﬀect of a $10,000 change in home values over the four
years before a child turns 18 on the likelihood she enrolls in a given type of university. This
marginal eﬀect is a function of the β1 estimate for each outcome.15 In order to claim that β1
identiﬁes a causal relationship between housing wealth changes and college choice, the housing
14 The use of MSA ﬁxed eﬀects and MSA-level home price indices requires that the NLSY97 is representative within each MSA.
While this is a diﬃcult assumption to test, the primary sampling unit used by the BLS for the survey is the MSA. This sampling
frame is suggestive that the data are representative of the population in each, once sampling weights have been applied.
15 The formula for the marginal eﬀect of a change in variable x on the probability of a given outcome being chosen (i.e.,
k
∑J
β
),
where
P
is
the
predicted
probability
of outcome j occurring. So, the sign of the marginal
p(j ∗ = j|X)) is Pj (βjk − J1
j
jk
j=1
eﬀect is a function not only of the parameter value for that speciﬁc option but also of the average of all parameter values for that
variable.

12

price changes at the MSA level must be conditionally uncorrelated with unobserved factors that
aﬀect college choice.
Arguing that home price changes at the MSA-level are exogenous is complicated by the fact
that there still is little understanding of why home prices increased dramatically in some areas
at speciﬁc times. Housing price dynamics are a function of supply and demand forces, most of
which are unobserved in this study.16 We argue that the main source of home price variation
is coming from average price growth diﬀerences within MSAs over time, which combined with
the structure of our data and the extensive set of student-level background controls creates
plausibly exogenous housing wealth variation to the household.
Home price variation in our model comes from three sources: 1) 1997 home price levels, 2)
cross-sectional diﬀerences across cities within states in average home prices and 3) changes in
average 4-year home price growth within cities over time. Of these three sources, the third
is the most promising because it is based solely on diﬀerences over time within cities in the
size of average home price changes. For example, between 1993 and 2003 home prices in New
York City increased by 90% but only increased by 20% in Rochester and by 19% in Syracuse.
Furthermore, the timing of steep home price increases varied across cities. Miami home prices
increased by 14% between 1993 and 1996, by 17% between 1996 and 2000 and by 45% between
2000 and 2003. In San Francisco, however, home prices remained ﬂat between 1993 and 1996,
rose by 67% between 1996 and 2000 and increased by 23% between 2000 and 2003. Figure
1 shows the extent of such variation in our data. The ﬁgure presents percentage home price
changes by MSA from 1994-1998 (the pre-housing boom period) versus from 1999-2003 (the
housing boom period in our data). The 45 degree line also is shown – points above the line
have higher home price growth in the later period than in the earlier period, and vice versa.
Figure 1 demonstrates that there is a large amount of cross-sectional and within-city over time
variation in home price growth rates. While the majority of cities experienced large home price
growth in the 1999-2003 period, the magnitude of this growth is quite varied and is unrelated
to growth in the earlier period. Furthermore, there is a non-trivial number of MSAs that had
16 As of yet, there is no consensus in the literature regarding why the housing boom varied across cities and over time. Gyourko,
Mayer and Sinai (2006) and Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005) suggest that local supply constraints are an important cause of
these diﬀerences. To the extent that these housing supply constraints are responsible for the temporal and geographic variation in
the housing boom, it indicates home price changes are exogenous because such MSA-level constraints are unlikely to be directly
related to individual collegiate selection.

13

higher home price growth in the 1990s than in the early 2000s (such as San Francisco). It is
these diﬀerential rates of home price changes within MSAs over time as well as across MSAs in
each year that our identiﬁcation strategy seeks to exploit.
Using only within-city variation in home price changes over time, β1 would be identiﬁed
solely oﬀ of the fact that in our data diﬀerent age cohorts within each city come of college age
at diﬀerent times and thus are exposed to diﬀerent home price changes. Controlling for the
city in which one lives and the timing of coming of college age, any endogenous selection must
be based on families with higher unobserved preferences for or access to higher quality schools
sorting into MSAs pre-1997 that will have the highest housing price growth when their children
are in high school. Recall that because we are able to control for strong measures of student
academic ability, such as AFQT scores and parental education, any such selection would have
to be residual to these controls.
The variation due to the ﬁrst two sources of home price variation could be more problematic.
In particular, 1997 home price levels could be proxying for an unobserved component of ability
or for permanent income. However, in Section 4.5 and in Appendix Table A-1, we present
evidence that neither source of variation appears to be driving the results.
The structure of the data also allows us to guard against the main threats to identiﬁcation
from potential endogeneity of home price changes. First, because each respondent’s location
is ﬁxed as of 1997, no endogenous moving occurs in our sample. Combined with the location
ﬁxed eﬀects, this restriction allows us to control for any ﬁxed diﬀerences across households
in college choice and home price changes that are a function of household location. Second,
because homeownership status is ﬁxed throughout our sample, families cannot endogenously
switch in and out of home ownership based on local market forces that may be related to college
choice. However, it is possible that ﬁxed homeownership status is endogenous. Home ownership
rates for our sample are very high, at 79%. The proportion of the sample potentially aﬀected
by endogenous home ownership thus is small. Furthermore, for homeowner endogeneity to be
driving our results it would have to be the case that families with higher unobserved likelihood
of attending a higher quality school are more likely to own a home in 1997 in the MSAs in
which home prices will rise more when their kids are in high school.

14

The richness of our data combined with the source of housing price variation makes it
unlikely that our results are plagued by selection of students with higher unobserved ability
into areas that have higher home price growth when they are in high school. However, any
factor aﬀecting both home price growth and expected returns to diﬀerent college types could
bias our estimates. For example, high-skilled labor demand shocks could both increase home
prices and increase the returns to college quality. The existence of such shocks is unlikely
since there was a negative relationship between MSA-level home price changes and real income
per capita during the housing boom (Mian and Suﬁ, 2010). However, in order to address this
potential source of bias, we control for real income per capita and the unemployment rate at the
MSA-by-cohort level. We also control for the state-by-cohort mean of average college graduate
wages relative to both high school wages and associate’s degree wages, calculated from CPS
Outgoing Rotation Group data.17 These wage ratios control for the possibility of high-skilled
labor demand shocks that likely impact individuals’ college enrollment decisions and could be
correlated with home price growth. We only control for these shocks at the state-level, which
is problematic if the relevant variation is within-state. However, high-skilled labor demand is
not highly localized within states (Bound, Groen, Kezdi and Turner, 2004). Insofar as local
demand shock aﬀects all students in the state roughly equally, within-state changes will not
bias our estimates. Finally, we control for the number of schools of each type within each MSA
because the presence of universities may drive housing price growth, and students who live
closer to universities are more likely to attend college (Card, 1995).
Because higher education sector is an incomplete measure of college quality, we also estimate
OLS models that examine the relationship between housing wealth and the direct resource and
school quality measures students experience at their ﬁrst postsecondary school:
h
+ γXi + αZsc + δWmc + θm + ψc + ϵimsc ,
Yimsc = β0 + β1 ∆Pimc

(3)

where θm are MSA ﬁxed eﬀects and all other variables are as previously deﬁned. This model
17 We construct the ratio of hourly wages of 25-55 year olds with a bachelor’s degree (BA) to the hourly wages of 25-55 year olds
with an associate’s degree (AA) in the state. We construct a similar wage ratio for those with a BA compared to those whose
highest level of educational attainment is a high school diploma. We also control for real need-based aid per student provided by
the state, calculated from National Association of State Student Aid Providers (NASSGAP) surveys. All state and MSA variables
are measured as of when each respondent is 18 years old. These variables all vary at the state or MSA by cohort level, where each
cohort is deﬁned by respondent age in 1997.

15

identiﬁes β1 using only within MSA-level variation in home price growth rates over time, leveraging the fact that diﬀerent age cohorts in 1997 experienced diﬀerent short-run home price
changes before they turn 18 due to the diﬀerential timing and strength of the housing boom
across cities. This model is identiﬁed by comparing college choices within cities among students
who were diﬀerent ages in 1997 and thus who experienced diﬀerent home price variation when
they were 14 through 18 years old. The identifying assumptions underlying identiﬁcation of
β1 in equation (3) are similar to those in equation (2), but we have removed the variation
across MSAs within states. Now, any selection on unobservables would have to be occurring
by families with children of diﬀerent ages who have unobserved characteristics that make them
more likely to go to a higher quality university selecting into MSAs prior to 1997 that will have
higher home price growth rates during the child’s high school years. While it is not possible to
test for such selection with our data, given the richness of the characteristics we observe about
students we believe such selection is unlikely.

4

Results

4.1

Multinomial Logit Estimates

Marginal eﬀects at the mean of all variables from multinomial logit estimates of equation (2) are
shown in Table 3. All marginal eﬀects are relative to non-ﬂagship public four-year institutions,
and all standard errors are clustered at the MSA-level to reﬂect the within-MSA correlation of
home price changes. The estimates shown in Table 3 are from one regression.
The table shows a strong relationship between home price changes in the four years before
a respondent turns 18 and her decision to attend a more prestigious college or university. A
$10,000 increase in home prices increases the likelihood that a student attends a public ﬂagship
university by 0.0019 percentage points and reduces the likelihood a student attends a community
college by 0.0059 percentage points, although the latter coeﬃcient is only statistically signiﬁcant
at the 10% level. Relative to the baseline enrollment rates in Table 2, these estimates translate
into enrollment increases of 2.0% (=
(=

−0.0059
0.378

0.0019
0.094

∗ 100) in ﬂagship public and decreases of 1.6%

∗ 100) in community colleges from each $10,000 increase in home prices.

Given the substantial variation in home prices over the past decade, these marginal eﬀects
16

imply large changes in college selection. The average homeowner in our sample experienced a
four-year home price increase of $53,310, which leads to a 10.7% increase in the probability of
attending a state ﬂagship university and a decrease in the likelihood of attending a community
college of 8.5%. These average eﬀects mask a signiﬁcant change across cohorts: the average
four-year home price increase was $72,621 for the sample of 12-year-olds in 1997. For this
cohort, home price changes increased attendance at ﬂagship universities by 14.5% and decreased
community college attendance by 11.6%. The marginal eﬀects for housing price growth in Table
3 therefore lead to sizeable shifts in the types and quality of schools students attend within the
public sector, which has important implications given the recent large declines in home prices
in many areas of the country.
We ﬁnd no eﬀect of home price changes on selection into private universities. This result
most likely is due to the fact that private universities are more likely to “tax” home equity
for the purposes of ﬁnancial aid and that they are considerably more expensive than public
universities.18 Most students need to access additional aid to ﬁnance private university attendance, even when their parent’s home gains in value. Table 3 thus indicates that housing wealth
changes aﬀect sorting within the public sectors of higher education, not across the public and
private sectors. This ﬁnding reinforces the importance of examining how family resources aﬀect
college selection within the public sector, which previous work largely has ignored.
In our characterization of school sectors, we did not distinguish between in-state and outof-state enrollment. Some students may decide to attend a public or private university outside
their home state, which could increase institutional quality and/or match quality but would
entail higher attendance costs. Using a dummy variable for out-of-state attendance as the
dependent variable in equation (2), we estimate that a $10,000 increase in home prices while in
high school increases the likelihood of leaving one’s home state for college by 0.0035 percentage
points, or 2.0%. This result provides further evidence that housing wealth increases lead to the
purchase of more expensive higher education.
The average eﬀects in Table 3 may mask heterogeneity across the income distribution in the
response of college choice to family resources, particularly if credit constraints play a role in
18 In 1992, the federal government exempted home equity from federal ﬁnancial aid calculations. See Dynarski (2003) for more
details on this change. Institutions still can include family housing wealth as a part of institutional support, and although systematic
data on which institutions engage in this practice are unavailable, conversations with ﬁnancial aid oﬃcers at various universities
suggest private universities are more likely to account for home equity when calculating institutional aid.

17

driving these results. A potential problem with examining heterogeneity by household income
is that the MSA average home price changes we use may not equal the home price changes
experienced by diﬀerent income groups within MSA. However, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we found little evidence that households with diﬀerent income levels
experienced diﬀerent home price growth rates within MSAs.19
To examine diﬀerences in the eﬀect of home prices by family income, we estimate a modiﬁed
version of equation (2) in which we interact home price changes with income group indicators:
less than $75,000 (low income), $75,000 to $125,000 (middle income) and greater than $125,000
(high income). Table 4 shows these estimates, which come from one multinomial logit regression.
The results indicate that most of the estimated eﬀect of home price changes in Table 3 is coming
from lower-income households. The probability a student attends a public ﬂagship increases by
0.0039 percentage points, or 8.3%, for every $10,000 four-year home price increase for families
with income under $75,000. Families earning between $75,000 and $125,000 also are more likely
to send their child to a ﬂagship university, although the marginal eﬀect is smaller at 0.0032
percentage points, or 3.9%. We ﬁnd a small and statistically insigniﬁcant eﬀect of home price
growth on ﬂagship attendance among families with incomes over $125,000, and the low and high
income estimates are statistically distinguishable from each other at approximately the 3% level.
It is only among lower-income families that community college attendance is inﬂuenced by home
price changes. The estimated marginal eﬀect is large, however, suggesting a $10,000 increase in
four-year home price growth leads to a 0.0180 percentage point, or 3.8%, decline in community
college enrollment. This estimate is statistically distinguishable from the other two income
groups at the 1% level. Even for the private sector, the marginal eﬀect is consistent with a
positive impact of home prices on private school enrollment, but it is imprecisely estimated.
Multiplying these marginal eﬀects by the average four-year home price change for the lowerincome sample of $33,890 (see Table 2) yields an average relative increase in the likelihood of
ﬂagship enrollment of 28.1% and an average relative decrease in the likelihood of community
college enrollment of 12.9%. Among twelve-year-olds in 1997, the average home price increase
19 In particular, we used the 2001, 2003 and 2005 samples and focused on households with children age 18 or 19. We regressed
the four-year percentage home price change on income group dummies and MSA ﬁxed eﬀects, using the same income groups as
in the analysis below. The coeﬃcient on the middle-income dummy variable is -0.051(0.049) and is -0.071(0.055) for the highestincome dummy. Thus, the lower-income groups experienced slightly larger percentage changes in home prices within MSA, but the
diﬀerences are small and are not statistically diﬀerent from zero.

18

was $44,622, which leads to a 37.0% increase in ﬂagship enrollment and a 17.0% decrease in
community college enrollment relative to non-ﬂagship public enrollment. Table 4 demonstrates
that the housing boom caused signiﬁcant changes among lower and middle income families in
the sectors in which their children enrolled in college.
4.2

Extensive Margin Estimates

Using the PSID, Lovenheim (2011) shows that the type of housing wealth variation we use in
this analysis aﬀects the extensive margin of college enrollment. In particular, he ﬁnds a $10,000
increase in housing wealth increases the likelihood of college enrollment by 0.0071 percentage
points. In Table 5, we conduct a similar analysis using the NLSY97 data. In order to explore the
importance of controlling for student academic ability, which is not available in the PSID, we
estimate the model both with and without AFQT scores. In column (i), we ﬁnd each $10,000 in
housing wealth leads to a 0.0092 percentage point increase in college enrollment. This estimate
is very similar to Lovenheim (2011).20 In the next column, we control for AFQT scores and
the estimate drops to 0.0072. This result is suggestive of a small upward bias from excluding
pre-collegiate ability measures, but the bias is small and column (ii) still points to a positive
and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of home price changes on college enrollment.
In columns (iii) and (iv), we allow the estimates to vary by household income. Similar to
Table 4, we ﬁnd the lower-income sample to be most responsive to home price changes. A
$10,000 increase in home prices is associated with a 0.015 percentage point higher likelihood
of attending college, which is statistically diﬀerent from the highest income group estimate at
the 1% level in both columns. The estimates change little when AFQT scores are included.
However, these results are smaller than in Lovenheim (2011), who ﬁnds a marginal eﬀect of
0.0567 for each $10,000 change in home equity. These diﬀerences could be due to diﬀerences in
when income is measured with respect to when students turn 18, diﬀerences in the timing of the
sample, diﬀerences in the samples themselves, or diﬀerences in how housing wealth is measured.
Despite the fact that the estimates are somewhat smaller for the lower income sample in Table
5, they still point to a rather large and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of home price changes on
20 Note that Lovenheim (2011) estimates instrumental variables models in which four-year home equity changes are used to
instrument for contemporaneous home equity. We cannot use this method with the NLSY97 data because we do not have information
on home equity changes. He also includes renters in his baseline model.

19

college enrollment that is robust to controlling for AFQT scores. This ﬁnding suggests that
while the primary determinant of college attendance may well be student ability (see Carneiro
and Heckman (2002) for a discussion), conditional upon that ability there still is a role for short
run changes in household resources to aﬀect college attendance.
4.3

Eﬀects on Applications and Admissions

That housing wealth impacts whether and where students attend college is suggestive that it
may impact application behavior. In Table 6, we examine the eﬀects of housing wealth on
applications and admissions in order to shed light on some of the mechanisms by which housing
wealth inﬂuences college choices.21 In Panel A, we estimate poisson regressions of the number
of applications at four-year institutions by sector, where the control variables are the same as
those in equation (2) in addition to MSA ﬁxed eﬀects.22 Each column is a separate regression,
and we ﬁnd that each $10,000 increase in home prices leads to a 1% increase in applications.
The eﬀects are larger for non-ﬂagship and ﬂagship applications, at 2.7 and 3.3% respectively.
Consistent with our ﬁndings above, home price changes are uncorrelated with private school
applications. The ﬁnal column in Table 6 shows logit estimates of the eﬀect of home price
changes on the likelihood of applying to a two-year school. Even though two-year attendance
falls with home price increases, the likelihood of applying to one does not. Thus, students
whose families experience home price increases while in high school submit more applications
overall and submit more in particular to public four-year schools, including ﬂagships.
In Panel B, we show the relationship between admissions and home price changes. These
estimates include the change in applications shown in Panel A, and they are very similar to those
estimates. This similarity suggests the admissions eﬀect is being driven by the applications,
not by the relative likelihood of being admitted conditional on applying. Panel C shows these
conditional likelihoods, and while the estimates for ﬂagships and non-ﬂagships are positive,
they are much smaller than the estimates in Panel A. This is particularly true for the ﬂagship
21 We examine the number of applications in order to see whether the choice set of students expands when parental resources
increase. Such an expansion would come about if students believe that they will be better able to aﬀord enrollment at a higher
quality school, which induces them to apply.
22 Applications only are available for the sample of respondents who were 12-14 years old. We cannot exclude renters from the
application regressions because the sample size is too small to achieve convergence. We include renters, assigning them zeros for
home price growth, and include a dummy variable for home ownership status. Given that all of our previous estimates are robust
to including renters in this manner, including renters is unlikely to impact these estimates.

20

estimates, which indicate that family resource changes while in high school aﬀect applications to
more elite public institutions that students are qualiﬁed to attend. An actual or perceived lack
of resources appears to dissuade at least some students from applying to, and thus attending,
ﬂagship state universities. We argue below in Section 4.5 that this result is not being driven
by changes in investments during high school or in high school quality. Rather, the evidence
points to family resources when students are in high school directly aﬀecting application and
attendance decisions of students in a manner that aﬀects higher education quality.
4.4

Direct Resource and Quality Eﬀects

Because college sector is an imperfect proxy for college resources and because students may be
changing their selection behavior within our four sectors when home prices change, we examine
the eﬀect of housing price changes on direct quality and resource measures in Table 7. In the
table, each cell for the full sample results comes from a separate regression of equation (3), and
for the results by income, each row comes from a separate regression.
The estimates suggest that students attend higher quality and resource institutions when
their parents’ home value increases over the previous four years. For example, a $10,000 increase
in four-year home prices increases the 75th percentile SAT scores of the attending university by
0.80 points, the student-faculty ratio by 0.0003, expenditures per student by $289.92, instructional expenditures per student by $63.56, and the six-year BA graduation rate of the university
by 0.001. Although many of these marginal eﬀects are modest, each of these measures is at
best a partial proxy for the underlying quality of the institution. Furthermore, when multiplied
by the average changes in home prices shown in Table 2, these marginal eﬀects translate into
sizeable institutional quality changes experienced by students, which are driven by changing
enrollment decisions. Table 7 also shows that home price changes have at most a small eﬀect on
posted tuition.23 Given that most students are likely to receive federal, state and institutional
aid, however, posted tuition may be a poor measure of the amount actually paid by families.
The remaining columns in Table 7 present estimates that vary by income group. As with
the multinomial logit results, the eﬀects are largest for the lowest income group. All estimates
23 We deﬁne tuition as posted in-state tuition if a student attends in the state in which she lived in 1997 and as out-of-state
tuition if the student attends in a diﬀerent state.

21

except for tuition are positive and are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5 or
10% level. Although students from both lower and middle income families attend institutions
with higher SAT scores and with higher graduation rates when home prices increase, there
is no signiﬁcant eﬀect among families with income over $125,000 per year. The multinomial
logit estimates are suggestive that at least some of these results are being driven by the higher
likelihood of both lower and middle income families to send their children to ﬂagship public
schools that have higher resources when they experience housing price increases.
4.5

Robustness Checks

Interpreting the estimates in Tables 3-7 as causal relies on several assumptions about the
exogeneity of home price changes that were discussed in Section 3. In this section, we show
a series of robustness checks in order to assess the sensitivity of our results to many of these
assumptions. In column (i) of Table 8, we show estimates from equations (2) and (3) using
only renters.24 We assign each renter the 4-year percentage change in the CMHPI for his MSA.
These regressions are informative because they check whether unobserved factors at the MSA
level, such as high-skilled labor demand, are aﬀecting both home prices and college selection for
all residents. Furthermore, these estimates show whether it is appropriate to restrict our main
analysis to home owners. Table 8 presents evidence that renters do not alter their school choices
in response to MSA-level home price changes. In neither panel is any estimate statistically
diﬀerent from zero at conventional levels, and the estimates are universally small in magnitude.
The estimates for renters suggest that our results are not being driven by home price changes
inﬂuencing K-12 education quality, as such quality changes would be experienced by both renters
and home owners. In order to explore this issue further, we examine whether four-year home
price changes while in high school impact the likelihood of attending a private school, the size
of one’s high school, teacher-student ratios, high school GPA, the number of AP tests taken and
hours worked while in high school. We also investigated the impact of housing price changes
on the likelihood of high school completion in the full sample. In no case is there a statistically
or economically signiﬁcant relationship between home price changes and these variables, which
suggests our estimates are not being driven by diﬀerential investment in human capital while
24 Descriptive

statistics by home owner status in 1997 are presented in Appendix Table A-2.

22

in high school. All results are available upon request.
In column (ii) of Table 8, we control for 1997 home prices. These estimates distinguish
between the eﬀects of owning an expensive home and the eﬀect of being exposed to home price
changes based on one’s location and age. The results in both columns are qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to those in Tables 3 and 7. Overall, the estimates indicate that MSA-level
home price changes are the main driver of our results, which supports many of our identiﬁcation
assumptions because this source is the most likely to be exogenous.25
Throughout much of this analysis, we have excluded non-attenders from the sample in order
to make the multinomial logit and the school resource samples the same. However, as shown in
Table 5 and in Lovenheim (2011), the extensive margin also is aﬀected by home price changes.
In column (iii), Panel A of Table 8, we include non-attendance as its own category in our
multinomial logit model. The marginal eﬀects are very similar to those in Table 3, which
suggests the exclusion of this group is not driving our results and conclusions.
Furthermore, our categorization of college sectors may be problematic because some nonﬂagship state universities are of higher quality than some ﬂagship universities in other states.
In order to assess the sensitivity of our estimates to the way in which we categorize schools,
column (iv) of Table 8 shows estimates that use the top 50 public universities according to the
2005 U.S. News and World Report ranking instead of the state ﬂagship. While the result for
top-50 attendance is less precisely estimated, primarily because we are identifying this eﬀect
oﬀ of fewer states and MSAs due to school location diﬀerences, the estimates are qualitatively
and quantitatively the same as our baseline estimates.
One important distinction between the multinomial logit and direct resource estimates is
that the latter include MSA ﬁxed eﬀects and the former include state ﬁxed eﬀects. Estimating equation (3) using state ﬁxed eﬀects provides a check on the use of state ﬁxed eﬀects in
equation (2); if the estimates are much larger, it will suggest our multinomial logit results are
overstated. In column (iii) of Panel B, we show such estimates, and the results are inconsistent with the existence of across-MSA selection within states biasing upward our multinomial
logit eﬀects. The results are extemely similar to, if mostly smaller in absolute value than, the
25 We also have controlled for four-year home price growth when students are between 21 and 24, and we ﬁnd that this home
price growth measure has no eﬀect on college choice when four-year home price growth during high school also is included in the
regression.

23

estimates in Table 7, with the notable exception of tuition. While this is not a perfect test for
MSA-level selection in our multinomial logit models, the strong correlation between sector and
our resources/quality measures (see Table 1) makes it unlikely that state ﬁxed eﬀects would
understate direct quality eﬀects while overstating cross-sector selection.
Our direct resource measures are averages over 1997-2003. Despite the use of such averages,
if housing price increases cause an increase in these measures, it could cause a mechanical
relationship between quality/resources and home price changes that is not reﬂective of changes
in student enrollment decisions.26 In column (iv) of Panel B, we use average quality measures
from 1992-1994. Note that SAT and graduation rate data were not collected in these years.
However, for the data that overlap, the estimates are very similar to those from Table 7. This
similarity is unsurprising given the high correlation between the lagged and contemporaneous
measures (between 0.8 and 0.97 depending on the variable).
Tables A-3 and A-4 of the Appendix present additional robustness checks. In Table A-3, we
show there there is at most a weak relationship between housing price changes and institutional
resources. Table A-4 presents evidence that state-level home prices growth did not lead to
increases in ﬁnancial aid. These results, together with with the estimates from Table 8, suggest
we induce little bias by using contemporaneous college quality measures.
4.6

College Outcomes

The results thus far indicate that students who experience increases in their parents’ home price
in the four years prior to turning 18 attend higher resource and higher quality postsecondary
institutions. Do these collegiate resource changes, combined with the increased access to family
ﬁnancial resources brought about by home price increases, aﬀect students’ postsecondary outcomes? In Table 9, we present estimates of the eﬀect of home price changes in the four years
prior to a child turning 18 on three college outcomes: time between college and high school, BA
completion and weekly hours worked during college. These estimates present new evidence on
the eﬀect of family resources on collegiate outcomes, using wealth variation generated by the
housing boom rather than conditional income gradients. Note that because we only observe
26 From a budgeting perspective, this story is unlikely because property taxes are not used to fund four-year schools and only are
used to fund two-year schools in certain states.

24

BA receipt as of 2008, our estimates may reﬂect both “on time” graduation as well as whether
students eventually obtain a four-year degree.27 We show estimates for the full sample in Panel
A and by income groups in Panel B that include state ﬁxed eﬀects in the odd columns and
MSA ﬁxed eﬀects in the even columns.
The estimates in the ﬁrst two columns show little evidence that housing price increases
aﬀect the length of time between high school and college for either the full sample or across
income groups. In Panel B, a $10,000 home price increase among the lowest income families
increases the likelihood of obtaining a BA by between 0.004 and 0.006 percentage points. Table
2 shows the baseline graduation rate for the lower-income sample is 31.2%, which implies that
the probability of graduating increases by 1.8% for every $10,000 increase in home prices, using
the estimates with MSA ﬁxed eﬀects. Multiplying by the average change in home prices among
these households leads to a change in BA receipt of 6.2%. This represents a large change in
the BA completion rate of lower-income families over this time period, and we ﬁnd no eﬀect of
housing wealth on BA completion rates for middle and high income families. Importantly, these
estimates are suggestive of potential reductions in the BA attainment rate among lower-income
families due to the housing market bust that began in 2006.
As student labor supply has grown markedly in recent years (Scott-Clayton, forthcoming;
Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, forthcoming; Babcock and Marks, 2011) and has been linked
to reduced academic success (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2003; Kalenkoski and Pabilonia,
2010), we next examine the eﬀect of home price changes on student working behavior. As
shown in the ﬁnal two columns of Table 9, while there is little evidence of an overall eﬀect, for
low income students, a $10,000 home price increase while a student is in high school reduces
average weekly hours worked by between -0.21 and -0.31 hours. The median lower-income
student works 15.9 hours per week in the sample, so these marginal eﬀects are modest relative
to the baseline. However, they do indicate that increased family resources cause a reduction in
student labor supply for lower-income students, which together with the school quality eﬀects
documented above, lead to higher BA attainment rates for this group.
27 When we restrict the sample to students who are over 13 in 1997, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar, which
suggests we are not simply identifying an “on-time” graduation eﬀect.

25

5

Conclusion

With growing evidence of the high labor market and educational attainment returns to college
quality, determining how students make college choices and, in particular, whether low family
resources deter students from attending higher quality institutions is of preeminent importance.
This paper uses quasi-experimental evidence from the housing boom to examine whether families that experienced increases in their home’s value in the time period prior to their children
becoming of college-age due to the fact that they live in a high home price growth city make
systematically diﬀerent decisions about where to send their children to college. Employing
restricted-use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), we ﬁnd
a $10,000 increase in a family’s housing wealth in the four years prior to a student becoming of college-age increases the likelihood he attends a ﬂagship public university relative to a
non-ﬂagship public university by 2.0% and decreases the relative probability of attending a
community college by 1.6%. There is no eﬀect of home price growth on selection into private
universities, however. By splitting our sample into diﬀerent income groups, we show these effects are driven by relatively low-income families. Similar to Lovenheim (2011), we also show
that housing prices aﬀect the extensive margin of college enrollment and present evidence that
housing wealth impacts the number and quality of the schools to which students apply. Finally,
we demonstrate a link between housing price growth and direct resource/quality measures and
show that lower-income students living in homes that appreciate in value while they are in high
school are more likely to graduate from college.
These results have particular importance for current policy as housing prices have fallen
about 35% in the United States since their peak in 2006. These declines have been even
more dramatic in certain metro areas in which the housing bubble was most severe. Our
estimates are suggestive that these home price declines will have an eﬀect on the quality and
sector of postsecondary schools students attend and that the attendance decisions of lowerincome students will be most aﬀected. To the extent that these changes in attendance decisions
translate into declines in graduation and labor market outcomes, the housing bust may have
long-run eﬀects on the supply of high-skilled labor and on income inequality. Future research
examining policies that may insulate lower-income families from housing price volatility in the

26

college attendance decision is warranted.

27

References
[1] Andrews, Rodney, Jing Li and Michael Lovenheim, 2011. “Quantile Treatment Eﬀects of College Quality on Earnings:
Evidence from Administrative Data in Texas.” Mimeo.
[2] Avery, Christopher and Caroline M. Hoxby, 2004. “Do and Should Financial Aid Packages Aﬀect Students’ College
Choices?” In Caroline M. Hoxby (Ed.) College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to
Pay for It. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[3] Babcock, Phillip S. and Mindy Marks, 2011. “The Falling Time Cost of College: Evidence from Half a Century of
Time Use Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2).
[4] Belley, Philippe and Lance Lochner, 2007. “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in Determining Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital 1(1): 37–89.
[5] Black, Dan A. and Jeﬀrey A. Smith, 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Eﬀects of College Quality? Evidence
from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 99–124.
[6] Black, Dan A. and Jeﬀrey A. Smith, 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality with Multiple Proxies for
Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 701–728.
[7] Bound, John, Jeﬀrey Groen, G. Gábor Kézdi and Sarah Turner, 2004. “Trade in University Training: Cross-state
Variation in the Production and Stock of College-educated Labor.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 143-173.
[8] Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah Turner, 2010. “Why Have College Completion Rates Declined?
An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 2(3): 1-31.
[9] Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah Turner, Forthcoming. “Increasing Time to Baccalaureate Degree in
the United States.” Education Finance and Policy.
[10] Bound, John, and Sarah Turner, 2007. “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Aﬀect Collegiate Attainment.” Journal
of Public Economics 91: 877–899.
[11] Bowen, William, Martin Kurzweil, and Eugene Tobin, 2005. Equity and Excellence in American Higher Education.
Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2005.
[12] Brewer, Dominik, Eric Eide and Ronald Ehrenberg, 1999. “Does it Pay to Attend an Elite Private College? CrossCohort Evidence on the Eﬀects of College Type on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 104-123.
[13] Card, David, 1995. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to Schooling,” in
Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, ed. by Louis N. Christoﬁdes, E.
Kenneth Grant, and Robert Swidinsky. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 201-222.
[14] Cameron, Stephen V. and Christopher Taber, 2004. “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using Returns to Schooling” Journal of Political Economy 112(1): 132–182.
[15] Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman, 2002. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-Secondary Schooling.”
The Economic Journal 112(482): 705–734.
[16] Dale, Stacey Berg and Alan B. Krueger, 2002. “Estimating the Payoﬀ to Attending A More Selective College: An
Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.
[17] Dynarski, Susan, 2003. “Loans, Liquidity and Schooling Decisions.” Mimeo.
[18] Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks, 2005. “Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up?” NBER
Working Paper No. 11129.
[19] Greenspan, Alan and James Kennedy, 2005. “Estimates of Home Mortgage Originations, Repayments and Debt on
One-to-Four Family-Residences.” Federal Reserve Board Working Paper, Finance and Economics Discussion Series.
[20] Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai, 2006. “Superstar Cities.” Mimeo.
[21] Hoekstra, Mark, 2009. “The Eﬀect of Attending the State Flagship University on Earnings: A Discontinuity-Based
Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 717–724.
[22] Hoxby, Caroline M., 2009. “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
23(4): 95–118.
[23] Kalenkoski, Charlene Marie and Sabrina Wulﬀ Pabilonia, 2010. “Parental Transfers, Student Achievement, and the
Labor Supply of College Students.” Journal of Population Economics 23(2): 469-496.
[24] Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse, 1995. “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year Colleges.” American
Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.
[25] Kinsler, Joshua and Ronni Pavan, 2010. “Family Income and Higher Education Choices: The Importance of Accounting for College Quality.” Journal of Human Capital 5(4): 453-477.

28

[26] Kurleander, Michal and Bridget Terry Long, 2009. “Do Community Colleges Provide a Viable Pathway to a Baccalaureate Degree?” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(1): 30-53.
[27] Light, Audrey and Wayne Strayer, 2000. “Determinants of College Completion: School Quality or Student Ability?”
Journal of Human Resources 35(2): 299–332.
[28] Long, Bridget Terry, 2004. “How Have College Decisions Changed Over Time? An Application of the Conditional
Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 271-296.
[29] Lovenheim, Michael F., 2011. “The Eﬀect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment.” Journal of Labor
Economics 29(4): 741–771.
[30] Lovenheim, Michael F. and Kevin Mumford, Forthcoming. “Do Family Wealth Shocks Aﬀect Fertility Choices?
Evidence from the Housing Market Boom and Bust.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
[31] Lovenheim, Michael F. and C. Lockwood Reynolds, 2011. “Changes in Postsecondary Choices by Ability and Income:
Evidence from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth.” Journal of Human Capital. forthcoming.
[32] Mian, Atif and Amir Suﬁ. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage
Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 1449-1496.
[33] Pallais, Amanda and Sarah E. Turner, 2006. “Opportunities for Low Income Students at Top Colleges and Universities: Policy Initiatives and the Distribution of Students.” National Tax Journal 59(2): 357-386.
[34] Pallais, Amanda and Sarah E. Turner, 2007. “Access to Elites” in Economic Inequality and Higher Education,
Access, Persistence, and Success, Dickert-Conlin, Stacey and Ross Rubenstein (Eds.): 128-156. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
[35] Reynolds, C. Lockwood, Forthcoming. “Where to Attend? Estimating the Eﬀects of Beginning College at a Two-year
Institution.” Economics of Education Review.
[36] Rouse, Cecilia E., 1995. “Democratization or Diversion? The Eﬀect of Community Colleges on Educational Attainment.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13(2): 217-224.
[37] Royston, Patrick. 2004. “Multiple Imputation of Missing Values.” Stata Journal 4(3): 227-241.
[38] Scott-Clayton, Judith, Forthcoming. “What Explains Increasing Labor Supply Among U.S. Undergraduates, 19702003?” National Tax Journal.
[39] Sinai, Todd and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2009. “Can Owning a Home Hedge the Risk of Moving?” Mimeo.
[40] Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd R. Stinebrickner, 2003. “Working During School and Academic Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics 21(2): 473-491.
[41] Van Buuren, Stef, Hendriek C. Boshuizen, and Dick L. Knook. 1999. “Multiple Imputation of Missing Blood Pressure
Covariates in Survival Analysis.” Statistics in Medicine 18(6): 681-694.

29

−.2

Percentage Home Price Change: 1999 to 2003
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

Figure 1: MSA-Level Home Price Index Changes, 1994-1998 vs. 1999-2003

−.2

0
.2
.4
.6
Percentage Home Price Change: 1994 to 1998

.8

Source: MSA-level CMHPI percent diﬀerences as described in the text. The 45 degree line also is shown. The 4-year changes
in the ﬁgure correspond to the home price growth experienced by the 17-year old and the 12-year old cohorts in the NLSY97.
Each point represents a separate MSA in the data.

Table 1: Means of College Resource and Quality Measures by Higher
Education Sector

25th Percentile Math SAT
75th Percentile Math SAT
Faculty-Student Ratio
Expenditures Per Student
Instructional Expenditures Per Student
Graduation Rate
In-state Tuition
Out-of-state Tuition

Non-ﬂagship
Public
455.31
569.52
0.041
18337
5649
0.461
4536
12072

1

Flagship
Public
525.14
640.72
0.063
41350
10188
0.674
5746
16176

Private
Four-year
494.66
607.52
0.045
25482
8434
0.560
18161
18170

Two
Year

0.020
7698
2796
2805
6017

Source: 1997-2003 IPEDS data as described in the text. All monetary ﬁgures are in
real $2007 and are weighted by total undergraduate enrollment. All per-student means
are per total enrollment. Graduation rates are for BA degrees within six years of initial
enrollment.
2 SAT scores and graduation rates are reported for a small percentage of two-year schools.
Because of the open-admission mandate of community colleges and the fact that many
students do not intend to obtain a BA, we do not report means for SAT scores and
graduation rates for this sector.

30

Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations of Analysis Variables Among Homeowners
Variable
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
Real Family Income ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Father HS Dropout
Father HS Diploma
Father Some College
Father BA+
Mother HS Dropout
Mother HS Diploma
Mother Some College
Mother BA+
Female
White
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
Age 12
Age 13
Age 14
Age 15
Age 16
Age 17
Non-Flagship Public
Flagship Public
Private 4-Year
Community College
Unemployment Rate
Real Per Capita Income ($1,000)
2-Year Schools Per 18-24 Year Old
4-Year Schools Per 18-24 Year Old
Real Need-based Aid Per Student
BA-AA Wage Ratio
BA-HS Wage Ratio
25th Percentile Math SAT
75th Percentile Math SAT
Faculty-Student Ratio
Expenditures Per Student
Instructional Expend. Per Student
Graduation Rate
In-state Tuition
Out-of-state Tuition
Time Between HS and College
BA
Observations

Full Sample
Mean
S.D.
5.331
6.034
10.110
6.958
63.86
25.43
0.085
0.279
0.314
0.464
0.227
0.419
0.374
0.484
0.069
0.253
0.307
0.462
0.450
0.282
0.342
0.474
0.526
0.499
0.441
0.736
0.097
0.296
0.099
0.299
0.068
0.251
0.135
0.342
0.193
0.395
0.200
0.400
0.194
0.396
0.202
0.401
0.076
0.264
0.330
0.471
0.094
0.291
0.198
0.399
0.378
0.485
4.354
1.495
5.90
32.05
0.018
0.038
0.071
0.043
0.438
0.463
1.407
0.087
1.845
0.127
484.56
67.67
595.99
63.61
0.024
0.038
16217
18453
5925
5341
0.564
0.177
7085
7501
6858
11791
0.187
0.403
0.416
0.493
2801

1

Low Income
Mean
S.D.
3.389
3.922
5.023
2.114
57.57
26.46
0.148
0.355
0.415
0.493
0.222
0.416
0.216
0.411
0.122
0.327
0.400
0.490
0.269
0.444
0.209
0.406
0.544
0.498
0.640
0.480
0.151
0.358
0.145
0.352
0.064
0.245
0.151
0.358
0.189
0.391
0.183
0.387
0.196
0.397
0.201
0.401
0.078
0.269
0.303
0.460
0.047
0.212
0.173
0.378
0.477
0.500
4.432
1.532
31.88
5.99
0.040
0.020
0.068
0.040
0.436
0.431
1.407
0.089
1.836
0.128
463.07
64.84
575.63
63.80
0.033
0.020
12337
12775
4884
3875
0.509
0.174
5899
6422
10106
6101
0.238
0.458
0.312
0.463
1242

Middle Income
Mean
S.D.
4.989
4.895
9.706
1.357
65.12
24.19
0.058
0.233
0.316
0.465
0.274
0.446
0.352
0.478
0.043
0.203
0.299
0.458
0.330
0.470
0.328
0.470
0.511
0.500
0.773
0.419
0.077
0.267
0.084
0.278
0.066
0.248
0.126
0.332
0.206
0.404
0.215
0.411
0.187
0.390
0.192
0.394
0.074
0.262
0.363
0.481
0.082
0.274
0.188
0.391
0.368
0.482
4.370
1.510
31.88
5.85
0.037
0.017
0.073
0.042
0.493
0.459
1.410
0.084
1.848
0.121
479.57
59.89
591.78
55.10
0.037
0.022
14685
15212
5484
4156
0.552
0.165
6974
7053
11691
6378
0.188
0.406
0.418
0.493
967

High Income
Mean
S.D.
8.891
8.315
19.034
7.001
72.27
22.65
0.023
0.150
0.147
0.354
0.165
0.371
0.666
0.472
0.020
0.138
0.167
0.373
0.232
0.422
0.582
0.493
0.522
0.500
0.838
0.369
0.039
0.194
0.047
0.212
0.076
0.265
0.124
0.329
0.179
0.384
0.206
0.404
0.203
0.402
0.215
0.411
0.073
0.260
0.327
0.469
0.187
0.390
0.254
0.436
0.232
0.422
4.203
1.397
32.57
5.79
0.038
0.017
0.074
0.048
0.463
0.416
1.404
0.089
1.854
0.133
513.43
69.34
622.75
63.82
0.047
0.029
24015
26103
8253
7711
0.639
0.166
9194
9155
14698
7709
0.101
0.263
0.584
0.493
592

All estimates include sample weights and are for the sample who attend college within two years of high school
graduation and whose parents own a home in 1997.
2 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income families are those with total
income between $75,000 and $125,000, and high-income families are those with total income over $125,000.

31

Table 3: Marginal Eﬀects from Multinomial Logit Estimates of
the Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on the Likelihood
of Attending a Given Type of College Relative to a
Non-ﬂagship Public School
Independent Variable
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
Real Family Income ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Father HS Diploma
Father Some College
Father BA+
Mother HS Diploma
Mother Some College
Mother BA+
Female
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
MSA Unemployment Rate
MSA Real Per Capita Income
Public 2 Year Schools Per 18-24 Yr. Old
Public 4 Year Schools Per 18-24 Yr. Old
Real State Aid Per 18-24 Yr. Old
BA/AA Wage Ratio
BA/HS Wage Ratio
# of Flagships in MSA
# of Community Colleges in MSA
# of Public 4 Years in MSA
# of Private 4 Years in MSA
1

2
3

Flagship
Public
0.0019∗∗
(0.0009)
0.0021∗∗
(0.0006)
0.0016∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.0006
(0.0159)
-0.0122
(0.0196)
0.0159
(0.0160)
0.0033
(0.0186)
0.0148
(0.0185)
0.0209
(0.0187)
0.0073
(0.0059)
0.0010
(0.0146)
-0.0161
(0.0161)
0.0358∗∗
(0.0137)
0.0043
(0.0034)
0.0007
(0.0007)
1.2260
(0.9551)
0.1970
(0.1270)
-0.0485
(0.0631)
0.0046
(0.0663)
0.0814
(0.0766)
0.0110
(0.0144)
-0.0009
(0.0009)
-0.0013
(0.0043)
0.0014∗∗
(0.0006)

4 Year
Private
-0.0007
(0.0018)
0.0024
(0.0015)
0.0024∗∗
(0.0004)
0.0021
(0.0345)
0.0347
(0.0385)
0.1225∗∗
(0.0378)
-0.0963∗
(0.0506)
-0.0739
(0.0467)
-0.0634
(0.0484)
0.0332∗∗
(0.0168)
0.0479∗∗
(0.0241)
-0.0175
(0.0312)
- 0.0616∗
(0.0343)
-0.0300∗∗
(0.0122)
-0.0018
(0.0021)
0.4393
(3.1572)
0.5100∗∗
(0.2312)
0.0980
(0.1425)
-0.0200
(0.1701)
-0.0197
(0.2116)
-0.0456
(0.0278)
0.0040∗∗
(0.0016)
-0.0219∗∗
(0.0090)
0.0006
(0.0012)

Community
College
-0.0059∗
(0.0031)
-0.0074∗∗
(0.0023)
-0.0080∗∗
(0.0004)
0.0073
(0.0412)
-0.0474
(0.0466)
-0.1115∗∗
(0.0466)
0.0372
(0.0412)
0.0220
(0.0421)
-0.0730∗
(0.0431)
-0.0425∗
(0.0260)
-0.2542∗∗
(0.0358)
-0.0458
(0.0373)
-0.0774
(0.0610)
-0.0053
(0.0106)
-0.0038
(0.0026)
-2.4975
(4.0443)
-0.3641
(0.5339)
-0.0263
(0.2619)
-0.2796
(0.2412)
0.0665
(0.2778)
0.0762∗
(0.0429)
0.0035∗
(0.0020)
0.0031
(0.0109)
-0.0061∗∗
(0.0016)

All estimates include state ﬁxed eﬀects and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects and are weighed
by sampling weights. All results in the table come from one multinomial logit model
and include homeowners only.
Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students
turning 18 predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price index.
Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance
at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

32

Table 4: Marginal Eﬀects from Multinomial Logit Estimates
of the Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on the Likelihood of Attending a Given Type of College Relative
to a Non-ﬂagship Public School, by Family Income
Independent Variable
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(Low Income)
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(Middle Income)
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(High Income)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income ($10,000)
I(Middle Income)
I(High Income)
P-value(Low Income=Middle Income)
P-value(Low Income=High Income)
1

Flagship
Public
0.0039∗∗
(0.0010)
0.0032∗∗
(0.0011)
0.0012
(0.0009)

4 Year
Private
0.0013
(0.0033)
-0.0017
(0.0032)
-0.0015
(0.0023)

Community
College
-0.0180∗∗
(0.0062)
-0.0027
(0.0044)
0.0006
(0.0029)

0.0016∗∗
(0.0002)
0.0006
(0.0009)
0.0295
(0.0343)
0.0558∗∗
(0.0166)

0.0024∗∗
(0.0004)
0.0034
(0.0022)
0.0124
(0.0584)
0.2707∗∗
(0.0926)

-0.0080∗∗
(0.0004)
-0.0045
(0.0036)
0.0749
(0.0899)
0.3229∗∗
(0.1616)

0.567
0.031

0.415
0.460

0.009
0.003

All estimates include state and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for
mother’s and father’s education, gender, race, MSA-level unemployment and
real income per capita, state-level public and private institutions per college
age population, per-student state need-based aid, the ratio of BA to associates
degree wages, the ratio of BA to high school wages and the number of each type
of college in each MSA. All estimates also are weighted by NLSY97 sampling
weights and include only homeowners. All results in the table come from one
multinomial logit estimation.
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior
to students turning 18 predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price
index.
3 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income
families are those with total income between $75,000 and $125,000, and highincome families are those with total income over $125,000.
4 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates
signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

33

Table 5: Marginal Eﬀects from Logit Estimates of the Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on the Likelihood of Attending Any College
Independent Variable
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(Low Income)
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(Middle Income)
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)*
I(High Income)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income ($10,000)
I(Middle Income)
I(High Income)
P-value(Low Income=Middle Income)
P-value(Low Income=High Income)

No AFQT
(i)
0.0092∗∗
(0.0030)
.
.
.
.
.
.

AFQT
(ii)
0.0072∗∗
(0.0031)
.
.
.
.
.
.

No AFQT
(iii)
.
.
0.0153∗∗
(0.0058)
0.0085∗∗
(0.0035)
0.0012
(0.0047)

AFQT
(iv)
.
.
0.0104∗∗
(0.0053)
0.0069∗∗
(0.0033)
0.0011
(0.0049)

.
.
0.0071∗∗
(0.0017)
.
.
.
.

0.0053∗∗
(0.0003)
0.0052∗∗
(0.0015)
.
.
.
.

.
.
0.0047
(0.0035)
0.1143∗∗
(0.0564)
-0.0161
(0.0994)

0.0049∗∗
(0.0004)
0.0026
(0.0029)
0.0842
(0.0574)
0.0668
(0.0738)

.
.

1

.
.

0.209
0.006

0.458
0.012

All estimates include MSA and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for mother’s
and father’s education, gender, race, MSA-level unemployment and real income per capita,
state-level public and private institutions per college age population, per-student state needbased aid, the ratio of BA to associates degree wages, the ratio of BA to high school wages
and the number of each type of college in each MSA. All estimates also are weighted by
NLSY97 sampling weights and include only homeowners. Each row in the table comes from
a separate logit model.
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students
turning 18 predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price index.
3 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income families
are those with total income between $75,000 and $125,000, and high-income families are
those with total income over $125,000.
4 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at
the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

34

Table 6: The Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on Application Decisions and
Admission Probabilities

4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income ($10,000)

4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income ($10,000)

4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income ($10,000)

Panel A: Number of Applications
4 Year
Total
Flagship Non-Flagship
Private
0.010∗∗
0.033∗∗
0.027∗
-0.002
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.011)
0.006∗∗
0.013∗∗
0.010∗∗
0.015∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.001)
-0.0001
-0.001
-0.007
0.001
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.009)
Panel B: Number of Admissions
4 Year
Total
Flagship Non-Flagship
Private
0.012∗∗
0.037∗∗
0.027
-0.008
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.016)
(0.014)
0.007∗∗
0.013∗∗
0.012∗∗
0.017∗∗
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
-0.003
-0.005
-0.009
0.0003
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.004)
Panel C: Number of Admissions, Conditional
on Applying
4 Year
Flagship Non-Flagship
Private
Total
0.012∗∗
0.009
0.018∗
-0.015
(0.005)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.017)
0.007∗∗
0.002
-0.00003
0.005∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
-0.003
-0.005
-0.006
0.009
(0.102)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)

1

Apply To
2 Year?
0.004
(0.016)
-0.032∗∗
(0.002)
-0.025∗∗
(0.012)

All estimates include MSA and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for mother’s and father’s
education, gender, race, home ownership status in 1997, MSA-level unemployment and real income
per capita, state-level public and private institutions per college age population, per-student state
need-based aid, the ratio of BA to associates degree wages, the ratio of BA to high school wages
and the number of each type of college in each MSA. All estimates also are weighted by NLSY97
sampling weights. Each column in each panel comes from a separate regression. Estimates in the
ﬁrst four columns come from poisson models, while estimates in the ﬁfth column of Panel A come are
coeﬃcient estimates from a logit model.
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students turning 18
predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price index.
3 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5%
level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

35

Table 7: OLS Estimates of the Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on College
Resources

Dependent Variable
25th Percentile Math SAT
75th Percentile Math SAT
Faculty-Student Ratio
Expenditures Per Student
Instructional Expenditures Per Student
Graduation Rate
Tuition

Independent Variable:
Home Price Change ($10,000)
Full
Low
Middle
High
Sample
Income
Income
Income
0.796∗
1.299∗∗
1.297∗∗
0.549
(0.417)
(0.577)
(0.588)
(0.464)
0.573∗
0.902∗
0.814∗
0.426
(0.311)
(0.542)
(0.503)
(0.467)
0.0003∗∗
0.0004∗∗
0.0002
0.0002
(0.0001)
(0.0002)
(0.0002)
(0.0002)
289.915∗∗
427.974∗∗
173.842
273.834
(217.118)
(181.085)
(128.781)
(149.890)
63.597∗∗
118.608∗∗
35.170
55.832
(22.875)
(40.821)
(28.171)
(39.610)
0.0014∗
0.0016∗∗
0.0022∗
0.0011
(0.0008)
(0.0007)
(0.0012)
(0.0011)
23.932
25.853
-4.023
27.664
(60.811)
(43.622)
(56.573)
(50.441)

1

All estimates include MSA and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for AFQT score,
parental income, mother’s and father’s education, gender, race, MSA-level unemployment and
income per capita, state-level public and private institutions per college age population, perstudent state need-based aid, the ratio of BA to high school wages and the number of each type
of college in each MSA. All estimates also are weighted by NLSY97 sampling weights and include
homeowners only. Each cell in the ﬁrst column comes from a separate regression, while each row
in the subsequent columns represents a separate regression.
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students turning 18
predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price index.
3 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income families are those
with total income between $75,000 and $125,000, and high-income families are those with total
income over $125,000.
4 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5%
level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

36

Table 8: Robustness Checks
Panel A: Multinomial Logit Estimates
Controlling
for 1997
Renters
Home
Only
Price
School Type
(i)
(ii)
2.52e−9
0.0023∗∗
Flagship/Top 50 Public
(0.0011)
(3.90e−9 )
0.0002
-0.0014
4 Year Private
(0.0002)
(0.0028)
-0.0025
-0.0069∗∗
Community College
(0.0021)
(0.0028)
No College Attendance
Panel B: School Resource Estimates
Controlling
for 1997
Renters
Home
Only
Price
Dependent Variable
(i)
(ii)
0.476
0.778∗∗
th
25 Percentile Math SAT
(0.448)
(0.363)
0.796
0.676∗∗
75th Percentile Math SAT
(0.482)
(0.320)
0.0003
0.0003∗∗
Faculty-Student Ratio
(0.0002)
(0.0001)
235.958∗∗
63.487
Expenditures Per Student
(80.308)
(53.404)
14.059
53.992∗∗
Instructional Expenditures Per Student
(15.257)
(17.731)
0.0007
0.0011
Graduation Rate
(0.0013)
(0.0009)
-14.369
80.922∗∗
Tuition
(30.553)
(30.565)
1

Including
Non
Attenders
(iii)
0.0014∗∗
(0.0005)
0.0012
(0.0016)
-0.0060∗
(0.0035)
-0.0095∗∗
(0.0033)

State
Fixed
Eﬀects
(iii)
0.729∗∗
(0.338)
0.523∗
(0.316)
0.0003∗∗
(0.0001)
295.864∗∗
(98.210)
63.598∗∗
(22.875)
0.0005
(0.0015)
78.436∗∗
(36.818)

Using
Top
50
Public
(iv)
0.0024∗
(0.0014)
0.0001
(0.0018)
-0.0054∗
(0.0030)

1992-1994
Average
Quality
Measures
(iv)

0.0002∗
(0.0001)
224.699∗∗
(74.304)
82.371∗∗
(25.503)

16.379
(35.371)

All estimates in Panel A include state ﬁxed eﬀects and all estimates in Panel B except those in
column (iii) contain MSA ﬁxed eﬀects. All estimates include age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as
controls for all covariates used throughout the analysis and are weighed by sampling weights.
Estimates in columns (ii)-(iv) include only homeowners
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students turning
18 predicted by the conventional mortgage housing price index. In column (i), the main
independent variable is the four-year percent change in home prices at the MSA-level, and the
sample is restricted to renters in 1997.
3 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the
5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

37

Table 9: The Eﬀect of Housing Wealth on Collegiate Outcomes and Student Labor
Supply
Panel A: Average Eﬀects
Time Between
HS and College
BA
0.0027
0.0008
0.0036
0.0008
4 Year Home Price Change ($10,000)
(0.0034)
(0.0032)
(0.0022)
(0.0035)
-0.0085∗∗
-0.0062∗∗
0.0076∗∗
0.0070∗∗
Real Family Income
(0.0021)
(0.0022)
(0.0020)
(0.0021)
-0.0038∗∗
-0.0041∗∗
0.0053∗∗
0.0057∗∗
AFQT Score
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
MSA Fixed Eﬀects?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Panel B: Eﬀects by Family Income
Time Between
HS and College
BA
4 Year Home Price Change*
-0.0034
-0.0022
0.0039∗∗
0.0057∗∗
I(Low Income)
(0.0026)
(0.0028)
(0.0019)
(0.0022)
4 Year Home Price Change*
0.0027
0.0033
0.0017
0.0044∗∗
I(Middle Income)
(0.0033)
(0.0028)
(0.0019)
(0.0022)
4 Year Home Price Change*
-0.0035∗∗
-0.0016
-0.0015
0.0005
I(High Income)
(0.0012)
(0.0018)
(0.0014)
(0.0021)
AFQT Score
Real Family Income
I(Middle Income)
I(High Income)
P-value(Low Income=Middle Income)
P-value(Low Income=High Income)
MSA Fixed Eﬀects?

-0.0016∗∗
(0.0004)
-0.0011
(0.0014)
-0.0188
(0.0554)
-0.0106
(0.1767)
0.063
0.979
No

-0.0014∗∗
(0.0004)
-0.0007
(0.0015)
0.0384∗
(0.0537)
0.0170
(0.1734)
0.068
0.846
Yes

1

0.0044∗∗
(0.0002)
0.0038∗∗
(0.0016)
0.0576
(0.0470)
-0.0320
(0.0859)
0.288
0.006
No

0.0046∗∗
(0.0002)
0.0030∗
(0.0018)
0.0707
(0.0617)
0.0550
(0.0935)
0.593
0.030
Yes

Weekly Hours
Worked
-0.0690
-0.0549
(0.0803)
(0.1140)
-0.1535∗∗
-0.1746∗∗
(0.0450)
(0.0504)
-0.0792∗∗
-0.0751∗∗
(0.0132)
(0.0143)
No
Yes
Weekly Hours
Worked
-0.3059∗∗
-0.2081∗∗
(0.0929)
(0.1023)
-0.0158
-0.0329
(0.1009)
(0.1226)
-0.0251
-0.0164
(0.1007)
(0.1407)
-0.0789∗∗
(0.0132)
-0.1033
(0.0674)
0.6088
(2.1485)
-2.1475
(4.4655)
0.009
0.006
No

-0.0748∗∗
(0.0142)
-0.1495∗∗
(0.0723)
2.4569
(2.3290)
-1.3234
(4.5007)
0.120
0.090
Yes

All estimates include state and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for mother’s and father’s education,
parental income, gender, race, MSA-level unemployment and income per capita, state-level public and private
institutions per college age population, per-student state need-based aid, the ratio of BA to associates degree
wages and the ratio of BA to high school wages. All estimates include only homeowners and are weighted by
NLSY97 sampling weights. The time between college and high school and the weekly hours worked estimates are
from OLS models, while the BA completion estimates are marginal eﬀects from logit models calculated at the mean
of all variables.
2 Housing price changes are real housing price changes over the 4 years prior to students turning 18 predicted by the
conventional mortgage housing price index.
3 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income families are those with total income
between $75,000 and $125,000, and high-income families are those with total income over $125,000.
4 Weekly hours worked is calculated by dividing total yearly hours worked in the ﬁrst year of college enrollment by
52, including respondents who work zero hours in the year.
5 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and *
indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

38

Table A-1: Marginal Eﬀects from Multinomial Logit Estimates of the Eﬀect of Housing Price Changes on
the Likelihood of Attending a Given Type of College Relative to a Non-ﬂagship Public School, using
Four-Year Percentage Change in MSA-level Home
Prices Calculated from the CMHPI
Panel A: Average Eﬀects Among Homeowners
Flagship
4 Year
Independent Variable
Public
Private
0.0013∗∗
0.0006
4 Year Percentage Home Price Change
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
Panel B: Eﬀects by Income Group Among
Flagship
Independent Variable
Public
4 Year Percentage Home Price Change*
0.0016∗∗
I(Low Income)
(0.0006)
4 Year Percentage Home Price Change*
0.0011∗∗
I(Middle Income)
(0.0004)
4 Year Percentage Home Price Change*
0.0001
I(High Income)
(0.0004)
1

Community
College
-0.0012∗
(0.0007)

Homeowners
4 Year
Community
Private
College
0.0024∗∗
-0.0039∗∗
(0.0011)
(0.0017)
0.0002
-0.0004
(0.0011)
(0.0013)
-0.0006
0.0006
(0.0010)
(0.0015)

All estimates include state and age in 1997 ﬁxed eﬀects as well as controls for
mother’s and father’s education, gender, race, MSA-level unemployment and
real income per capita, state-level public and private institutions per college age
population, per-student state need-based aid, the ratio of BA to associates degree
wages, the ratio of BA to high school wages and the number of each type of college
in each MSA. All estimates also are weighted by NLSY97 sampling weights and
include only homeowners. All results in the table come from one multinomial
logit estimation.
2 Housing price changes are the percentage change in the CMHPI within each MSA
over the four years prior to the student turning 18.
3 Low-income families are those with total income under $75,000, medium income
families are those with total income between $75,000 and $125,000, and highincome families are those with total income over $125,000.
4 Standard errors clustered at the MSA-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

39

Table A-2: Means and Standard Deviations of Analysis
Variables
Homeowners
S.D.
Mean
26.422
14.766
10.110
6.958
63.86
25.43
0.085
0.279
0.314
0.464
0.227
0.419
0.374
0.484
0.253
0.069
0.462
0.307
0.282
0.450
0.474
0.342
0.499
0.526
0.736
0.441
0.097
0.296
0.099
0.299
0.068
0.251
0.135
0.342
0.193
0.395
0.200
0.400
0.194
0.396
0.202
0.401
0.076
0.264
0.330
0.471
0.094
0.291
0.399
0.198
0.378
0.485
4.354
1.495
5.90
32.05
0.018
0.038
0.071
0.043
0.463
0.438
1.407
0.087
0.127
1.845
67.67
484.56
595.99
63.61
0.038
0.024
16217
18453
5341
5925
0.564
0.177
7501
7085
11791
6858
0.187
0.403
0.416
0.493
2801

Variable
4 Year CMHPI Change (%)
Real Family Income ($10,000)
AFQT Score
Father HS Dropout
Father HS Diploma
Father Some College
Father BA+
Mother HS Dropout
Mother HS Diploma
Mother Some College
Mother BA+
Female
White
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
Age 12
Age 13
Age 14
Age 15
Age 16
Age 17
Non-Flagship Public
Flagship Public
Private 4-Year
Community College
Unemployment Rate
Real Per Capita Income ($1,000)
2-Year Schools Per 18-24 Year Old
4-Year Schools Per 18-24 Year Old
Real Need-based Aid Per Student
BA-AA Wage Ratio
BA-HS Wage Ratio
25th Percentile Math SAT
75th Percentile Math SAT
Faculty-Student Ratio
Expenditures Per Student
Instructional Expend. Per Student
Graduation Rate
In-state Tuition
Out-of-state Tuition
Time Between HS and College
BA
Observations

Renters
Mean
S.D.
28.216 15.780
4.752
4.534
51.69
26.86
0.231
0.422
0.408
0.491
0.165
0.371
0.196
0.397
0.218
0.413
0.320
0.466
0.289
0.454
0.173
0.378
0.567
0.496
0.454
0.498
0.258
0.438
0.211
0.408
0.077
0.266
0.136
0.343
0.198
0.398
0.205
0.404
0.204
0.403
0.206
0.404
0.050
0.219
0.258
0.438
0.041
0.199
0.131
0.337
0.570
0.495
4.603
1.595
31.46
5.32
0.037
0.016
0.066
0.037
0.453
0.457
1.406
0.090
1.859
0.138
464.80
65.17
577.94
64.65
0.030
0.020
11662
13977
4429
3666
0.502
0.171
5327
6074
9420
5828
0.311
0.509
0.234
0.403
908

All estimates include sample weights and are for the sample who attend
college within two years of high school graduation and whose parents own
a home in 1997. The 4-year CMHPI change is the percent change in the
MSA home price index over the four years prior to the respondent turning
18.

40

Table A-3: Eﬀect of Statewide Housing Price Changes on College Resources Across Institutions Types
Independent
Total
Sector
Expend.
Flagship
0.122**
(0.061)
Other public four-year 0.032
(0.097)
Two-year
0.115
(0.130)

Variable: Ln(Home Price Index)
Inst.
Faculty/ Faculty/
Expend. Total
First-year
0.106
-0.008
-0.006
(0.088)
(0.109)
(0.132)
0.144
-0.066
-0.234**
(0.094)
(0.090)
(0.109)
0.187*
0.169**
-0.113
(0.095)
(0.057)
(0.131)

Faculty
-0.015
(0.119)
0.024
(0.132)
0.127*
(0.071)

In-state
Tuition
-0.167*
(0.091)
-0.117
(0.115)
0.128
(0.172)

1

All dependent variables are logged. All estimates include state unemployment rates, real
state per capita income, institution ﬁxed eﬀects and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Each cell in the table
represents a separate regression.
2 All monetary variables are in 2007 dollars.
3 Standard errors clustered at the state-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at
the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

Table A-4: Eﬀect of Log Statewide Housing Price Index on Financial
Aid Oﬀerings by Institution Types
Federal
State
Institutional Loans
Any
Aid
Grants
Grants
Grants
Dependent variable: natural log of proportion of entering cohort receiving aid
Flagship
-0.085
-0.226
-1.198** -0.210
-0.251**
(0.080)
(0.212)
(0.539)
(0.189)
(0.118)
Other public four-year -0.143** -0.285** 0.164
-0.281
-0.511**
(0.057)
(0.084)
(0.187)
(0.196)
(0.135)
Two-year
0.047
-0.098
-0.126
0.294**
-0.302**
(0.075)
(0.092)
(0.183)
(0.124)
(0.090)
Dependent variable: natural log of real average aid given
0.037
-0.366
-0.210
(0.144)
(0.245)
(0.189)
Other public four-year
-0.265*
-0.281
-0.007
(0.054)
(0.164)
(0.196)
Two-year
-0.082** 0.155
0.294**
(0.037)
(0.218)
(0.124)
Flagship

1

2
3

0.048
(0.168)
-0.216**
(0.108)
-0.133**
(0.039)

Each cell represents a separate regression, and all dependent variables are logged. All
estimates include state unemployment rates, real state per capita income, institution ﬁxed
eﬀects and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
All monetary variables are in 2007 dollars.
Standard errors clustered at the state-level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at
the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

41

