                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   A MARKOV-SWITCHING MULTI-FRACTAL INTER-TRADE DURATION MODEL,
                 WITH APPLICATION TO U.S. EQUITIES

                                           Fei Chen
                                       Francis X. Diebold
                                       Frank Schorfheide

                                       Working Paper 18078
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18078


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. For outstanding research assistance we thank Matthew Klein.
For financial support we thank the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Wharton Financial
Institutions Center. For helpful comments we thank Emily Fox, Aureo de Paula and Kevin Song,
and seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania. All errors are ours alone.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Fei Chen, Francis X. Diebold, and Frank Schorfheide. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Markov-Switching Multi-Fractal Inter-Trade Duration Model, with Application to U.S.
Equities
Fei Chen, Francis X. Diebold, and Frank Schorfheide
NBER Working Paper No. 18078
May 2012
JEL No. C22,C41

                                            ABSTRACT

We propose and illustrate a Markov-switching multi-fractal duration (MSMD) model for analysis
of inter-trade durations in financial markets. We establish several of its key properties with emphasis
on high persistence (indeed long memory). Empirical exploration suggests MSMD's superiority relative
to leading competitors.


Fei Chen                                           Frank Schorfheide
School of Economics, HUST                          University of Pennsylvania
No 1037 Luoyu Road, Hongshan District              Department of Economics
Wuhan, 430074 CHINA                                3718 Locust Walk
chenf@econ.upenn.edu                               McNeil 525
                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
Francis X. Diebold                                 and NBER
Department of Economics                            schorf@ssc.upenn.edu
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
The necessity of grappling with “big data,” and the desirability of unlocking the information
hidden within it, is a key modern development – arguably the key modern development –
in all the sciences. Time-series econometrics, particularly time-series financial econometrics,
is no exception. Big data in financial econometrics has both cross-sectional and time-series
aspects. In the cross-sectional dimension it arises from the literally hundreds of thousands
of assets that trade in global financial markets. In the time-series dimension it arises from
the similarly huge number of trades, often many per second, that are now routinely executed
for financial assets in liquid markets.
    In this paper we are concerned in general with the time-series dimension, and in particular
with the durations associated with inter-trade arrivals. Those trades are facilitated by mod-
ern hardware, software and algorithms, and they are continuously recorded electronically.
The result are vast quantities of high-frequency (trade-by-trade) price data.
    One might reasonably ask what, precisely, financial econometricians hope to learn from
high-frequency trading data. Interestingly, such high-frequency data emerge as largely un-
informative for some objects of interest (e.g., trend, or “drift,” in log price), but highly
informative for others (e.g., volatility), an insight traces in economics at least to Merton
(1980). In particular, although precise estimation of trend benefits greatly from a long cal-
endar span but not from high-frequency sampling, precise estimation of volatility benefits
immensely from high-frequency sampling.1 Accurate volatility estimation and forecasting,
in turn, are crucial for financial risk management, asset pricing and portfolio allocation.
    In this paper we are not directly interested in volatility; rather, as mentioned above, we
are interested in inter-trade durations. However, high-frequency data is informative not only
for the properties of volatility, but also for the properties of inter-trade durations. At one
level that observation is trivial, as one obviously needs trade-by-trade data to infer properties
of inter-trade durations. But at another level the observation is quite deep, linked to the
insight that, via time-deformation arguments in the tradition of Clark (1973), properties of
calendar-time volatility and transactions-time trade arrivals should be intimately-related.
    In particular, the time-deformation perspective suggests that serial correlation in calendar-
time volatility is driven by serial correlation in calendar-time trade counts. But serial cor-
    1
     Indeed the mathematical foundation of the modern financial econometrics “realized volatility” literature
initiated by Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2001) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2002)
is precisely the convergence of empirical quadratic variation to population quadratic variation as sampling
frequency increases.



                                                     2
relation in calendar-time trade counts is driven by serial correlation in transactions-time
trade-arrival intensity, which is ultimately driven by serial correlation in the information
flow that drives trading. Hence the calendar-time “realized volatility” persistence revealed
by high-frequency data should have parallels in calendar-time trade count persistence and
transaction-time inter-trade duration persistence. Interestingly, the key and robust find-
ing for realized volatility dynamics is not only high volatility persistence (of course...), but
tremendously high volatility persistence, in the form of long memory.2
    Against this background, in this paper we propose and evaluate a new model of inter-
trade durations, closely-linked to the pioneering “multi-fractal” return volatility model of
Mandelbrot, Fisher, and Calvet (1997), Calvet and Fisher (2001) and Calvet and Fisher
(2004) as discussed and extended in Calvet and Fisher (2008). As we will discuss subse-
quently in detail, our model’s construction and implications are quite different from existing
dynamic duration models, most notably the prominent Autoregressive Conditional Duration
(ACD) model of Engle and Russell (1998) and variants thereof. Our model, which we call
the Markov-switching multi-fractal duration (MSMD) model, captures high persistence in
duration clustering; indeed it intrinsically captures long memory while nevertheless main-
taining covariance stationarity. It also captures additional important features of observed
durations, such as over-dispersion. Finally, as we will also demonstrate, it is highly successful
empirically, largely dominating ACD.
    We proceed as follows. In section 2, we review the important empirical regularities that
routinely emerge in inter-trade durations in financial markets. In section 3 we develop our
MSMD model, we characterize its properties relative to the earlier-documented empirical
regularities. We also relate the MSMD model to other models that have appeared in the
literature, such as the ACD model and the Stochastic Conditional Duration (SCD) model
of Bauwens and Veredas (2004). In section 4 we apply the MSMD model to inter-trade
duration data for a representative set of U.S. equities, evaluating its performance in both
absolute terms as well as relative to the prominent ACD model. We conclude in section 5.


2       Empirical Regularities in Inter-Trade Duration Data
Here we highlight three important regularities in financial market inter-trade durations,
illustrating them for a particular U.S. equity (Citigroup). We shall be interested subsequently
    2
     Findings of long memory in realized volatility run consistently from the early work of Andersen, Boller-
slev, Diebold, and Labys (2001) through scores of subsequent studies, as surveyed for example in Andersen,
Bollerslev, Christoffersen, and Diebold (2013).


                                                     3
              40
   Duration




              20


              0
                    2500    5000      7500     10000      12500   15000    17500     20000    22500

                                                       Trade



Figure 1: Citigroup Duration Time Series. We show a time-series plot of inter-trade durations
between 10:00am and 4:00pm during February 1993, measured in minutes and adjusted for calendar effects.


in econometric duration models that capture those regularities.


2.1            Serially-Correlated Duration Dynamics and Self-Similar Clus-
               tering
Durations are highly persistent, as is clear visually from the time-series plot of Citigroup du-
rations in Figure 1.3 The transactions-time duration clustering is matched by a correspond-
ing calendar time transactions-count clustering. Moreover, the calendar-time transactions
count clustering tends to look similar regardless of observational frequency. In Figure 2, for
example, we show Citigroup transaction counts in intervals of length 2, 5, 10 and 30 minutes
during February 1993. Such invariance of qualitative features to observational frequency is
called self-similarity and has long been emphasized in financial asset returns, particularly by
Mandelbrot (e.g., Mandelbrot (1997)).


2.2            Over-Dispersion
Another property of inter-trade durations, related to their high persistence, is over-dispersion.
Over-dispersion refers to the standard deviation exceeding the mean, in contrast to the equal-
ity that would obtain with exponential durations generated by iid trade arrivals. In Figure
3, for example, we show an exponential duration Q-Q plot for the Citigroup durations, which
clearly indicates a non-exponential duration distribution characterized by a longer right tail
than would occur under the exponential. Indeed the the sample standard deviation is 2.63
  3
      We have adjusted the durations for calendar effects and will provide details subsequently in section 4.1.



                                                         4
                                               A: Counts in 2 Minutes




                200
                100
                0
                           500        1000    1500             2000           2500   3000   3500


                                               B: Counts in 5 Minutes
                200
                100
                0




                           200        400     600              800            1000   1200   1400


                                              C: Counts in 10 Minutes
                400
                200
                0




                           100        200     300              400            500    600    700


                                              D: Counts in 30 Minutes
                1000
                500
                0




                                 50           100                       150          200




Figure 2: Citigroup Trasactions Counts. We show transaction counts in intervals of length 2, 5,
10 and 30 minutes between 10:00am and 4:00pm during February 1993.


and the sample mean is only 1.93. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit test rejects the
exponential null hypothesis at a marginal significance level less than 10−6 .


2.3     Long Memory
We have already mentioned duration persistence and clustering, but we have saved for last
the most important aspect of that persistence: long memory. Consider again the Citigroup
duration data.4 The time-series plot in Figure 1 clearly reveals high persistence, but the slow
hyperbolic decay of the sample autocorrelation function in Figure 4 reveals significantly more.
As is well-known, covariance stationary long memory dynamics are associated with very slow
(hyperbolic) autocorrelation decay, in contrast to covariance-stationary short-memory (e.g.,
ARMA) dynamics, which are associated with very quick (exponential) autocorrelation decay.
    It is interesting to note that long memory is self-similar. That is, it can be shown that
if a flow variable like transactions counts is I(d) at one observational frequency, then it is
I(d) at all other observational frequencies. Hence the observed long memory in duration
   4
    For an extensive investigation of long memory in inter-trade durations from a model-free perspective,
see Deo, Hsieh, and Hurvich (2010).


                                                       5
Figure 3: Citigroup Duration Distribution. We show an exponential QQ plot for Citigroup
inter-trade durations between 10:00am and 4:00pm during February 1993, adjusted for calendar effects.


and transaction count dynamics coheres with the earlier-mentioned observed self-similarity
in transaction-count clustering.


3     The Markov-Switching Multi-Fractal Duration Model
In this section we propose the Markov-Switching Multi-fractal Duration (MSMD) model and
study its properties, proceeding as follows. In section 3.1 we sketch its basic structure, a
mixture-of-exponentials representation with dynamics driven by a Markov-switching multi-
fractal intensity process. In section 3.2 we establish some important properties of the MSMD
model that match the earlier-documented features of inter-trade durations. In section 3.3 we
provide an illustrative simulation. In section 3.4 we explore the relationship of the MSMD
model to the general class of point processes. Finally, in section 3.5 we situate the MSMD
model within some of the broader literature in inter-trade duration modeling, comparing
and contrasting MSMD to existing approaches.


3.1     A New Model for Inter-Trade Durations
We specify our dynamic model of durations in terms of a mixture of exponential random
variables in which the intensity evolves dynamically. Working in precisely parallel fashion
to the multi-fractal stochastic volatility model of Calvet and Fisher (2008), we assume that


                                                   6
   Autocorrelation


                     .3

                     .2

                     .1

                     .0
                          25     50            75             100            125           150   175    200

                                               Displacement (Trades)


Figure 4: Citigroup Duration Autocorrelations. We show the sample autocorrelation function
of Citigroup inter-trade durations between 10:00am and 4:00pm during February 1993, adjusted for calendar
effects.


the intensities are composed multiplicatively of k̄ dynamic components following two-state
Markov-switching processes with different degrees of persistence, ranging from very low to
very high. This produces the Markov-switching multi-fractal duration (MSMD) model.
   Let us now introduce the model. We use di = ti − ti−1 to denote the duration between
trades (events) occurring at times ti and ti−1 . The durations are distributed according to

                                      i
                               di ∼      ,   i ∼ iidExp(1),           i = 1, . . . , n,               (1)
                                      λi

where Exp(1) refers to an exponential distribution with intensity parameter 1. Conditional
on λi , the durations have a Exp(λi ) distribution, and we refer to the λi ’s as (mean) intensities.
The intensities evolve according to the following Markov-switching multi-fractal process:

                                                        k̄
                                                        Y
                                               λi = λ         Mk,i ,                                   (2)
                                                        k=1


where λ is a positive constant and the Mk,i ’s are positive intensity components, independent
across k and following Markov renewal processes. That is, at time i Mk,i is either renewed
(drawn from a fixed distribution f (M )) or kept at its previous value, k ∈ {1, 2, 3, ..., k̄}. We
write                            (
                                    draw from f (M ) w.p. γk
                          Mk,i =                                                                (3)
                                    Mk,i−1              w.p. 1 − γk ,

where the renewal distribution f (M ) is identical for all k = 1, ..., k̄, with M > 0 and

                                                        7
E(M ) = 1. Renewal of Mk,i corresponds to a new shock of type k hitting the system at
time i, with the draw from f (M ) governing the magnitude of the shock. The value of
γk determines the average lifetime and hence the persistence of an M shock. A large γk
corresponds to M shocks with short expected lifetime and low persistence, and conversely.
    Consider now the renewal distribution f (M ). We take it as discrete, with two equally-
likely points of support,            (
                                        m0       w.p. 1/2
                                M=                                                      (4)
                                        2 − m0 w.p. 1/2,
where m0 ∈ (0, 2]. We refer to this distribution as “binomial,” although it differs slightly
from a standard 0-1 Bernoulli trial. Note that the condition m0 ∈ (0, 2] implies M > 0
a.s. and E(M ) = 1, as required. By combining (3) and (4) we obtain a two-state Markov
process for Mk,i that alternates between the states s1 = m0 and s2 = 2 − m0 with transition
probabilities                          "                      #
                                         1 − γk /2    γk /2
                              P(γk ) =                          .                        (5)
                                           γk /2    1 − γk /2
Here element jl of the matrix P(γk ) specifies the transition from state sj to sl . The largest
eigenvalue of P(γk ) is equal to one, which implies that the Markov process has an equilibrium
distribution. The equilibrium probabilities of states s1 and s2 are 1/2 regardless of γk . The
second eigenvalue is equal to 1 − γk and determines the persistence of the Markov chain.
    Finally, to induce parsimony, we impose the following restriction on the sequence {γk }k̄k=1 :

                                                         k−k̄
                                      γk = 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b      ,                               (6)

where γk̄ ∈ (0, 1) and b ∈ (1, ∞). Hence, although the renewal distribution f (Mk ) is the same
for all intensity components Mk , the renewal probability, γk , differs across k, creating a variety
of intensity components ranging from low-frequency components that renew infrequently to
high-frequency components that renew frequently, despite the fact that all renewals are of
course stochastic. Small values of k relative to k̄ lead to large values of 1 − γk and therefore
produce “low-frequency” or “long-run” Mk shocks with low renewal probability and hence
long expected lifetime and high persistence.
    Equations (1), (2), (3), (4), and (6) define the MSMD model. Assembling everything, we
can write it compactly as
                                                   i
                                        di = Qk̄                                                (7a)
                                              λ k=1 Mk,i



                                                 8
                                       (                             k−k̄
                                       M     w.p. 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b
                              Mk,i   =                         k−k̄                                 (7b)
                                       Mk,i−1 w.p. (1 − γk̄ )b
                                        (
                                          m0       w.p. 1/2
                                     M=                                                             (7c)
                                          2 − m0 w.p. 1/2,

where i ∼ iid exp(1), k̄ ∈ N, λ > 0, γk̄ ∈ (0, 1), b ∈ (1, ∞) and m0 ∈ (0, 2]. Conditional
on k̄ we collect the remaining parameters in the vector θk̄ = (λ, γk̄ , b, m0 )0 . Note that
the MSMD model has a k̄-dimensional state vector Mi = (M1,i , M2,i , . . . Mk̄,i ), and hence
2k̄ states, despite its great parsimony (just four parameters, regardless of k̄). Each latent
intensity component takes the value m0 in the high state and 2 − m0 in the low state. The
parameter λ governs the overall intensity level; if all intensity components are in the high
state, then λi = mk̄0 (the upper bound for intensity) and if all intensity components are in
the low state, then λi = (2 − m0 )k̄ (the lower bound for intensity). The parameter γk̄ is
the renewal probability of the most frequently-renewing intensity component Mk̄ . The other
renewal probabilities γ1 , ..., γk̄−1 increase monotonically (and at an increasing rate) toward
γk̄ , with the precise pattern governed by the parameter b.


3.2     Implied Dynamics and Distributions
Here we study some properties of MSMD processes. We begin by showing stationarity,
finite moments and ergodicity. Then we show that MSMD processes are consistent with the
earlier-documented key stylized features of inter-trade financial market durations: serially-
correlated duration dynamics and self-similar clustering, over-dispersion and long memory.
Stationarity, Ergodicity, and Finite Moments. Provided that γk > 0, the transition
probability matrix (5) implies that the process Mk,i is strictly stationary and ergodic. More-
over, because the Mk,i processes are independent across k and independent of i , and because
the i ’s are independent across i, the vector process ξi = (i , M1,i , . . . , Mk̄,i ) is strictly sta-
tionary and ergodic. Because the durations di are a measurable function of ξi , it follows that
the sequence of durations is strictly stationary and ergodic. Because the moments of the
Exp(1) distribution are finite and there exists an upper bound λ̄ and a lower bound λ > 0
such that λ ≤ λi ≤ λ̄ for all i, we deduce that the moments of di are finite.
Serially-Correlated Duration Dynamics and Self-Similar Clustering. The MSMD
model produces serially-correlated durations by design, due to the serial correlation in its
conditional intensity, which in turn produces serial correlation in calendar-time transaction
counts (clustering). Such clustering matches the predictions of many theoretical market

                                                   9
microstructure models. Those models emphasize the simultaneous presence of informed and
uninformed traders, with informed trades occurring only when informational events occur,
which produces transaction clustering in calendar time.5
Over-Dispersion. MSMD processes also display over-dispersion. The Exp(1) distribution
of i implies that E[i ] = 1 and E[2i ] = 2. Recall that di = i /λi . Because i and λi are
independent, we deduce from Jensen’s Inequality that

                              V ar(di ) = 2E[λ−2        −1 2
                                              i ] − (E[λi ])                                   (8)
                                        ≥ 2(E[λ−1  2      −1 2
                                               i ]) − (E[λi ])

                                        = (E[di ])2 .

The inequality is strict if the distribution of λi has a non-zero variance, which leads to the
over-dispersion property
                                       p
                                         V ar(di ) > E[di ].                               (9)

    It is interesting to note that, in the MSMD model and in reality, the over-dispersion
of transactions-time duration distributions is induced by stochastic intensity. This is pre-
cisely analogous to the well-known fat-tails of calendar-time return distributions induced
by stochastic volatility. Just as stochastic volatility “fattens” Gaussian conditional return
distributions, so too does MSMD “over-disperse” exponential conditional duration distribu-
tions.
Long Memory. We now show that the MSMD process has long memory, by showing that
the duration autocorrelation function, ρ(h) = Corr(di , di+h ), decays hyperbolically. We
begin by letting α1 < α2 denote two arbitrary numbers in the open interval (0, 1). Then the
set of integers Hk̄ = {h : α1 logb (bk̄ ) ≤ logb h ≤ α2 logb (bk̄ )} contains a broad collection of
lags. Notice that as k̄ → ∞ the values of h included in the set Hk̄ also tend to infinity. The
formal statement of the long-memory property is provided in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 The MSMD autocorrelation function satisfies

                                   ln ρ(h)
                            sup            −1 →0        as   k̄ → +∞
                           h∈Ik̄    ln h−δ

where δ = logb E(M̃ 2 ) − logb {[E(M̃ )]2 } and M̃ has a binomial distribution that takes the
values 2m−1    −1              −1                 −1   −1           −1
         0 /(m0 + (2 − m0 ) ) and 2(2 − m0 ) /(m0 + (2 − m0 ) ) with probability 1/2.
  5
   Early work includes Admati and Pfleiderer (1988) and Easley and O’Hara (1992). Surveys include
O’Hara (1995), Hasbrouck (2007) and Vives (2008).

                                                10
Proof The proposition is a direct consequence of results in Calvet and Fisher (2008), as
follows. First note that we can define the mean-duration process

                                                  k̄
                                        1    1 Y −1
                                   φi =    =      M .                                    (10)
                                        λi   λ k=1 k,i

Because Mk,i is a two state Markov process that takes the values s1 = m0 and s2 = 2 − m0
                  −1
it follows that Mk,i  is also a two state Markov process that takes the values s−1        −1
                                                                                  1 and s2 .
                −1
The mean of Mk,i   is independent of k given by µ = (s−1      −1
                                                         1 + s2 )/2. Now define the mean-one
                  −1
process M̃k,i = Mk,i /µ such that
                                                k̄
                                            µk̄ Y
                                       φi =        M̃k,i ,                              (11)
                                            λ k=1

which highlights that φi is also a Markov-switching multi-fractal process. The autocovari-
ances of φi are not affected by the factor µk̄ /λ. Thus, with this transformation the MSMD du-
ration process di = φi has effectively the same probabilistic structure as the squared return
process rt2 in Calvet and Fisher (2008), and the long-memory property of the durations follows
from their Proposition 1.                                                               Q.E.D.

    As shown in Proposition 1, the overlaid Markov-switching processes in the MSMD model
truly generate long memory in durations.6 The MSMD long memory is reminiscent of well-
known earlier results showing that long memory is obtained by aggregating short-memory
processes of differing persistence. Those results include both aggregation of simple AR(1)
processes in discrete time as in Granger (1980) and aggregation of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck pro-
cesses in continuous time as in Cox (1981).7 Moreover, although the long memory arising in
such environments is a limiting result as the number of component processes grows (k̄ → ∞
in the case of MSMD), authors such as Alizadeh, Brandt, and Diebold (2002) have argued
that that the limiting result holds quickly. Hence only a few components should be needed
to approximate long memory accurately.




                                             11
                                                             0.20
                                                             0.15
                                   Renewal Probability, γk
                                                             0.10
                                                             0.05
                                                             0.00
                                                                    3   4        5   6   7

                                                                                 k




Figure 5: Latent Intensity Component Renewal Probabilities. We show the renewal
                                 k−k̄
probabilities (γk = 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b ) associated with the latent intensity components (Mk ), k = 3, ..., 7.
We calibrate the MSMD model with k̄ = 7, and with parameters that match our subsequently-reported
estimates for Citigroup.


3.3     An Illustrative Simulation
To build insight we provide an illustrative simulation of the MSMD model. We calibrate the
parameters to our later-obtained estimates for Citigroup (m0 = 1.23, λ = 1.17, γk̄ = 0.18,
b = 4.52), and we use k̄ = 7, which emerges as widely adequate in our subsequent empirical
work.
    In Figure 5 we show the renewal probabilities γk implied by our choices of γk̄ , k̄ and b
                                  k−k̄
(recall that γk = 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b ), for k = 3, ..., 7. For smaller values of k, the renewal
probabilities are very small and increasing only slowly, but they increase quickly starting
around k = 5, reaching 0.18 when k = k̄ = 7.
    In Figure 6 we show time series of simulated latent intensity components M1,i , ..., M7,i ,
overall latent intensities λi , and durations di . Despite the sample of length greater than
22,000 (again chosen to match our subsequent empirical work), the switching probabilities
of M1 and M2 are so low that they never switch regime. Switching begins with M3 and
increases in frequency as we approach the highest-frequency component M7 , which switches
very often. The resulting overall intensity and duration series are very highly persistent,
   6
     In this regard the MSMD environment with k̄ → ∞ is very different from the simple two-state Markov-
switching environment studied by Diebold and Inoue (2001), who show in that environment how short-
memory dynamics can be mis-diagnosed as long-memory.
   7
     See also Corsi (2009).



                                                                            12
Figure 6: Time-series plots of simulated M1,i , ..., M7,i , λi , and di . We show simulated
sample paths for an MSMD model with sample size (N = 22, 988) and parameters calibrated to match our
subsequently-reported estimates for Citigroup.


with episodes of clustering visually apparent in the time series plots at the bottom of Figure
6.
   In Figure 7 we show an exponential QQ plot of the simulated durations. It clearly
indicates a longer right tail than exponential, consistent with overdispersion. Indeed the
exponential Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic has a p-value less than 2.2e-16.
   In Figure 8 we show the sample autocorrelation function of the simulated durations, which
makes clear that they are more than just highly-persistent but short-memory; instead, their
slow hyperbolic decay indicates long memory.




                                                13
Figure 7: QQ Plot, Simulated Durations. We show a QQ plot for a simulated duration sam-
ple path for an MSMD model with sample size (N = 22, 988) and parameters calibrated to match our
subsequently-reported estimates for Citigroup.


3.4     MSMD, Point Process Theory, and Time Deformation
We now relate situate the MSMD approach within the broader framework of general point
process theory.8 We focus not on the Markov-switching multi-fractal process for λi , as we
have discussed it previously and will return to it subsequently. Rather, we step back for
a moment to consider the broader background associated with our parameterizing the the
conditional intensity in a mixture-of-exponentials representation.
    Formally, a point process (PP) on (0, ∞) is a sequence of nonnegative random variables
{Ti (ω)}i∈1,2,... defined on a probability space (Ω, F, P ), satisfying 0 < T1 (ω) < T2 (ω) < · · · ,
where Ti is the instant of the i-th occurrence of an event. A PP is associated with a counting
                                         P
process, N (t, ω), where N (t, ω) =         i≥1 1(Ti (ω) ≤ t) is the number of events up to and
including time t. Under suitable regularity conditions the PP can be characterized by a
stochastic intensity λ(t, ω). The heuristic interpretation of the process λ(t, ω) is that of a
conditional hazard function:
                                                                               
                                      1
                     λ(t, ω) = lim       P [N (t + ∆t, ω) − N (t, ω) = 1 | Ft− ] ,            (12)
                               ∆t↓0   ∆t

where Ft− is a sub-sigma field of F and can be intuitively interpreted as information available
at time t−. Conditional on Ft− information, the intensity λ(t, ω) is non-stochastic, which is
   8
    Throughout this subsection we only provide a brief heuristic discussion. For a more rigorous and complete
treatment, see for example see Karr (1991) and Daley and Vere-Jones (2003, 2007).


                                                     14
                      0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
    Autocorrelation




                                        0   25        50           75            100             125            150      175   200

                                                                         Displacement (Trades)



Figure 8: Sample Autocorrelation Function, Simulated Durations. We show the sample
autocorrelation function for a simulated sample path from an MSMD model with sample size (N = 22, 988)
and parameters calibrated to match our subsequently-reported estimates for Citigroup.


why we will drop the ω argument subsequently.
   On can interpret a PP as a dynamic, uncountable set of independent Bernoulli trials,
one for each t. If we observe the process over the interval (0, T ] then the probability of
“successes,” i.e. observing trades in the context of our application, at times t1 , . . . , tn is
given by ni=1 λ(ti ). Likewise, the probability of no successes in the interval (ti−1 , ti ) is given
         Q
          R ti
by exp[− ti−1  λ(t)dt]. Combining these two expressions, we deduce that the probability of
events at and only at times t1 , . . . , tn is
                                                                        n 
                                                                        Y             Z                ti          
                                             p(t1 , . . . , tn |λ(·)) =    λ(ti ) exp −                       λ(t)dt .               (13)
                                                                        i=1                            ti−1


Suppose that λ(t) is constant on the interval [ti−1 , ti ) and denote its value by λi . Moreover,
let di = ti − ti−1 . Then we can rewrite the probability as
                                                                                 n
                                                                                 Y
                                                    p(t1 , . . . , tn |λ(·)) =         (λi exp [−λi di ]) ,                          (14)
                                                                                 i=1


which exactly corresponds to the mixture-of-exponentials specification (1).
     Interestingly, the MSMD mixture-of-exponential representation can also be motivated
using a time-deformation argument. Provided that the stochastic intensity λ(t, ω) exists
                             R∞
and satisfies the condition 0 λ(t, ω) = ∞ almost surely, meaning that one always expects
more trades in the context of our application, one can define the (stochastic) stopping time
                                     R τ (t,ω)
τ (t, ω) as the (unique) solution to 0         λ(s, ω)ds = t. It turns out that the process Ñ (t, ω)
defined by Ñ (t, ω) = N (τ (t, ω), ω) is a standard Poisson process with intensity one. As a


                                                                               15
                                         R Ti (ω)
consequence the random variables ei (ω) = Ti−1  (ω)
                                                    λ(t, ω)dt are iid Exp(1). If the intensity is
constant between events as assumed in the MSMD model, we again obtain di λi ∼ iidExp(1)
as in (1).


3.5     On the Comparative Structure of MSMD and Other Inter-
        Trade Duration Models
Duration dynamics and volatility dynamics are by necessity intimately related. In particular,
we have noted the close link between the Markov-switching multi-fractal duration (MSMD)
model and the pioneering Calvet-Fisher Markov-switching multi-fractal volatility (MSMV)
model. But MSMD is not, of course, the first or only dynamic duration model, just as MSMV
is not the first or only dynamic volatility model. Here, therefore, we contrast MSMD to some
obvious competing dynamic duration models. We organize our discussion along four lines:
mean intensity vs. mean duration models, parameter-driven vs. observation-driven models,
long-memory vs. short-memory models, and “structural” vs. “reduced-form” long memory
models. Throughout, we use the popular autoregressive conditional duration (ACD) model
as an anchoring benchmark.9
Mean Intensity vs. Mean Duration. The ACD model of Engle and Russell (1998),
which is parameterized in terms of the conditional mean duration, was the key breakthrough
in modeling financial market inter-trade durations, and many varieties of ACD models now
exist. The “multiplicative error model” (MEM) originally suggested by Engle (2002) is
closely related; indeed ACD is a special case of MEM.10 ACD/MEM assumes that

                                                 di = ϕi i ,                                            (15)

where ϕi = E(di |di−1 , ..., d1 ) and i ∼ iid(1, σ 2 ), and it focuses on parameterizing the
conditional mean duration, ϕi . We have shown in section 3.2, however, that the MSMD
mean-intensity model can be easily re-written as a mean-duration model where the mean
duration follows a Markov-switching process. Hence the mean-intensity and mean-duration
approaches are evidently more similar than might appear at first glance.
Parameter-Driven vs. Observation-Driven. A key difference between ACD/MEM and
MSMD concerns “observation-driven” vs. “parameter-driven” structure. In the parlance of
   9
    Hautsch (2012) provides a fine overview of much of the relevant literature on financial duration modeling.
  10
    The MEM literature has also grown impressively; see, for example, Brownlees, Cipollini, and Gallo
(2012) and Hautsch (2012).


                                                     16
Cox (1981), a model is observation-driven if conditional dynamics are driven by the history of
observables (as for example in traditional ARCH volatility models), whereas it is parameter-
driven if conditional dynamics are driven by the history of a latent variable (as for example
in traditional stochastic volatility models).
     The ACD model, as well as the important score-driven MEM extensions emphasized
by Creal, Koopman, and Lucas (2010) and Harvey (2011), are clearly and intrinsically
observation-driven. Their construction precisely parallels the ARCH model, which is also
observation-driven. The motivating recognition is that the likelihood may always be factored
into a product of conditional densities, where the conditioning is on observed historical data,
so that if one specifies a model directly in terms of those conditional densities then likelihood
evaluation is immediate and simple.
     In contrast, the MSMD model is parameter-driven, as the evolution of the mean intensity
follows a hidden Markov process. Rich MSMD duration dynamics arise from the large MSMD
state space (recall that λi can take 2k̄ distinct values). Simultaneously, however, MSMD is
parsimonious. In addition to k̄, which determines the total number of duration states,
MSMD uses only two parameters, namely b and γk̄ , to determine the transition probabilities
in this high-dimensional state-space. However, as we discuss below in section 4.3, likelihood
evaluation is a bit more challenging (although still simple) for parameter-driven MSMD than
for observation-driven ACD/MEM. In particular, MSMD likelihood evaluation requires use
of a nonlinear filter as in Hamilton (1989).
     The MSMD model is of course not the first parameter-driven duration model. For exam-
ple, the Stochastic Conditional Duration (SCD) model of Bauwens and Veredas (2004), spec-
ifies the log expected duration (ln ϕi in the notation of (15)) as an autoregressive process.11
Hence if ACD is the duration analogue of the GARCH model, then SCD is the duration ana-
logue of the stochastic volatility model. Finally, Hautsch (2008) combines parameter-driven
and observation-driven dynamics in a so-called stochastic ACD model.
Long-Memory vs. Short-Memory. Another key difference between ACD/MEM (as
typically implemented) and MSMD concerns long memory. Before considering transactions-
time durations, first consider calendar-time volatility. The volatility literature features long
memory prominently. For example, long memory is routinely found and modeled in realized
volatility calculated using intra-day data, as for example in Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold,
and Labys (2003). Indeed long memory features prominently even in the “conventional”
stochastic volatility literature without intra-day data, as for example in the pioneering work
 11
      Meddahi, Renault, and Werker (1998) also propose an interesting and closely-related model.


                                                    17
of Comte and Renault (1998) and Breidt, Crato, and De Lima (1998).
    Now consider durations. The existing inter-trade dynamic duration modeling literature
that began with Engle and Russell (1998) is of course aware of high persistence in inter-
trade duration dynamics, and it works hard to capture that persistence. But given the close
relationship between duration dynamics and volatility dynamics (and again, the routine
finding of long memory in volatility dynamics), as well as the direct and model-free empirical
evidence of long memory in inter-trade durations presented in section 2.3, long memory has
been curiously absent from most of the duration literature. Two notable exceptions are the
fractionally integrated ACD model of Jasiak (1999) (FI-ACD) and the long memory version
of the SCD model proposed by Deo, Hsieh, and Hurvich (2010). MSMD is firmly in this
long-memory camp.
Structural vs. Reduced-Form Long Memory.
    The MSMD model’s long-memory durations have an appealing structural flavor; that is,
MSMD provides a natural long-memory duration generating mechanism by overlaying simple
regime-switching processes with different degrees of persistence, potentially corresponding to
market activity of different types of informed and uninformed traders. The regime-switching
MSMD intensity components in turn parallel earlier two-state regime-switching models in
the tradition of Hamilton (1989).
    The structural long memory model of MSMD contrasts to “reduced-form” long memory
model of Granger and Joyeux (1980). That approach works directly with representations of
the form (1 − L)d yt = xt , where xt is a short-memory process, and 0 < d < 1/2, with the
fractional differencing operator (1 − L)d defined via the expansion

                                       d(d − 1) 2 d(d − 1)(d − 2) 3
                 (1 − L)d = 1 − dL +           L −               L + ...
                                          2!            3!

Such a series is said to be (fractionally-) integrated of order d, and we write yt ∼ I(d).
    From the reduced-form perspective, all shocks have identical hyperbolically-decaying ef-
fects. That is the case, for example, with the reduced-form long-memory duration models
of Jasiak (1999) and Deo, Hsieh, and Hurvich (2010). An attractive feature of MSMD,
however, is its decomposition of reduced-form long memory into structural short-memory
pieces coming from underlying cyclical variation at different frequencies, which again may
correspond to market activity of different groups of informed and uninformed traders.




                                             18
             Symbol     Company Name                       Symbol     Company Name
             AA         ALCOA                              ABT        Abbott Laboratories
             AXP        American Express                   BA         Boeing
             BAC        Bank of America                    C          Citigroup
             CSCO       Cisco Systems                      DELL       Dell
             DOW        Dow Chemical                       F          Ford Motor
             GE         General Electric                   HD         Home Depot
             IBM        IBM                                INTC       Intel
             JNJ        Johnson & Johnson                  KO         Coca-Cola
             MCD        McDonald’s                         MRK        Merck
             MSFT       Microsoft                          QCOM       Qualcomm
             T          AT&T                               TXN        Texas Instruments
             WFC        Wells Fargo                        WMT        Wal-Mart
             XRX        Xerox


Table 1: Twenty-Five U.S. Equities: Ticker symbols and company names. We show
twenty-five stocks selected randomly from the U.S. S&P 100 Index, ordered alphabetically.


4      Empirical Analysis of U.S. Equities
Here we apply the MSMD model to twenty-five U.S. equities selected randomly from those
in the S&P 100 index. We study consolidated trade data extracted from the TAQ database.
The sample period covers twenty trading days, from February 1, 1993 to February 26, 1993,
10:00 - 16:00.12 Here in the main text we summarize graphically the results for all firms
collectively, and we provide details for Citigroup, whose results are typical. In the appendices
we provide details for all firms individually. We list the firms and their ticker symbols in
Table 1.


4.1     Intra-Day Calendar Effects
Just as with intra-day volatility in calendar time, durations display intra-day calendar ef-
fects. In particular, inter-trade durations tend to be shorter early and late in the day, and
longer around lunch. Although the calendar effects are mild, they are nevertheless desirably
removed prior to analysis. We do so using a simple deterministic dummv variable approach,
as in Ghysels, Gourièroux, and Jasiak (2004). We divide the trading day into half-hour
  12
    Trading also occurs 09:30-10:00, but following standard procedure (e.g., Engle and Russell (1998)), we
delete transactions in 09:30-10:00 to remove effects of the opening auction.




                                                   19
                                                            5
                                                            4
                                Intra−Day Calendar Effect
                                                            3
                                                            2
                                                            1
                                                            0

                                                                1   2    3    4       5     6   7   8       9   10   11   12

                                                                                  Interval in Trading Day




Figure 9: Intra-Day Duration Calendar Effect Profile Bundle. We plot estimated time-
of-day effects for each firm for twelve half-hour intervals, 10:00am-4:00pm. The bold profile is Citigroup.


periods, and we form the associated indicator variables,
                                                                                  (
                                                                                          1, if i ∈ k
                                                                        xki =
                                                                                          0, otherwise,

k = 1, ..., 12. Then we estimate of the logarithmic dummy-variable regression,

                                                                             12
                                                                             X
                                                            log di =                ak xki + i = a0 xi + i .
                                                                             k=1


The estimated coefficients are the estimated calendar effects. We graph them for all firms
in Figure 9; that is, we provide a “profile bundle” in the terminology of Gallant, Rossi, and
Tauchen (1993).13 Finally, we form the adjusted duration series as

                                                                          dˆi = di exp(−â0 xi ).

From this point onward, we use such adjusted durations exclusively, but in slight abuse of
notation we use di instead of dˆi to refer to our observations.
  13
       In addition, we provide numerical details in Appendix A.




                                                                                           20
                                       8
               Duration Distribution
                                                               Citi




                                       6
                                       4
                                       2
                                       0




                                           1   2   3   4   5    6     7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

                                                                                         Firm




Figure 10: Firm-by-Firm Duration Distributions (Box-and-Whisker Plots). The
box bottom is the 25th percentile, the box top is the 75th percentile, and the median is in between. The
“whiskers” extend 1.5 interquartile ranges above and below the box, or to the edge of the data, whichever
comes first.


4.2        Descriptive Statistics for Adjusted Durations
In Figure 10 we summarize the duration distributions for the twenty-five stocks using box-
and-whisker plots, with Citigroup labeled. All show long right tails indicative of overdisper-
sion. This is confirmed in Figure 11, in which we show a histogram of coefficients of variation
(the standard deviation relative to the mean), for all twenty-five stocks. All are greater than
one, and the distribution has a long right tail.14 In Figure 12 we focus on dynamics rather
than distributions, showing a profile bundle of sample autocorrelation functions (to displace-
ment 200) for all twenty-five firms. The slow hyperbolic decay is apparent.


4.3        Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Prior to obtaining maximum-likelihood estimates, we first discuss here the likelihood function
for a sequence of durations d1:n = {d1 , . . . , dn } governed by the MSMD model. By conditional
factorization of the joint density, the likelihood is immediately
                                                                                             n
                                                                                             Y
                                                       p(d1:n |θk̄ ) = p(d1 |θk̄ )                 p(di |d1:i−1 , θk̄ ).            (16)
                                                                                             i=2

  14
       For reference, the arrow indicates Citigroup in that histogram and all subsequent histograms.



                                                                                        21
                                      8
                                      6
                              Count
                                      4
                                      2
                                      0

                                          1.0   1.2    1.4      1.6       1.8    2.0   2.2

                                                      Coefficient of Variation




Figure 11: Distribution of Duration Coefficients of Variation Across Firms. We
show a histogram of coefficients of variation (the standard deviation relative to the mean), as a measure of
overdispersion relative to the exponential.


Conditional on λi , each duration di simply has an Exp(λi ) distribution with density p(di |λi ) =
λi exp[−λi di ], so evaluation of the likelihood would be trivial if the sequence of λi ’s were
known. But the λi ’s are of course not known and must be replaced with estimates from
an optimal filter as in Hamilton (1989), the only difference being that the MSMD model
has 2k̄ states rather than Hamilton’s 2 state. To streamline the exposition we focus on the
case of k̄ = 2, for a total of 4 states; generalization to k̄ > 2 is obvious but notationally
tedious. Recall that we abbreviated the potential values of the states Mk,i by s1 = m0 and
s2 = 2 − m0 . Using this notation, λi can take four values, λi ∈ {λs1 s1 , λs1 s2 , λs2 s1 , λs2 s2 }.
Because the states Mk,i evolve independently, the matrix of transition probabilities for the
mean intensity is simply Pλ = P(γ1 ) ⊗ P(γ2 ), where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product and
P(γk ) was defined in (5). In slight abuse of notation, we characterize the distribution of
λi through densities p(λi |·). Then we evaluate the likelihood recursively. First we initialize
the hidden states with their equilibrium distribution in period i = 0. Then starting from
p(λi−1 |d1:i−1 , θk̄ ) we obtain the i’th point likelihood by evaluating conditional distribution
p(λi |d1:i−1 , θk̄ ) (forecast of the mean intensity), then p(di |d1:i−1 , θk̄ ) (forecast of the duration),
and then finally the desired p(λi |d1:i , θk̄ ) (updating).
    As discussed in Section 3.1, the MSMD model is a hidden Markov model. Its parameter
vector is given by θk̄ = (λ, γk̄ , b, m0 )0 and the number of states is 2k̄ . Hence k̄ can be
viewed as a model index, and we will use the notation Mj to denote a MSMD model with


                                                              22
                  0.4
                  0.3
Autocorrelation

                  0.2
                  0.1
                  0.0




                        0   25   50         75           100             125    150         175           200

                                                 Displacement (Trades)


Figure 12: Duration Autocorrelations Function Profile Bundle. For each firm, we show
the sample autocorrelation function of inter-trade durations between 10:00am and 4:00pm during February
1993, adjusted for calendar effects. The bold profile is Citigroup.


k̄ = j. While k̄ affects the number of hidden states in the MSMD model, it does not alter
the dimensionality of the parameter vector θk̄ . In this sense the MSMD model remains
parsimonious even if k̄ is large.
    Models Mj and Ml , j ≤ l are essentially non-nested. For instance, consider M1 versus
M2 . For model M1 the intensity can take the values λi ∈ {λ1 m0,1 , λ1 (2 − m0,1 )}, whereas
the for M2 the intensity switches among λi ∈ {λ2 m20,2 , λ2 m0,2 (2 − m0,2 ), λ2 m20,2 }. Recall that
the sequence {γk }k̄k=1 that determines the transition probabilities P(γk ) of the k’th intensity
component Mk,i is given by
                                                         k−k̄
                                     γk = 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b .

This restriction ensures that M1 and M2 are only nested if either b = 1 and γk̄ = 1 or
m0 = 1. The first case is explicitly excluded from the parameter space and the second case
turned out to be empirically irrelevant.
     We estimate the parameter vector θk̄ of model Mk̄ by maximizing the log likelihood
function: θ̂k̄ = argmaxθk̄ ∈Θ ln p(d1:n |θk̄ , Mk̄ ) using the adjusted durations. The MSMD
model potentially suffers from the following identification problems. For γk̄ = 1 the decay
parameter b is non-identifiable. While we exclude γk̄ = 1 from the parameter space – recall
that γk̄ ∈ (0, 1) – the decay parameter becomes weakly identified near the upper bound for
γk̄ . As b approaches its lower bound of one, the sequence {γk }k̄k=1 approaches a sequence
of constants. In the limit, the intensity components Mk,i become exchangeable. Finally, if

                                                   23
     2.0




                                                                                              1.0
                                                                40
                                   5
     1.8




                                                                                              0.8
                                   4




                                                                30
     1.6




                                                                                              0.6
                                   3
m0




                                                                20




                                                                                         γk
                                                            b
                               λ
     1.4




                                                                                              0.4
                                   2




                                                                10
     1.2




                                                                                              0.2
                                   1
     1.0




                                                                                              0.0
                                   0




                                                                0
           3   4   5   6   7           3   4   5   6   7             3   4   5   6   7              3   4   5   6   7

                   k                           k                             k                              k




Figure 13: m̂0 , λ̂, b̂ and γ̂ k̄ Profile Bundles. For each firm, we show maximum likelihood
parameter estimates as a function of k̄, for k̄ = 3, ..., 7. The bold profiles are Citigroup.


m0 ∈ (0, 2] equals one, then the intensity components are identical across states and neither
b nor γk̄ are identifiable.
    We implement the maximum-likelihood estimation in MATLAB using the fmincon func-
tion to carry out a constrained maximization. After some experimentation we selected the
interior-point option of the optimization algorithm. The empirically relevant bound on the
parameters turns out to be γk̄ < 1, which we enforce by supplying the fmincon function
with an upper bound of 0.999 for γk̄ . The identification problems associated with b = 1 and
m0 = 1 did not turn out to be empirically relevant. For each estimation, we explore a grid
of starting values for the minimization routine. The computational time is increasing in 2k̄ .
For instance, for k̄ = 10 the state transition matrix is a 1024 × 1024 matrix that needs to
be re-calculated for every evaluation of the likelihood function. Moreover, the filter has to
track probabilities for 1024 states. Fortunately, however, such high k̄ values are empirically
unnecessary, as we now show.


4.4            Parameter Estimates
We proceed as follows. First we discuss profile bundles for each estimated parameter (that
is, parameter estimates as a function of k̄, for each firm). Second, we discuss profile bundles
for maximized likelihoods as a function of k̄, which generally indicate that k̄ = 7 is adequate.
Third, given the general adequacy of k̄ = 7, we discuss parameter distributions across firms
conditional on k̄ = 7. In keeping with our running Citigroup example, we highlight Citigroup
results throughout. We present detailed estimation results in Appendix C.
    First, consider the parameter estimate profile bundles in Figure 13. Citigroup’s m0
estimates are robust and slightly decreasing across k̄, with m̂0 = 1.33, ..., 1.23 for k̄ = 3, ..., 7,
respectively. The entire profile bundle of m0 estimates behaves similarly. Citigroup’s λ


                                                           24
                                                              20
                                                              0
                                Log−Likelihood Differential
                                                              −20
                                                              −40
                                                              −60
                                                              −80
                                                              −100

                                                                     3   4    5   6   7

                                                                              k




Figure 14: Log-Likelihood-Differential Profile Bundle. We show log-likelihood differentials
for all firms as a function of k̄, with respect to the value for k̄ = 7, which is therefore identically equal to 0.
The bold profile is Citigroup.


estimates are rather stable in k̄, but there is a noticeable increase when moving from k̄ = 6
to k̄ = 7, with λ̂0 = 0.79, 0.98, 0.88, 0.70, 1.17 for k̄ = 3, ..., 7, respectively. Most firms’
λ̂ profiles are quite stable, but a few are noticeably “bumpy.” Citigroup’s b estimates are
monotonically decreasing in k̄, with b̂ = 14.22, ..., 4.52 for k̄ = 3, ..., 7, respectively. Most
firms’ b̂ profiles are stable or slightly decreasing in k̄. Citigroup’s γk̄ are quite stable in k̄
with, for example, γ̂k̄ = 0.18, 0.18, 0.18 for k̄ = 5, 6, 7, respectively. As for the profile bundle
of γk̄ estimates, recall that γk̄ is the renewal probability of the most frequently-renewing
latent intensity component. Interestingly, the profile bundles separate rather neatly into
“high” and “low” groups.
     Now we focus on profile bundles of maximized log likelihood functions ln p(d1:n |θ̂k̄ , Mk̄ ),
which we show in Figure 14. In particular, we show log likelihood differentials with respect
to k̄ = 7, which is therefore identically equal to 0, and moreover, a profile increasing in k̄
corresponds to a likelihood increasing in k̄. Most profiles increase in k̄ and level off quickly,
around k̄ = 4; a few are basically flat in k̄. While the largest log-likelihood differential is
-85, most of the differentials are less than 10 in absolute value. Since the model complexity,
i.e. number of parameters, does not increase with k̄ the log-likelihood differentials may be
interpreted as log-posterior odds. It is rare that the log-likelihood differential is positive and
if it is the evidence in favor of k̄ < 7 tends to be small. The Citigroup profile fits the general
pattern, increasing from k̄ = 3 to k̄ = 4, and then staying roughly constant.


                                                                             25
         12




                                                   12




                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                  12
         10




                                                   10




                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                  10
         8




                                                   8
 Count




                                           Count




                                                                                         Count




                                                                                                                          Count
                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                  8
         6




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                 4
         4




                                                   4




                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                 2
         2




                                                   2




                                                                                                                                  2
         0




                                                   0




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                  0
              1.2   1.3        1.4   1.5                0   5   10   15   20   25   30                1   2       3   4                0.0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0

                          m0                                         b                                        λ                                          γk




Figure 15: Distributions of MSMD Parameter Estimates Across Firms, k̄ = 7. We
show histograms of maximum likelihood parameter estimates across firms, obtained using k̄ = 7. The arrow
denotes Citigroup.


    Given the log likelihood results, we now focus exclusively on k̄ = 7 and consider cross-
firm distributions of parameter estimates, as summarized in Figure 15. The distribution of
m0 estimates is skewed, with most estimates around roughly 1.25, but some as high as 1.4 or
even 1.5. The distribution of λ estimates is quite dispersed, with some estimates greater than
1 and some less. Most firms’ λ̂ are less than or near 1, but there is again a long right tail.
The distribution of b estimates is yet again right-skewed, with a mode in the neighborhood of
7. The distribution of γk̄ estimates, in contrast, is strongly bimodal, with a low “low mode”
(near 0) and a high “high mode” (near 1), corresponding to the earlier-discussed separation
of γk̄ profile bundles into “high” and “low” groups.
    In Figure 16 we assemble the information in the various parameter estimates in an infor-
mative way. We show latent intensity component (Mk ) renewal probability profile bundles,
                                                                                 k−k̄
estimated using k̄ = 7. That is, for each firm we show γk = 1 − (1 − γk̄ )b           as a function
of k, k = 3, ..., 7, where k̄ = 7.15 Because the estimated b tends to be substantially larger
than 1 for all firms, bk−k̄ is close to zero for small values of k and all profiles have similarly
small γk ’s for k ≤ 3. But as k grows, a clear bifurcation emerges, with roughly half the
profiles rising only slowly, and half rising much more quickly toward 1. Citigroup is one of
the “slowly-rising” firms, with γk rising from approximately 0 to .18 for as k goes from 3 to
7, meaning that its inter-trade durations are quite persistent.
     15
    Recall that 1 − γk corresponds to the eigenvalue of the transition probability matrix P(γk ) that governs
the persistence of the intensity component Mk . Thus, firms for which γk stays close to zero have very
persistent inter-trade durations.




                                                                                         26
                                                           1.0
                                                           0.8
                                 Renewal Probability, γk
                                                           0.6
                                                           0.4
                                                           0.2
                                                           0.0



                                                                 3   4    5   6   7

                                                                          k




Figure 16: Estimated Intensity Component Renewal Probability Profile Bundle.
The bold profile is Citigroup.


4.5     Absolute and Relative MSMD Performance
We now examine the performance of the estimated MSMD model, considering absolute fit
as well as measures of relative fit and forecasting performance. We assess absolute per-
formance of the MSMD model using White’s information matrix test, and we assess per-
formance relative to the leading ACD(1,1) competitor using Bayesian information criterion
(BIC) differentials as well as pseudo-out-of-sample root-mean-squared forecast error (RMSE)
differentials.16
White’s Information-Matrix Test for MSMD(7).
     Given the mixture-of-exponentials structure of the MSMD model, we could presumably
construct specification tests based on the residual ˆi = di λ̂i , assessing whether the residuals
are iid exponential after accounting for the fact that the residual is based on the estimate
λ̂i rather than the true λi .17 Instead we take a different and general approach, performing
the information matrix (IM) test of White (1982), which is a generic specification test for
models estimated by MLE.
     White (1982)’s IM test was originally developed for models with iid observations. Ex-
tensions to time series models are discussed, for instance, in White (1994). In the context of
  16
     We consider the ACD(1,1) model because it is a widely-used benchmark in the literature. We chose the
ubiquitous (1,1) specification based on preliminary empirical investigation.
  17
     In fact, such tests have a long tradition in the specification analysis of point process models that rely on
the time-deformation result discussed in Section 3.4 (e.g., Ogata (1988)).


                                                                         27
                                                          1.0
                                                          0.8
                              White's Statistic p−value
                                                          0.6
                                                          0.4
                                                          0.2
                                                          0.0



                                                                3       4      5         6   7

                                                                               k




Figure 17: White Statistic p-Value Profile Bundle. The bold profile is Citigroup. For visual
reference we include a horizontal line at p=0.05.


a time series model, IM tests focus on two properties of a correctly specified model. The so-
called dynamic first-order IM tests assess whether the score process is serially uncorrelated.
Under correct specification, the score process should be a martingale difference sequence.
The so-called second-order IM tests mimic White (1982)’s test for iid data and assess the
large-sample equivalence of the Hessian and the outer product of scores.
    We report p-values for a second-order IM test (see White (1994, Section 11.1). We use all
10 non-redundant elements of the information matrix to form the test statistic W hite. Under
the null hypothesis of correct specification the limit distribution takes the form W hite ∼ χ210 .
In Figure 17 we show the profile bundle of White statistic p-values. There is rather wide
variation, but there is also a clear pattern of increase in W hite statistics with k̄. Indeed
for the preferred value of k̄ = 7, almost none of the twenty-five p-values are less than 0.05.
Thus the second-order IM test generally reveals little or no evidence in the data against our
preferred MSMD specification.
Bayesian Information Criterion for MSMD(7) vs. ACD(1,1). We now consider the
performance of MSMD(7) relative to the canonical ACD(1,1) model. The ACD(1,1) model
is
                                       di = ϕi i                              (17)

                                                                    ϕi = ω + αdi−1 + βϕi−1

                                                                        i ∼ iidExp(1)

                                                                             28
                                         8
                                         6
                                 Count
                                         4
                                         2
                                         0

                                             0   100    200    300     400    500   600

                                                       D = BICMSMD − BICACD




Figure 18: Distribution of Differences in BIC Values Across Firms, γ k̄ = 7. We
compute differences as MSMD - ACD. We show a histogram.


The ACD(1,1) has three parameters whereas our MSMD(7) model has four parameters. We
estimate both models by maximum likelihood and use the Bayesian information criterion,
BIC = −2 ln L + k ln(n), to adjust the maximized likelihood function for model complexity,
that is, the number of estimated parameters.18 In Figure 18 we show the distribution of BIC
differences (BICM SM D − BICACD ). The differences are typically large, and the distribution
is centered around 600. For Citigroup the BIC differential is 200. To put the number into
perspective consider the following back-of-the-envelope calculation. The sample consists of
22,988 observations. Dividing the differential by the number of observations yields 0.013.
Thus, from a Bayesian perspective, on average each duration observation shifts the odds in
favor of the MSMD model by a factor of 1.013. Thus, while each individual observation
only provides weak evidence in favor of our specification, the nearly 23,000 observations in
combination provide overwhelming evidence in favor of the MSMD model.
Out-of-Sample Forecasting for MSMD(7) vs. ACD(1,1). BIC is an asymptotic
approximation of a Bayesian marginal data density, which in turn can be interpreted as
a measure of one-step-ahead predictive performance.19 We now conduct a pseudo-out-of-
  18
      For ease of interpretation and comparability to the maximized log likelihoods reported in Appendix C
and Figure 18, we multiply the BIC by -1/2, which converts it to BIC = ln L − k ln(n)/2; that is, maximized
log likelihood less a degrees-of-freedom penalty. Hence our BIC is in “log likelihood units,” so that “bigger
is better.”
   19
                                                            R
      The marginal
               P ndata density is definedP n asR p(d1:n ) = p(d1:n |θ)dθ and its logarithm
                                                                                     R        can be decomposed
as p(d1:n ) =     lni=1 p(di |d1:i−1 ) =  lni=1 p(di |d1:i−1 , θ)p(θ|d1:i−1 )dθ. Here p(di |d1:i−1 , θ)p(θ|d1:i−1 )dθ
can be viewed as score for a one-step-ahead forecast of di based on information about d1:i−1 .


                                                              29
sample forecasting experiment and directly compute RMSEs for one-step-ahead as well as
multi-step-ahead forecasts. Because our sample is large, we do not re-estimate the parameters
of the MSMD and the ACD model for each forecast origin. Instead we simply estimate the
models based on an initial sample d1:n0 and then keep the parameter estimates fixed for the
subsequent forecast origins i = n0 + 1, . . . , n. For more than half of the stocks we have more
than 11,000 inter-trade durations. In this case we choose n0 = 10, 0000. For all other stocks
we choose n0 such that n − n0 > 1, 000. Thus, the forecast evaluations are based on more
than 1,000 forecasts for all stocks. The shortest estimation sample consists of n0 = 1, 000
observations. Detailed information in n and n0 for each stock is provided in the Appendix.
    Under the quadratic loss function implicit in the RMSE criterion, the best predictor
is the conditional mean. For the ACD model we simply iterate the expression for ϕi ,
which represents the expected duration, forward using (17). The forecasting procedure for
the MSMD model is slightly more complicated. Using our filter, we construct a posterior
(based on the information available at the forecast origin n∗ ) for the intensity components:
p(M1,n0 , . . . , Mk̄,n0 |θ̂, d1:n∗ ). We then use the transition matrices P(γ̂k ) to forecast the inten-
sity components and compute the expected duration.
    We summarize the results in Figure 19. The three panels show histograms of RMSE
differences (MSMD(7) - ACD(1,1)) at forecast horizons h = 1, h = 5, and h = 20. For each
horizon we are forecasting the duration dn∗ +h , which is the duration between trade n∗ + h − 1
and n∗ + h (as opposed to the duration between trade n∗ and n∗ + h). For Citigroup the
RMSE differentials are −0.02, −2.50, and −2.00, respectively. Across stocks, the one-step-
ahead forecasting performances of the MSMD and ACD models are comparable, and most of
the differentials are close to zero. However, for five-step-ahead and 20-step-ahead forecasting
the MSMD model dominates the ACD model for all 25 stocks. The forecasting gain from
using MSMD is huge. For instance, for Citigroup the RMSE reduction is about 50%, clearly
illustrating the benefits of MSMD’s more-accurate approximation to longer-run dynamics.


5     Summary and Concluding Remarks
The inter-trade duration is an important and natural measure of market liquidity, and its
variability is related to liquidity risk. In this paper, we proposed a new Markov-switching
multi-fractal (MSMD) model of inter-trade durations. MSMD is a parameter-driven long-
memory model of conditional intensity dynamics, with the long memory driven by structural
markov-switching components. The popular standard ACD duration model neglects al+l of


                                                   30
                                                   12




                                                                                                                        8
           15




                                                   10




                                                                                                                        6
                                                   8
           10
   Count




                                           Count




                                                                                                                Count
                                                   6




                                                                                                                        4
                                                   4
           5




                                                                                                                        2
                                                   2
           0




                                                   0




                                                                                                                        0
                −1.0     −0.5      0.0                  −4.5   −4.0   −3.5   −3.0   −2.5   −2.0   −1.5   −1.0               −4      −3     −2      −1      0

                  1−Step RMSE Difference                        5−Step RMSE Difference                                           20−Step RMSE Difference




Figure 19: Distribution of Differences in RMSE Across Firms. Differences are computed
as MSMD - ACD.


those features. A few other notable duration models such as SCD have featured them in
isolation or in smaller assemblies, but none have featured them all. MSMD does so in a
simple and parsimonious fashion, successfully capturing the key features of financial market
inter-trade durations: long-memory dynamics and over-dispersed distributions. Both model
selection criteria and out-of-sample forecast comparisons strongly favor MSMD relative to
ACD. We leave it for future research to explore multivariate extensions and specifications
tailored to confront the massive trade counts observed in recent years.


References
Admati, A., and P. Pfleiderer (1988): “A Theory of Intraday Trading Patterns: Volume
 and Price Variability,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 3–40.

Alizadeh, S., M. Brandt, and F. Diebold (2002): “Range-Based Estimation of
 Stochastic Volatility Models,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1047–1091.

Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, P. Christoffersen, and F. Diebold (2013): “Risk
 Measurement for Market Risk Management,” in M. Harris, G. Constantinedes and R.
 Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier.

Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, and P. Labys (2001): “The Distribution
 of Realized Exchange Rate Volatility,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
 96, 42–55.

Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2003): “Modeling and
 Forecasting Realized Volatility,” Econometrica, 71, 579–625.

                                                                             31
Barndorff-Nielsen, O., and N. Shephard (2002): “Econometric Analysis of Realized
 Volatility and Its Use in Estimating Stochastic Volatility Models,” Journal of the Royal
 Statistical Society B, 64, 253–280.

Bauwens, L., and D. Veredas (2004): “The Stochastic Conditional Duration Model: A
 Latent Variable Model for the Analysis of Financial Durations,” Journal of Econometrics,
 119, 381–412.

Breidt, F., N. Crato, and P. De Lima (1998): “The Detection and Estimation of Long
 Memory in Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of Econometrics, 83, 325–348.

Brownlees, C., F. Cipollini, and G. Gallo (2012): “Multiplicative Error Models,” in
 L. Bauwens, C. Hafner and S. Laurent (eds.), Volatility Models and Their Applications,
 Wiley, in press.

Calvet, L., and A. Fisher (2001): “Forecasting Multifractal Volatility,” Journal of
 Econometrics, 105, 27–58.

          (2004): “How to Forecast Long-Run Volatility: Regime Switching and the Estima-
  tion of Multifractal Processes,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 2, 49–83.

         (2008): Multifractal Volatility: Theory, Forecasting, and Pricing, Elsevier.

Clark, P. (1973): “A Subordinated Stochastic Process Model with Finite Variance for
 Speculative Prices,” Econometrica, 41, 135–155.

Comte, F., and E. Renault (1998): “Long Memory in Continuous-Time Stochastic
 Volatility Models,” Mathematical Finance, 8, 291–323.

Corsi, F. (2009): “A Simple Approximate Long-Memory Model of Realized Volatility,”
 Journal of Financial Econometrics, 7(2), 174–196.

Cox, D. (1981): “Statistical Analysis of Time Series: Some Recent Developments,” Scan-
 dinavian Journal of Statistics, 8, 93–115.

Creal, D., S. Koopman, and A. Lucas (2010): “Generalize Autoregressive Score Models
 with Applications,” Manuscript, University of Chicago and Free University of Amsterdam.

Daley, D., and D. Vere-Jones (2003): An Introduction to the Theory of Point Processes:
 Volume I: Elementary Theory and Methods, Springer.

                                             32
         (2007): An Introduction to the Theory of Point Processes: Volume II: General
  Theory and Structure, Springer.

Deo, R., M. Hsieh, and C. Hurvich (2010): “Long Memory in Intertrade Durations,
 Counts and Realized Volatility of NYSE Stocks,” Journal of Statistical Planning and
 Inference, 140, 3715–3733.

Diebold, F., and A. Inoue (2001): “Long Memory and Regime Switching,” Journal of
 Econometrics, 105, 131–159.

Easley, D., and M. O’Hara (1992): “Time and the Process of Security Price Adjust-
 ment,” Journal of Finance, 47, 576–605.

Engle, R. (2002): “New Frontiers for ARCH Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
 17, 425–446.

Engle, R., and J. Russell (1998): “Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A New Model
 for Irregularly Spaced Transaction Data,” Econometrica, 66, 1127–1162.

Gallant, A. R., P. Rossi, and G. Tauchen (1993): “Nonlinear Dynamic Structures,”
 Econometrica, 61, 871–907.

Ghysels, E., C. Gourièroux, and J. Jasiak (2004): “Stochastic Volatility Duration
 Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 119, 413–433.

Granger, C., and R. Joyeux (1980): “An Introduction to Long-Memory Time Series
 Models and Fractional Differencing,” Journal of time series analysis, 1, 15–29.

Granger, C. W. J. (1980): “Long Memory Relationships and the Aggregation of Dynamic
 Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 14, 227–238.

Hamilton, J. (1989): “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time
 Series and the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57, 357–384.

Harvey, A. (2011): “Exponential Conditional Volatility Models,” Manuscript, University
 of Cambridge.

Hasbrouck, J. (2007): Empirical Market Microstructure, Oxford University Press.




                                         33
Hautsch, N. (2008): “Capturing Common Components in High-Frequency Financial Time
 Series: A Multivariate Stochastic Multiplicative Error Model,” Journal of Economic Dy-
 namics and Control, 32, 3978–4015.

Hautsch, N. (2012): Econometrics of Financial High-Frequency Data. Springer Verlag,
 New York, Econometrics of Financial High-Frequency Data, Springer.

Jasiak, J. (1999): “Persistence in Intertrade Durations,” Manuscript, Department of Eco-
  nomics, York University.

Karr, A. (1991): Point Processes and their Statistical Inference, Dekker.

Mandelbrot, B. (1997): Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinuity, Concentration,
 Risk, Springer.

Mandelbrot, B., A. Fisher, and L. Calvet (1997): “A Multifractal Model of Asset
 Returns,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1164.

Meddahi, N., E. Renault, and B. Werker (1998): “Modeling High-Frequency Data
 in Continuous Time,” Manuscript, University of Montreal.

Merton, R. (1980): “On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Exploratory
 Investigation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323–361.

Ogata, Y. (1988): “Statistical Models for Earthquake Occurrences and Residual Analysis
 for Point Processes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83, 9–27.

O’Hara, M. (1995): Market Microstructure Theory, Cambridge University Press.

Vives, X. (2008): Information and Learning in Markets: The Impact of Market Microstruc-
  ture, Princeton University Press.

White, H. (1982): “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models,” Economet-
 rica, 50, 1–25.

         (1994): Estimation Inference and Specification Analysis. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.




                                           34
Appendices
(For Web Publication Only)

A      Firm-by-Firm Intraday Calendar Effects

 Ticker    Name              â1    â2    â3    â4    â5    â6    â7    â8    â9   â10   â11   â12
 AA        Alcoa           3.61    3.58   3.64   3.91   4.22   3.90   4.41   4.24   4.02   4.21   4.06   3.70
 ABT       Abbott Labs     2.38    2.29   2.51   2.51   2.68   2.75   2.56   2.82   2.75   2.65   2.56   2.44
 AXP       Amex            2.45    2.63   2.79   2.84   2.99   3.10   2.99   3.00   2.93   2.99   3.02   2.82
 BA        Boeing          2.37    2.43   2.60   2.53   2.59   2.67   2.81   2.85   2.58   2.60   2.60   2.41
 BAC       B of A          3.11    3.15   3.30   3.38   3.40   3.41   3.34   3.40   3.32   3.12   3.16   3.15
 C         Citigroup       1.89    1.92   2.02   2.27   2.40   2.37   2.39   2.54   2.40   2.29   2.32   2.13
 CSCO      Cisco           2.03    1.98   2.39   2.23   2.41   2.54   2.53   2.64   2.59   2.36   2.19   2.31
 DELL      Dell            1.67    1.79   1.93   1.97   2.23   2.28   2.36   2.28   2.26   2.01   2.13   2.03
 DOW       Dow             3.20    3.23   3.37   3.34   3.49   3.79   3.61   3.54   3.52   3.43   3.25   3.27
 F         Ford            2.32    2.32   2.48   2.56   2.62   2.62   2.67   2.66   2.33   2.52   2.49   2.39
 GE        GE              2.40    2.42   2.59   2.54   2.68   2.79   2.76   2.84   2.85   2.60   2.54   2.47
 HD        Home Depot      1.80    1.85   1.92   2.08   2.15   2.44   2.15   2.32   2.30   2.32   2.22   2.05
 IBM       IBM             1.84    1.82   1.88   1.96   2.08   1.95   2.14   2.03   2.16   2.14   2.06   1.96
 INTC      Intel           1.39    1.41   1.57   1.64   1.75   1.86   1.87   1.89   1.91   1.80   1.85   1.54
 JNJ       J&J             2.15    2.16   2.20   2.24   2.33   2.45   2.46   2.49   2.43   2.34   2.17   2.13
 KO        Coca-Cola       2.54    2.50   2.50   2.63   2.78   2.78   2.89   2.93   2.84   2.71   2.61   2.51
 MCD       McDonald’s      3.26    3.22   3.35   3.41   3.43   3.58   3.52   3.68   3.40   3.34   3.15   3.01
 MRK       Merck           1.40    1.37   1.40   1.46   1.65   1.65   1.67   1.74   1.65   1.64   1.61   1.43
 MSFT      Microsoft       1.79    1.89   1.90   1.80   1.94   2.19   2.04   2.19   2.09   1.91   1.97   1.72
 QCOM      Qualcomm        3.35    3.60   3.64   3.91   3.61   2.26   3.32   3.73   3.97   3.64   3.94   3.25
 T         AT&T            2.24    2.25   2.20   2.31   2.50   2.43   2.58   2.55   2.55   2.41   2.35   2.28
 TXN       Texas Inst.     3.42    3.58   3.47   3.57   3.95   3.94   4.04   3.85   3.69   3.67   3.27   3.34
 WFC       Wells Fargo     3.30    3.55   3.41   3.62   3.78   3.78   3.98   3.90   4.04   4.09   3.75   3.54
 WMT       Wal-Mart        1.66    1.73   1.82   1.87   1.96   1.98   2.14   2.13   2.05   2.01   1.98   1.85
 XRX       Xerox           3.89    3.80   3.87   4.06   4.06   4.07   4.14   4.35   4.12   3.98   4.02   3.85


Table 2: Estimated Intraday Calendar Effects, Twenty-Five Firms Randomly Se-
lected From S&P 100. We show estimated coefficients on time-of-day dummies, for half-hour intervals
from 10 AM to 4 PM, for February 1993. We order firms across rows alphabetically.




                                                  35
B      Firm-by-Firm Descriptive Statistics

 Ticker    Name              Mean     Med      Max     Min    Std    Skew     Kurt    OD         n        n0
 AA        Alcoa               2.66   1.28    39.58    0.01   3.77    3.07    17.09   1.42    2,989    1,000
 ABT       Abbott Labs         1.86   1.11    26.30    0.06   2.21    2.84    15.89   1.19   16,929   10,000
 AXP       Amex                2.22   1.17    42.33    0.05   2.93    3.13    19.35   1.32   10,531    9,000
 BA        Boeing              1.82   1.13    25.00    0.06   2.03    2.50    12.94   1.12   17,111   10,000
 BAC       B of A              1.97   1.12    27.14    0.03   2.44    2.90    15.69   1.24    7,939    6,000
 C         Citigroup           1.93   1.01    32.67    0.08   2.63    3.59    22.46   1.36   22,988   1,0000
 CSCO      Cisco               2.22   1.01    56.30    0.07   3.52    4.53    36.29   1.59   17,963   10,000
 DELL      Dell                2.13   1.02    76.83    0.09   3.40    5.15    48.30   1.60   24,610   10,000
 DOW       Dow Chemical        1.96   1.11    37.59    0.02   2.49    3.60    28.03   1.27    6,902    5,000
 F         Ford                2.18   0.99    49.25    0.07   3.13    3.50    22.48   1.44   15,562   10,000
 GE        GE                  2.03   1.10    27.13    0.06   2.56    2.72    13.85   1.26   14,798   10,000
 HD        Home Depot          1.97   1.00    38.62    0.09   2.65    3.47    22.28   1.35   25,113   10,000
 IBM       IBM                 1.75   1.06    35.87    0.12   2.03    3.01    19.16   1.16   31,895   10,000
 INTC      Intel               1.81   1.00    50.38    0.15   2.41    4.17    34.57   1.33   41,957   10,000
 JNJ       J&J                 1.72   1.03    29.56    0.08   2.01    3.10    19.10   1.17   24,208   10,000
 KO        Coca-Cola           1.82   1.14    26.31    0.05   2.06    2.49    12.47   1.13   15,542   10,000
 MCD       McDonald’s          1.93   1.15    22.17    0.03   2.26    2.58    12.77   1.17    7,441    6,000
 MRK       Merck               1.61   0.98    24.66    0.18   1.78    2.95    17.31   1.11   54,242   10,000
 MSFT      Microsoft           2.01   1.01    53.68    0.11   2.94    4.43    37.43   1.46   29,191   10,000
 QCOM      Qualcomm            3.09   1.09   201.25    0.02   6.81   10.00   202.57   2.20    4,416    3,000
 T         AT&T                1.79   1.05    22.78    0.08   2.09    2.62    13.26   1.16    21145   10,000
 TXN       Texas Inst.         2.56   1.15    55.41    0.02   3.70    3.39    23.54   1.44    4,235    3,000
 WFC       Wells Fargo         2.47   1.08    78.65    0.02   4.05    5.18    54.37   1.64    4,047    3,000
 WMT       Wal-Mart            1.77   0.99    31.92    0.12   2.11    2.88    16.23   1.19   33,899   10,000
 XRX       Xerox               2.50   1.18    31.80    0.01   3.42    2.83    14.62   1.37    2,933    1,000


Table 3: Descriptive Statistics, Twenty-Five Firms Randomly Selected From S&P
100. We show sample mean, median, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, over-dispersion (Std/Mean),
sample size n (number of inter-trade durations), and size of estimation sample for pseudo-out-of-sample
forecasting exercise (n0 ) for inter-trade durations between 10 AM and 4 PM during February 1993. We
order firms across rows alphabetically.




                                                  36
C     Firm-by-Firm Estimation and Forecasting

                               k̄ = 3     k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.47       1.47        1.47        1.47        1.47
                               (0.02)     (0.08)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
         λ
         b                      0.83       0.65        1.23        2.35        4.47
                               (0.06)     (0.43)      (0.24)      (0.40)      (0.81)
         γbk̄                   0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
         bb                     7.68       13.85       14.72       14.96       15.07
                               (2.09)     (16.68)     (4.70)      (2.85)      (1.34)

         ln L                 -5595.32   -5599.27    -5599.68    -5600.08    -5600.54
         W hite               117.71       25.66       13.76       7.80        8.24
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.18)   (p= 0.65)   (p= 0.61)
         BIC                     –          –           –           –        11233.09
         1-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          4.26
         5-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          4.33
         20-step RMSE            –          –           –           –          4.45

         ACD Comparison:         –          –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –          –           –           –        -5783.64
         BIC                     –          –           –           –        11591.29
         1-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          4.05
         5-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          6.43
         20-step RMSE            –          –           –           –          5.03


Table 4: Model Estimation and Forecasting: AA. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                37
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.29       1.25        1.24        1.21        1.21
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.80       0.85        1.08        0.95        0.53
                               (0.14)      (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.02)


         γbk̄                   0.07       0.13        0.13        0.18        0.17
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.02)

         bb                    13.89       8.53        7.28        4.81        5.24
                               (1.09)      (1.56)     (0.72)      (0.53)      (0.22)

         ln L                -26342.34   -26329.71   -26326.88   -26324.39   -26328.48
         W hite                39.00       16.39       15.01       21.18       17.70
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.09)   (p= 0.13)   (p= 0.02)   (p= 0.06)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        52695.91
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.46
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.46
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          1.48

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -26434.75
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        52898.71
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.46
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.10
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          1.68


Table 5: Model Estimation and Forecasting: ABT. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              38
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.38       1.34        1.30        1.31        1.27
                               (0.48)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.76       0.95        0.87        1.61        0.81
                               (1.12)      (0.26)     (0.07)      (0.15)      (0.04)


         γbk̄                   0.79       0.94        0.99        0.95        0.99
                               (0.10)      (0.28)     (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.00)

         bb                    30.70       29.10       12.69       20.68       10.24
                               (0.59)      (4.69)     (1.62)      (0.18)      (1.08)

         ln L                -17888.32   -17844.68   -17835.35   -17843.72   -17829.99
         W hite                29.73       28.11       7.64        19.56       10.16
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.66)   (p= 0.03)   (p= 0.43)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        35697.03
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.18
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.23
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.31

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -18042.24
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        36112.27
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.07
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          8.00
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          7.83


Table 6: Model Estimation and Forecasting: AXP. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              39
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.30       1.25        1.26        1.24        1.22
                               (0.05)      (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)


         λ
         b                      1.17       1.06        1.63        0.74        0.82
                               (0.25)      (0.05)     (0.17)      (0.03)      (0.09)


         γbk̄                   0.10       0.28        0.10        0.22        0.26
                               (0.04)      (0.01)     (0.03)      (0.07)      (0.06)

         bb                    26.21       11.86       9.70        10.44       6.77
                              (26.69)      (2.62)     (1.47)      (1.35)      (1.31)

         ln L                -26717.54   -26712.29   -26714.19   -26705.30   -26703.08
         W hite                26.55       26.13       20.41       18.28       12.83
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.03)   (p= 0.05)   (p= 0.23)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        53445.15
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.79
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.80
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          1.83

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -26802.11
         BIC                     –           –           –          –         53633.4
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.78
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.69
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.34


Table 7: Model Estimation and Forecasting: BA. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              40
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.36        1.31        1.27        1.25        1.23
                               (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      1.16        1.09        1.02        0.93        0.89
                               (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.03)      (0.05)      (0.11)


         γbk̄                   0.42        0.86        0.99        0.98        0.99
                               (0.06)      (0.25)      (0.00)      (0.02)      (0.00)

         bb                     20.43       11.58       7.76        4.91        3.80
                               (0.24)      (2.07)      (0.43)      (0.68)      (0.33)

         ln L                 -12917.76   -12910.83   -12910.44   -12910.30   -12909.57
         W hite                 20.09       11.32       13.26       8.07        11.33
                              (p=0.03)    (p=0.33)    (p=0.21)    (p=0.62)    (p=0.33)
         BIC                      –          –           –           –        25856.52
         1-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          2.84
         5-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          2.86
         20-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          2.87

         ACD Comparison:          –          –           –           –           –
         ln L                     –          –           –           –        -13073.60
         BIC                      –          –           –           –        26174.14
         1-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          2.82
         5-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          4.97
         20-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          4.04


Table 8: Model Estimation and Forecasting: BAC. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              41
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.33       1.30        1.26        1.26        1.23
                               (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.79       0.98        0.88        0.70        1.17
                               (0.08)      (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.27)      (0.10)


         γbk̄                   0.08       0.10        0.18        0.18        0.18
                               (0.03)      (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.06)

         bb                    14.33       11.06       6.14        6.16        4.52
                              (11.23)      (0.39)     (0.55)      (2.29)      (1.61)

         ln L                -34872.83   -34844.23   -34850.18   -34850.67   -34845.03
         W hite                25.01       22.89       11.81       13.63       9.12
                             (p= 0.01)   (p= 0.01)   (p= 0.30)   (p= 0.19)   (p= 0.52)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        69730.23
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.41
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.44
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.50

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -35055.65
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        70141.43
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.43
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.94
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.50


Table 9: MSMD Model Estimation and Forecasting: C. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              42
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.42        1.37        1.34        1.40        1.29
                               (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.08)      (0.01)      (0.02)


         λ
         b                      0.73        0.82        0.84        2.74        0.83
                               (0.03)      (0.04)      (2.77)      (0.17)      (0.04)


         γbk̄                   0.14        0.17        0.19        0.18        0.20
                               (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.50)      (0.00)      (0.02)

         bb                     2.65        2.47        2.02        3.73        1.68
                               (0.80)      (0.34)      (1.88)      (0.32)      (0.08)

         ln L                 -28592.08   -28588.80   -28595.00   -28608.54   -28600.31
         W hite                 45.80       43.11       47.90       33.29       36.75
                              (p=0.00)    (p=0.00)    (p=0.00)    (p=0.00)    (p=0.00)
         BIC                      –          –           –           –        57239.8
         1-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          1.77
         5-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          1.81
         20-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          1.86

         ACD Comparison:          –          –           –           –           –
         ln L                     –          –           –           –        -29098.61
         BIC                      –          –           –           –        58226.61
         1-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          1.81
         5-step RMSE              –          –           –           –          3.24
         20-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          1.93


Table 10: Model Estimation and Forecasting: CSCO. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              43
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5     k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.40        1.36       1.37        1.32        1.32
                               (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)


         λ
         b                      0.67        0.80       1.26        1.18        0.91
                               (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.09)     (0.04)      (0.07)


         γbk̄                   0.08        0.09       0.10        0.11        0.10
                               (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)

         bb                     4.18        3.45       3.80        2.75        2.59
                               (0.98)      (0.66)      (0.55)     (0.15)      (0.30)

         ln L                -37957.67   -37903.42   -37909.02   -37899.56   -37898.92
         W hite                63.21       35.57       35.94       11.09       7.37
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p=0.00)    (p=0.35)    (p=0.69)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        75838.28
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.58
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.65
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.71

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -38240.47
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        76511.27
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.65
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.71
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.88


Table 11: Model Estimation and Forecasting: DELL. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              44
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.29       1.28        1.25        1.25        1.22
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.72       0.64        0.64        0.51        0.90
                               (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.07)


         γbk̄                   0.59       0.87        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.10)      (0.05)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    16.52       15.47       9.26        9.38        6.89
                               (0.41)      (0.44)     (1.37)      (1.18)      (0.27)

         ln L                -11159.40   -11149.76   -11146.89   -11147.64   -11145.02
         W hite                13.80       10.04       3.01        4.40        5.92
                             (p= 0.18)   (p= 0.44)   (p= 0.98)   (p= 0.93)   (p= 0.82)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –         22325.4
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.19
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.24
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.27

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -11238.01
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        22502.54
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.16
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.57
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.93


Table 12: Model Estimation and Forecasting: DOW. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              45
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.43       1.37        1.35        1.32        1.30
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.04)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      1.00       1.00        0.94        0.91        1.12
                               (0.09)      (0.32)     (1.16)      (0.06)      (0.02)


         γbk̄                   0.76       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    19.68       13.82       14.82       8.55        6.85
                               (2.07)      (2.68)     (2.69)      (1.00)      (0.33)

         ln L                -25684.19   -25673.06   -25650.57   -25640.26   -25638.54
         W hite                55.32       16.75       22.23       11.29       15.59
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.08)   (p= 0.01)   (p= 0.34)   (p= 0.11)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        51315.69
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.64
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.70
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.75

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -26227.00
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        52482.96
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.57
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.05
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.65


Table 13: Model Estimation and Forecasting: F. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              46
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.36       1.30        1.27        1.30        1.27
                               (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.90       0.85        0.80        1.75        0.51
                               (0.09)      (0.03)     (0.50)      (0.10)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    30.54       8.94        5.61        9.66        6.56
                               (3.12)      (0.54)     (0.41)      (0.65)      (0.46)

         ln L                -24406.93   -24404.04   -24406.14   -24409.90   -24410.93
         W hite                56.46       41.13       26.16       22.58       9.20
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.01)   (p= 0.51)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        48860.27
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.39
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.43
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.48

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -24766.13
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        49561.07
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.37
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.53
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.91


Table 14: Model Estimation and Forecasting: GE. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              47
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.31       1.28        1.22        1.20        1.20
                               (0.01)      (0.10)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.76       0.90        0.71        0.80        0.67
                               (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.05       0.06        0.06        0.09        0.09
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.05)      (0.01)      (0.02)

         bb                    23.46       20.34       7.53        6.99        6.94
                               (4.73)      (3.10)     (6.60)      (0.85)      (1.28)

         ln L                -38439.49   -38402.59   -38378.43   -38370.54   -38371.06
         W hite                51.38       30.45       12.69       8.96        8.61
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.24)   (p= 0.54)   (p= 0.57)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        76782.64
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          0.95
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          0.95
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          0.96

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -38474.64
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        76979.67
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          0.95
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.15
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.03


Table 15: Model Estimation and Forecasting: HD. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              48
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.27       1.24         1.21        1.21        1.18
                               (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.03)      (0.12)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.82       0.87         0.84        1.06        0.77
                               (0.02)     (0.03)       (0.29)      (0.33)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.05       0.05         0.05        0.05        0.06
                               (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.01)      (0.04)      (0.02)

         bb                    10.12       5.93         3.90        4.00        2.85
                               (0.99)     (0.56)       (1.91)      (3.64)      (0.31)

         ln L                -47744.73   -47710.78    -47696.20   -47697.22   -47695.07
         W hite                40.16       16.37        5.86        9.93        3.42
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.09)    (p= 0.83)   (p= 0.45)   (p= 0.97)
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        95431.62
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.68
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.67
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          1.69

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –           –        -47794.69
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        95620.49
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.68
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          3.57
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          2.84


Table 16: Model Estimation and Forecasting: IBM. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                 49
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.32       1.29         1.30        1.24        1.22
                               (0.00)     (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.00)


         λ
         b                      0.76       0.71         1.00        0.74        0.76
                               (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.04)


         γbk̄                   0.07       0.08         0.09        0.09        0.10
                               (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.01)

         bb                     3.86       3.42         3.97        2.21        1.92
                               (0.48)     (0.27)       (0.37)      (0.19)      (0.06)

         ln L                -61934.00   -61888.79    -61895.91   -61891.47   -61893.35
         W hite                76.93       83.01        83.32       64.88       67.82
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.00)    (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        123829.3
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          2.72
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          2.79
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          2.92

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –           –        -62030.70
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        124093.3
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          2.75
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          5.08
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          3.84


Table 17: Model Estimation and Forecasting: INTC. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                 50
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.23       1.18        1.18        1.18        1.18
                               (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.03)


         λ
         b                      0.75       0.71        0.60        0.51        0.90
                               (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.04)


         γbk̄                   0.08       0.12        0.12        0.12        0.12
                               (0.02)      (0.03)     (0.01)      (0.04)      (0.00)

         bb                    21.23       10.25       10.25       10.24       10.33
                               (2.34)      (1.01)     (0.40)      (1.64)      (0.83)

         ln L                -35902.36   -35890.60   -35891.17   -35891.85   -35891.62
         W hite                 9.45       17.73       11.24       11.02       9.75
                             (p= 0.49)   (p= 0.06)   (p= 0.34)   (p= 0.36)   (p= 0.46)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        71823.62
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.79
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.79
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          1.78

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -35961.84
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        71953.96
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.82
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.75
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.01


Table 18: Model Estimation and Forecasting: JNJ. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              51
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.24       1.21         1.20        1.21        1.18
                               (0.01)     (0.52)       (0.01)      (0.34)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.78       0.76         0.66        0.55        0.56
                               (0.02)     (3.80)       (0.02)      (0.35)      (0.09)


         γbk̄                   0.33       0.65         0.72        0.75        0.85
                               (0.05)     (0.49)       (0.09)      (0.57)      (0.02)

         bb                    12.02       7.21         6.78        7.17        4.69
                               (2.21)     (2.89)       (1.11)      (8.03)      (0.64)

         ln L                -24426.66   -24423.53    -24422.53   -24423.63   -24424.36
         W hite                25.44       23.20        12.45       12.75       13.51
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.01)    (p= 0.26)   (p= 0.24)   (p= 0.20)
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        48887.33
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.74
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.74
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          1.76

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –           –        -24534.83
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        49098.61
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.74
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          3.37
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          2.57


Table 19: Model Estimation and Forecasting: KO. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                 52
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.29       1.29        1.24        1.24        1.24
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.79       0.61        0.62        0.50        1.08
                               (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    34.56       35.43       10.32       10.37       10.46
                               (5.50)      (5.54)     (0.53)      (0.45)      (0.91)

         ln L                -12094.83   -12095.83   -12097.68   -12098.48   -12098.37
         W hite                17.27       12.02       16.77       14.35       17.55
                             (p= 0.07)   (p= 0.28)   (p= 0.08)   (p= 0.16)   (p= 0.06)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –         24232.4
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.48
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.51
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          2.51

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -12201.87
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        24430.48
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.47
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.54
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.59


Table 20: Model Estimation and Forecasting: MCD. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              53
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.22       1.20         1.17        1.17        1.17
                               (0.04)     (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)


         λ
         b                      0.71       0.83         0.75        0.64        0.78
                               (0.10)     (0.05)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         γbk̄                   0.03       0.03         0.04        0.04        0.04
                               (0.04)     (0.00)       (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.01)

         bb                    16.59       8.12         5.97        5.94        5.96
                               (1.32)     (0.21)       (0.83)      (0.67)      (0.66)

         ln L                -77426.73   -77402.21    -77374.72   -77375.22   -77375.26
         W hite                29.02       16.47        14.41       15.28       7.02
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.09)    (p= 0.16)   (p= 0.12)   (p= 0.72)
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        154794.1
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          0.95
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          0.96
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          0.95

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –           –        -77449.99
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        154932.7
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          0.96
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          2.13
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          1.69


Table 21: Model Estimation and Forecasting: MRK. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                 54
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.38        1.34       1.32        1.29        1.30
                               (0.03)      (0.01)     (0.03)      (0.00)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.78        0.85       0.72        0.85        0.68
                               (0.16)      (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.07)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.09        0.10       0.11        0.12        0.12
                               (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)

         bb                     4.29        3.18       3.04        2.54        2.70
                               (0.20)      (0.23)     (0.28)      (0.17)      (0.16)

         ln L                -44695.91   -44641.79   -44635.38   -44630.75   -44633.69
         W hite                60.03       12.87       15.57       6.39        7.04
                              (p=0.00)   (p=0.23)    (p=0.11)    (p=0.78)    (p= 0.72)
         BIC                     –           –          –           –        89308.51
         1-step RMSE             –           –          –           –          3.13
         5-step RMSE             –           –          –           –          3.22
         20-step RMSE            –           –          –           –          3.29

         ACD Comparison:         –           –          –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –          –           –        -44978.82
         BIC                     –           –          –           –        89988.48
         1-step RMSE             –           –          –           –          3.20
         5-step RMSE             –           –          –           –          6.07
         20-step RMSE            –           –          –           –          5.51


Table 22: Model Estimation and Forecasting: MSFT. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              55
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.58       1.51        1.45        1.43        1.44
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      1.14       1.06        1.11        0.89        0.63
                               (0.10)      (0.07)     (0.10)      (0.07)      (0.13)


         γbk̄                   0.18       0.21        0.22        0.21        0.23
                               (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.16)

         bb                     4.30       3.44        2.45        2.24        2.43
                               (1.01)      (0.38)     (0.28)      (0.29)      (0.73)

         ln L                 -7597.95   -7568.28    -7564.41    -7562.45    -7564.50
         W hite                41.27       15.36       12.69       6.32        5.08
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.12)   (p= 0.24)   (p= 0.79)   (p= 0.89)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        15162.57
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.58
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          6.36
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          6.91

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -7871.92
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        15769.02
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.92
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          10.63
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          10.80


Table 23: Model Estimation and Forecasting: QCOM. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              56
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.27       1.25         1.25        1.25        1.22
                               (0.01)     (0.04)       (0.07)      (0.54)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.80       0.88         0.71        0.56        0.56
                               (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.35)      (1.65)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.29       0.48         0.48        0.48        0.73
                               (0.15)     (0.05)       (0.76)      (0.10)      (0.04)

         bb                    13.55       10.42        10.65       10.68       6.61
                               (4.05)     (0.97)       (1.73)      (1.68)      (1.18)

         ln L                -32707.60   -32684.19    -32685.15   -32685.87   -32685.19
         W hite                49.12       29.23        17.68       15.33       19.86
                             (p=0.00)    (p= 0.00)    (p= 0.06)   (p= 0.12)   (p= 0.03)
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        65410.22
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.23
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.24
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          1.24

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –           –        -32886.98
         BIC                     –           –           –           –        65803.84
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          1.28
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –           –          2.49
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –           –          1.52


Table 24: Model Estimation and Forecasting: T. We report estimation results for
the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                 57
                               k̄ = 3     k̄ = 4      k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.48       1.42        1.45        1.44        1.45
                               (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)


         λ
         b                      0.83       0.86        1.89        2.60        2.36
                               (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.27)      (0.51)      (0.32)


         γbk̄                   0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                     8.23       4.75        8.53        8.70        8.63
                               (0.79)     (0.55)      (1.04)      (1.22)      (1.77)

         ln L                 -7689.50   -7688.41    -7693.84    -7695.12    -7694.20
         W hite                22.17       98.37       12.57       38.89       8.54
                             (p=0.01)    (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.25)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.58)
         BIC                     –          –           –           –         15421.8
         1-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          3.51
         5-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          3.57
         20-step RMSE            –          –           –           –          3.66

         ACD Comparison:         –          –           –           –           –
         ln L                    –          –           –           –        -7974.67
         BIC                     –          –           –           –        15974.39
         1-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          3.34
         5-step RMSE             –          –           –           –          5.35
         20-step RMSE            –          –           –           –          3.92


Table 25: Model Estimation and Forecasting: TXN. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                                58
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.46       1.41        1.36        1.36        1.36
                               (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.81       0.72        0.74        1.15        0.86
                               (0.07)      (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.02)


         γbk̄                   0.94       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.05)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    14.25       9.86        5.64        5.77        5.88
                               (0.96)      (0.91)     (0.51)      (0.31)      (0.69)

         ln L                 -7059.32   -7053.53    -7049.78    -7051.41    -7051.57
         W hite                21.49       12.04       4.17        2.99        2.86
                             (p= 0.02)   (p= 0.28)   (p= 0.94)   (p= 0.98)   (p= 0.98)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        14136.36
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.77
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          1.78
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          1.78

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -7291.16
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        14607.24
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.92
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          4.89
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.64


Table 26: Model Estimation and Forecasting: WFC. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              59
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.26       1.22        1.20        1.17        1.16
                               (0.03)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.01)


         λ
         b                      0.75       0.83        0.83        0.80        0.81
                               (0.37)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.03)


         γbk̄                   0.03       0.06        0.21        0.13        0.22
                               (0.01)      (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.03)      (0.11)

         bb                    10.97       18.38       10.48       6.80        5.76
                               (1.33)     (11.31)     (1.52)      (0.93)      (1.07)

         ln L                -50726.70   -50654.46   -50648.08   -50643.79   -50639.69
         W hite                94.54       20.87       22.78       5.54        8.80
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.02)   (p= 0.01)   (p= 0.85)   (p= 0.55)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        101321.1
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          2.99
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.01
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.03

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -50774.41
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        101580.1
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.02
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.33
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.16


Table 27: Model Estimation and Forecasting: WMT. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              60
                               k̄ = 3      k̄ = 4     k̄ = 5      k̄ = 6      k̄ = 7

         m
         c0                     1.52       1.52        1.53        1.52        1.52
                               (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.10)      (0.02)      (0.03)


         λ
         b                      1.53       3.23        0.76        4.43        2.93
                               (0.19)      (0.47)     (0.35)      (0.94)      (1.12)


         γbk̄                   0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
                               (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

         bb                    25.91       27.43       34.11       27.48       27.58
                               (6.18)      (2.91)     (37.63)     (6.93)      (1.58)

         ln L                 -5360.69   -5361.73    -5362.07    -5361.97    -5361.94
         W hite                30.32       8.34        31.07       28.50       29.34
                             (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.60)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)   (p= 0.00)
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        10755.82
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.65
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.69
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          3.71

         ACD Comparison:         –           –           –          –           –
         ln L                    –           –           –          –        -5552.51
         BIC                     –           –           –          –        11128.97
         1-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          3.43
         5-step RMSE             –           –           –          –          5.37
         20-step RMSE            –           –           –          –          4.04


Table 28: Model Estimation and Forecasting: XRX. We report estimation results
for the MSMD model with k̄ intensity components. Standard errors appear in parentheses
beneath estimated parameters. W hite is White’s omnibus information matrix test of model
specification adequacy, with marginal significance levels in parentheses. See text for details.




                                              61
