                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
                   OF SURVIVORS AFTER LAYOFFS:
                       A PLANT-LEVEL STUDY




                         Casey Ichniowskj




                      Working Paper No. 1807




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #180 7
                                                  January   1986




         The Economic Performance of Survivors After Layoffs:
                       A Plant-Level Study



                                ABSTRA2




     This   study tests for the empirical relationship between layoffs and

the economic performance of workers who remain after the layoffs.

Previous studies performed in laboratory settings have often found

increases in the efficiency of workers after layoffs. This analysis is

the first to test for this relationship using operating data from a set

of similar establishments. Within the framework of a modified Cobb-

Douglas production function, layoffs do not influence subsequent produc-

tivity in the establishments in this study's sample. It is also

suggested that the seniority systems governing layoffs and the high

levels of capital intensity in these establishments may help explain the

difference between the findings in the laboratory studies and those

obtained in this analysis.


                                              Prof. Casey Ichniowski
                                              Uris 713
                                              Graduate School of Business
                                              Columbia University
                                              New York, NY 10027
I. INTRODUCTION

     While many aspects of the decision to layoff workers have been the

focus of various economic studies, a growing body of psychologically-

based studies of worker behavior suggests another dimension of layoffs

yet to be explored in the economic literature: the impact of layoffs on

those not laid off --   the "survivorst' These studies describe a set of
potential cognitive or emotional responses among those who remain after a

layoff that can affect their effort, attention or motivation as well as

their attitudes toward their managers or their jobs. These responses

among the workers remaining after layoffs, in turn, will affect the

workers' performance on the job. Importantly, empirical tests in these

studies consistently find significant effects of layoffs on survivors'

work performance. However, all existing empirical tests have been

conducted in laboratory settings. Here, the empirical research is

extended by examining how the productivity of a set of nine manufacturing

plants changes in response to layoffs. Unlike the existing laboratory

studies, this analysis does not find significant differences in the

economic performance of these plants in periods following layoffs.



II. PREVIOUS RESEARCH AN]) TUE EQUITY THEORY FRANEWORK FOR SURVIVOR

     REACTIONS

     The existing laboratory studies are designed and interpeted within

the framework of equity theory developed by Adams.1 An individual

perceives inequity when he "perceives that his job inputs and/or outcomes

 stand psychologically in an obverse relation to the inputs and outcomes

     •tt2 of those in a relevant reference group. In work organizations,

 outcomes are broadly defined as pay, benefits, status, and other at-

 tributes that can be considered as rewards or compensation for the job.
                                                                             2



Inputs are the attributes the employee brings to the employment exchange:

human capital traits, demographic characteristics, "and, very important-

ly, the effort he expends on the job."3 Much of the empirical research

in organizational psychology based on equity theory analyzes what happens

to workers who experience "positive inequity"; that is, when an employee

perceives that his outcomes-to-inputs ratio exceeds that of relevant

coworkers.4 Traditionally, the outcome-to-input ratio in these labora-

tory-controlled studies is altered by increasing the compensation of one

worker above that of a coworker for continued work on the same task. In

the next round of these tasks, the peformance of "overpaid" employees

improves relative to that of the coworker and relative to the performance

of workers in control groups.5

     Recently, in an extension of these studies on "positive inequity,"

attention has focused on the performance of survivors of layoffs.    Here,
it is suggested that when a coworker is laid off, the survivor may

experience positive inequity. Similar to previous results, these labor-

atory studies document that, after a layoff, the suvivor performs signi-

ficantly better relative to his previous performance and to the perform-

ances of workers in a control group.6 The interpretation placed on these

results is that layoffs primarily arouse guilt or anxiety in the survivor

that stimulates improved performance rather than arousing anger (toward

the experimenter who laid off the worker) which might stimulate increased

performance.

     The research on survivors also documents the importance of certain

intervening variables on the behavior of survivors. Mechanisms that

accentuate the psychological responses of survivors should accentuate

performance differentials as well. For example, the method or decision
                                                                            3



 rule for the layoffs may affect behavioral responses. In a study that

 tests this hypothesis,7 layoffs were administered in two different ways:

 (1) by seemingly random selection criteria, and (2) according to previous

performance of the workers. When layoffs seemed random, performance

 increases of survivors were significantly greater than increases of

 control group workers. However, when layoffs were decided on merit,

performance increases of survivors and control group workers were not

significantly different.

     The growing body of empirical findings from laboratory studies may

provide economists with important information on how to model the labor

input in the firm's production process. Specifically, these studies

suggest that the marginal effect of a decrease in labor may vary accord-

ing to how the labor input is reduced. For example, the marginal impact

of a decrease in labor hours may be different when a worker quits and

when a worker is laid off if remaining workers respond differently in

these two situations. If the findings in the studies described above do

in fact apply to firms in the economy, models of production will require

an added degree of complexity. This study, then, is the first to test

for the empirical relationship between layoffs and subsequent economic

performance with operating data from a sample of firms.



III. PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTION: SANPLE, NODEL AND DATA



     The sample for this study includes nine paper mills in the same

four-digit industrial classification (SIC no. 2621). All are owned by

the same parent corporation and all have unionized production workforces.

Monthly observations on the operations and layoff experience of these
                                                                           4



mills cover the period from January 1976 to September 1982. Due to

incomplete data, particularly on the number of layoffs, certain monthly

observations are not included in the sample. Individual panels on a

given mill range from 28 months to 68 months. A full complement of

layoff, input, and output data needed to estimate the models below is

available for 527 mill-months.

     Analyzing changes in workers' economic contribution after layoffs

with actual operating data is clearly needed to consider whether the

existing set of findings can be extended beyond laboratory settings.

However, outside controlled settings, the number of factors other than

layoffs that influence the productivity of workers, even in a set of

plants in the same four-digit industry, will increase dramatically.

Also, with more than one factor of production, the marginal product of

employees who remain after a layoff should increase as the ratio of other

inputs to labor increases. As a first step in modelling the multivariate

determinants of the economic performance of these nine mills, consider a

simple Cobb-Douglas production function:8


                 Q A K1 E2 L's'                             (Equation 1)


where K, E and L are capital, energy and labor inputs. Aware of the

inability of standard economic production functions, such as Equation 1,

to explain intra- and inter-firm variations in productivity,9 field

investigations of the mills were conducted which led to certain modifica-

tions of this function. Generally, limiting the sample to mills in the

same four-digit industry classification did not insure homogeneous inputs

or output. Before considering how to model the impact of layoffs on the
                                                                              5




labor input L, this heterogeneity of economic inputs and output will be

addressed.

     A value-added output measure, the standard price-weighted index used

when heterogeneity in output exists, was not available --    nor   would it

have been appropriate.0 As an alternative, tons of paper produced is

the variable used to measure Q. The heterogeneity in output in this

sample is directly associated with differences in departments or stages

of the production process. Several dummy variables indicating the

presence of various departments that alter the paper products are there-

fore incorporated in equation 1 as direct controls for output heterogene-

ity. For example, the difference between sheeted white paper and

newsprint corresponds directly to the presence of bleaching and convert-

ing departments in mills that produce the former product. The coeffi-

cients on such department dummies are expected to be negative as these

optional departments use additional labor, capital, and energy inputs to

produce a given tonnage of paper. Associated with the vector of produc-

tion department dummy variables (D) is a corresponding vector of

department-specific capitl value variables (1(V). These more detailed

input variables are incorporated in Equation 1 as follows:



                   Q = A(1 +   D))(V)'    (E)2 (L)            (Equation 2)


After a logarithmic transformation and rearranging terms, equation (2)

can be expressed:11


   £n Q   £n A +   (D)   +     iV1) +   2(n E) + y(2n L)      (Equation 3)
                                                                           6




The PD variables are constants for any one plant over the seven years

for which data are available; therefore they serve as controls for

categories of plant-specific effects. To control completely for plant-

specific productivity effects, PD is expanded in subsequent analyses

into a complete set of mill dummy variables. The energy input, E, is

defined as total BTU's used in the production process.   (The input and

output variables are described in greater detail in the Data Appendix.

This Appendix also describes the deflators and depreciation schemes

used to construct the K variables.) Before describing the specifica-

tion of the labor input, it should be noted that these unconventional

elaborations for specifying inputs and output in this otherwise conven-

tional functional form improve the model of the production process.

Specifically, equation (3) accounts for a much larger proportion of

production variation in this sample than do more conventional

specifications. 12

     To specify the labor input, the statistic available for these plants

is similar to statistics often used to measure labor input in other

productivity studies: total hourly manhours reported (RL) in monthly

payroll calculations. The RL statistic for labor input clearly decreases

as layoffs occur by the number of manhours that had previously been

worked by the laid-off employees. Iloreover, the logarithmic Cobb-Douglas

function in equation (3) already allows for the fact that the marginal

product of labor will increase as total labor hours decreases according



to the product, y L. However, the research described in Section II

suggests that when layoffs decrease the level of labor input, the change

in the marginal product of labor may be different from the change in the
                                                                           7




marginal product of labor that occurs after a similar reduction in

manhours that is not the result of a layoff. For example, the workforce

may react differently after a layoff than it would after employees quit

or after overtime rates decrease. If the empirical findings of the

previous laboratory research hold for this sample, layoffs may tempor-

arily produce above average increases in the marginal product of labor as

survivors work at above average levels of efficiency.

     To allow labor hours to vary in their efficiency, let the true

measure of labor input, L, be some variable proportion of the RL statis-

tic according to the equation:


                        L = (1 + X)RL
                                                            (Equation 4)


A is positive when factors cause an hour of labor to be above the average

level of efficiency, ceteris paribus. Above-normal work effort on the

part of survivors who experience anxiety or guilt in periods after

layoffs would, therefore, be associated with positive values of A.

  While the central finding in the existing studies is that survivors

will increase their performance, the discussion in these studies allows

that decreases in the performance of survivors may occur if a psychologi-

cal reaction other than anxiety or guilt is the predominant response

among remaining workers. For example, angry workers wishing to retaliate

against management would lead to negative values of A, ceteris paribus.

To allow layoffs to be associated with changes in the effort and effi-

ciency of survivors, let the layoff rate, LO, provide information on A.

Substituting 6L0 for A in equation (4), one obtains:


                       L = (1 + 6   LO)RL                   (Equation 5)
                                                                             8



Substituting equation (5) into equation (3) and rearranging terms, one
obtains: 13




     £n Q     2.n   A +       + 1(n V) + 2(2n E) + y(.Qn RL) + y   ô    LO

                                                              (Equation 6)


     Managers report layoffs in terms of number of employees; therefore,

the layoff rate LO is defined as the ratio of the number of production

employees laid off in month t to the total number of production employees

in month t-1. Since the reported layoffs may not have occurred until

late in the given month, the reaction of survivors might not be evident

until the month after the layoff. The equation (6) model then will also

be estimated with a lagged layoff rate variable. If survivor reactions

are indicated by the coefficients on these layoff rate variables, the

change in labor efficiency may only be temporary. To be able to track

whether any initial survivor reaction dissipates over time, the empirical

specification will be expanded to examine changes in the labor produc-

tivity during the first one-half year after a layoff. That is, output is

specified as a function of the layoff rate in the current month and the

layoff rates in the six previous months as well. Accordingly, this

specification can be written:



     ln        ln A + a(P]D) + 1(ln KV)



               + 2(ln Et) + y(ln RLt)


                     6
               +                                         (Equation 7)
                          1.LO_.1
                    i=O
                                                                           9




     As in equation (6), p. =              The differential impact of

layoffs on output in period t as a method to reduce manhours will be

given by: y[oLO +             +                  Similarly, the cumula-
                                    6t_6Lc_6]
tive effect over six months of a layoff in period t on output relative to

a similar decrease in manhours that occurs for other reasons will be

given by: yLOt[o +                   In equation (6) or (7), values of 6

can be isolated by dividing the coefficient on a given layoff rate

variable by the coefficient on the RL variable. The semi-logarithmic

specifications in equations (6) and (7), then, are used to estimate the

relationship between layoff rates and subsequent productivity changes.'4

If survivors are spurred to above average levels of efficiency, then the

coefficient(s) on the layoff rate variable(s) should be positive (assum-

ing a positive coefficient on the RL variable). If reactions which

hinder performance, such as anger toward management, are the dominant

responses among survivors, the coefficient(s) on the layoff rate vari-

able(s) should be negative. To see whether layoffs do in fact lead to

different changes in productivity than do other fluctuations in manhours,

estimates from the production equations are now presented.



IV. EMPIRICAL ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF PRODUCTIVITY TO PRIOR
     LAYOFFS

     When equation (6) is estimated, the coefficients presented in Table

(1) are obtained. Column (1) presents estimates obtained when equation

(6) includes only the layoff rate of the current period. Column (2)

replicates the column (1) specification except that the dummy variables

for the presence of certain production departments (the D variables) are

replaced by a complete set of eight plant dummy variables. In neither
                                                                          10




specification is the coefficient on the layoff rate significantly differ-

ent from zero. Also, in both the column (1) and (2) specifcations, the

coefficient on the RL variable, y, is approximately .7. The ratio of the

layoff coefficient to the RL coefficient, which yields the estimate of ô,

is also judged not to be significantly different from zero.15

     When the column (1) and column (2) specifications are expanded to

include six periods of lagged layoff rate variables, the coefficients in

columns (3) and (4) are obtained. Not one coefficient is significantly

different from zero at the .10 level. As judged by an F-test comparing

the column (3) and (4) models to similar models without any layoff rate

variables for the same N = 481 sample,16 the entire complement of layoff

rate variables does not add to the explanatory power of the models. The

coefficient on the layoff rate lagged one period in the column (4)

specification has a p-value that is just greater than .10; however, when

the layoff rate variables are added to the model, other coefficients in

the model have lower levels of significance. As a result, even in this

specification, the layoff rate variables do not improve the model

significantly.

     As described in Section II, an important theme in previous research

is the importance of intervening variables that might mediate the effects

of survivors' reactions.17 While these studies have only documented

increases in performance after layoffs, they do suggest that decreases in

performance may also be possible. It might therefore be argued that the

insignificant coefficients on the layoff rate variables in Table 1 simply

reflect the fact that layoffs in certain mills may lead to strong posi-

tive effects on survivors' effort and efficiency, while in others the

effects may be negative because the mills are subject to different
                                                                             11




intervening variables. To test for this possibility, equations are es-

timated separately for each mill. Coefficients on the layoff rate and

lagged layoff rate variables from these nine mill-specific equations are

presented in Table (2).

     Among all coefficients, very few are significantly different from

zero. In the case of mill 5 in which two of the seven layoff rate

coefficients are significantly different from zero, one is positive (line

2a) and the other negative (line 2d). Mill 1 does exhibit a clear

pattern of negative coefficients, but this set of variables does not add

to the explanatory power of the model without any layoff rate variables.

Mill 9, on the other hand, exhibits a consistent pattern of positive

coefficients, but only one coefficient (for the layoff rate lagged five

periods) is significantly different from zero. Despite the significant

coefficient, the model is not improved significantly by the set of layoff

rate variables since the significance levels of other coefficients in the

model decline when the layoff variables are added. Moreover, one would

have expected the strongest survivor effects in the month of the layoff

or the first month after the layoff --   not   after a lag of five months.

Taken as a whole, the empirical results for the whole sample in Table 1

or for each mill individually in Table 2 provide no evidence that the

change in productivity after a layoff is different from the changes that

occur after similar decreases in employment that are not the result of

layoffs.
                                                                               12



            Table 1: The Effect of Prior Layoffs on Productivitya


                                   (1)             (2)      (3)          (4)

obsevations                        527          527        481           481

1. layoff rate                  -.013        -.104         .003     -.099
                                 (.200)       (.189)      (.200)    (.189)

2. lagged layoff rates
   (a) one period                                        -.173      -
                                                                        .305
                                                         (.197)     (.186)
      (b) two periods                                     .058      -   .051
                                                         (.196)     (.186)

      (c) three periods                                   .102      -.023
                                                         (.196)     (.185)

      (d) four periods                                    .152       .034
                                                         (.194)     (.183)
      (e) five periods                                    .255       .153
                                                         (.195)     (.183)
      (f) six periods                                     .264       .172
                                                         (.195)     (.183)
3. Other Controls                 b            c            b             c

            R2                   .940         .947        .945          .951


a -   Standard errors in parentheses
b -   Other controls include those specified in equation (6). Detailed
      descriptions of these controls are presented in the Dta Appendix.
c -   Controls are the same as those in note b, except the PD controls
      for the presence or absence of certain production departments is
      replaced by a complete set of eight mill dummies.
                                                                          13



V.   DISCUSSION AND INPLICATIONS

     The results of this study clearly indicate that the empirical

findings in previous laboratory studies do not necessarily describe the

experience inside actual firms. On the other hand, this study considers

the relationship between layoffs and subsequent productivity in only nine

establishments. It does not change the validity of the results obtained

in controlled experimental settings. To understand the difference

between the results obtained in this study and those in the studies

described in Section II, field investigations of the mills and interviews

with managers were conducted.

     In field investigations, the continuous flow production process in

these paper mills was observed to be highly capital-intensive'8 and

machine-paced. Even if strong worker reaction effects (of anxiety,

guilt, or anger) were engendered in response to layoffs, such a

technology may severely limit the degree to which any changes in effort

or attention on the part of survivors affect productivity. That is, in

such a capital-intensive setting, attendance of workers may be more

critical than changes in effort or attention of the workers.

     Also described in Section II, one laboratory study suggests that the

decision rule used for layoffs mediate the impact of layoffs on survivor

performance. Layoffs based on merit did not produce a significant change

in survivors' performance, while layoffs decided by a seemingly random

decision did. As described by managers in interviews, the contractual

provisions governing layoffs in these nine unionized mills all rely

heavily on strict seniority systems. While this is clearly not a random

or merit-based system, it might reasonably be argued that a seniority-

based decision rule for layoffs would reduce the types of reactions in
                             Table   2:    Estimates of the Effect of Prior Layoffs on Productivity from
                                                       Individual Plant Equationsa


plant #                                    1             2      3         4              5          6       7             8          9

observations                              28            64     51        46          50            68      46            63         65

1.       layoff rate                 -3.063         .415      2.523    -1.302       .565       .297      -7.114      .253       .718
                                     (3.359)       (.434)    (2.458)   (2.235)   (14.378)    (1.293)    (25.234)    (.241)    (1.017)
2.       lagged layoff
         rates

         (a) one period               -.558         .336     -1.603    2.99       37979*       .412      16.283     -.208       .324
                                     (5.534)       (.474)    (2.487)   (2.157)   (20.209)    (1.269)    (25.949)    (.177)     (.966)

         (b) two periods             -2.484         .672     -5.076*   2.788     -22.520       .089      30.555      .026      1.393
                                     (5.206)      (.501)     (2.556)   (2.153)   (15.861)    (1.334)    (26.233)    (.189)    (1.089)

         (c) three periods           -1.019         .714     -2.674    3.646     -3.463        .342     -25.615      .044       .789
                                     (5.688)      (.474)     (1.649)   (2.327)   (12.681)    (1.314)    (24.971)    (.183)     (.977)
         (d) four periods             -.412        .482      -3.116*   3.728                 -.872        6.594      .146     1.249
                                     (3.318)      (.480)     (1.685)   (2.196)   (10.954)     (.861)    (23.886)    (.189)    (1.049)

         (e) five periods            -2.036       -.064        .586    2.721        .597     - .025      13.575      .245     2.058*
                                     (3.311)      (.488)     (1.688)   (2.136)    (6.305)    (.852)     (23.472)   (1.84)     (.943)

         (f)   six periods           -.805         .682      -1.689    1.834      9.488      -.968      11.569       .146     1.142
                                     (8.281)      (.521)     (1.533)   (2.172)   (6.307)     (.831)     (22.279)   (1.85)     (.914)

3.       OtherControls                    b         b          b         b           b         b            b        b          b

                 R2                       .881     .459        .759      .758       .812       .958        .968      .864       .828


a -      Standard errors in parentheses.
b -      Control variables are those in equation (6) that are defined for
         ables for the presence or absence of certain production          indiidual plant equations. Dummy vari-
                                                                 departments (PD) drop out of invididual plant
         equations.
*    -   Significant at the .10-level, two-tailed test.
                                                                          15



survivors that would lead to changes in their effort. or performance.

First, anxiety would probably not be engendered by the layoffs, since

there would be little uncertainty about who would be laid off next. Even

for the more junior workers at greater risk after the layoff, there may

not be an increase in effort since these workers have little control over

their fate. Furthermore, since the employees' representatives took part

in developing the contractual decision rule for layoffs, survivors may be

less likely to experience either guilt or anger.

     While this study takes an important first step in moving the empiri-

cal study from laboratory settings to settings of existing work organiza-

tions, these final considerations point out the kinds of field research

that provide further insights. Specifically, investigation of the

layoff-productivity relationship in nonunion settings and particularly in

organizations where decision rules other than seniority-based systems are

in effect may produce very different results than those obtained in this

study. Research in these settings may also help to reconcile the results

of this study with those obtained in the previous laboratory research.
                                                                          16


         DATA APPENDIX: Descriptions and Definitions of Output, Input
                           and Layoff Rate Variables

Class of Variable                     Definition of Measure Used
(Variable Symbol)


1. Output (Q)                    Tons of Paper Produced

2. Production Departments        Mills with different combinations of produc-
     Present in the Mills        tion departments produce different types of
         (D)                     final paper products. Dummy variables are
                                 included for the presence of: a pulping de-
                                 partment; a bleaching and dyeing department;
                                 a converting department (either sheeting or
                                 coating operations); and a set of variables
                                 for whether the mill has two, three, four or
                                 five or more paper machine departments.

3. Department-specific           Total depreciated, deflated value of assets
                                 in each department in the mills. The depre-
    value of capital (Ky)        ciation schedule is the one used by the mills'
                                 management -- a straight-line depreciation ap-
                                 plied over engineering estimates of the as-
                                 sets' expected life. The deflators used are
                                 capital price indices in Economic Report of
                                 the President (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govern-
                                 ment Printing Office, 1981), p. 229. Table
                                 B-57, "Producer Price Indexes for Major Com-
                                 modity Groups -- Machinery and Equipment". In
                                 addition to the production departments that
                                 are present in some mills and absent in
                                 others, as listed in line 2 above, the follow-
                                 ing departments are present in all mills:
                                 wrapping and shipping; energy generation; pol-
                                 lution and recycling; and buildings not else-
                                 where classified. Each department has a total
                                 value of capital variable calculated for it.

4. Energy (E)                    Total BTU's of energy consumed in production
                                 at the mill

5. Labor (L)                     Production Workforce Manhours as reported in
                                 Monthly Payroll Calculations

6. Layoff Rate (LO)              Each of the nine mill managers made available
                                 confidential copies of U.S. Department of
                                 Labor's "Monthly Report on Labor Turnover."
                                 A layoff statistic (distinct from other sorts
                                 of separations) is reported for each month.
                                 Since this statistic is reported in units of
                                 employees, the layoff rate is the ratio of
                                 production employees laid off in month t
                                 to the total number of production employees
                                 in the previous month.
                                                                          17




                                FOOTNOTES



     1Adams, J. Stacy. "Toward an Understanding of Inequity," in Gary A.

Yuki and Kenneth N. Wexley, eds., Readings in Organizational and

trial Psychology (London: Oxford University Press, 1971), PP. 194-210.

     2lbid., p. 197.

      ____   p.   195.

     4Mowday, R., "Equity Theory Predictions of Behavior in Organiza-

tions," in R. H. Steers and L. W. Porter (eds.), Motivation and Work

Behavior (New York: MacGraw-Hill, 1979), pp. 124-126.

     5For a review of relevant "equity theory" studies, see Walster,

Elaine, G. W. Waister, and Ellen Berscherd. Equity Theory and Research

(Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1970), pp. 114-142.

     6Brockner, J., J. Davy, and C. Carter, "Layoffs, Self-Esteem and

Survivor Guilt: Motivational, Attitudinal and Affective Consequences," in

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (forthcoming); J.

Brockner, J. Greenberg, A. Brockner, J. Bortz, J. Davy, and C. Carter,

"Layoffs, Equity Theory, and Work Performance: Further Evidence of the

Impact of Survivor Guilt," Academy of Management Journal (forthcoming);

and J. Brockner, M. O'Malley, S. Grover, N. Esaki, M. Glynn, and S.

Lazarides, "The Effects of Layoffs, Job Insecurity, and Self-Esteem on

Survivors' Work Performance and Attitudes," Columbia University, unpub-

lished manuscript.

     7See Brockner, O'Malley, et al.

     81t is possible that even if the individual mill's technology has

fixed factor characteristics that cannot be characterized by the rela-

tively smooth Cobb-Douglas function, data across plants with different
                                                                          18




types of fixed-factor input configurations may map out a "smoother"

function.

     9For one statement of this position, see Nelson, Richard R., "Re-

search on Productivity Growth and Differences: Dead Ends and New Depar-

tures,'t Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 19, No. 3 (September, 1981),

pp. 1029-1064.

     10Specifically, a value added index is based on price weighting

assuming competitive prices. These mills are often sole or principal

employers in rural regions enjoying a large degree of monopsony power.

While the unions may counteract this power and introduce a case of

bilateral monopoly, it would appear unreasonable to assume competitive

prices for labor (and possibly other inputs as well).

     11The equation 3 transformation uses the approximation £n(1 +   x)   x

for x small.

     '2Equation 3, with L specified as total production manhours reported

in monthly payroll calculations, accounts for over 95% of the total

variation in production in this sample. In contrast, a £n-transformation

of the Cobb-Douglas function in equation (1), with capital measured as a

mill's aggregate net investment, accounts for only 65% of the output

variation. While all the coefficients in the equation (3) model are

significant with the expected signs, the equation (1) model produces

several nonsensical coefficients. Specifically, the coefficient on

capital is negative for this sample in which capital plays a central role

in transforming raw materials into final output.

     '3Equation 6 again employs the £n-transformation approximation

described in footnote 11.
                                                                          19



      140ne final specification issue is that department-specific KV

 variables will equal zero when the mill in question does not have that

 department (i.e., the corresponding PD variable equals zero). The

 equations estimated and reported in Sections IV and V specify KV in

 dollar units instead of 2n-dollar units. An alternative approach is to

add a small positive value to KV variables that are equal to zero. The

alternative specification does not affect the coefficients of interest

reported in the tables in this study to any appreciable extent.

      15The significance of the ratio of two normally distributed quanti-

ties is judged by Fieller's method. For a description of this method,

see Naddala, G. S., Econometrics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977), pp.

10 1-102.


     16The F-statistic used to compare the two models is given by:


               (SSRR -                -
                         SSRu)/(dfR       dfu)
                           SSRR/dfR


where SSR refers to the sum of squared residuals, df to degrees of

freedom, and the subscripts R and U to the restricted model without

layoff variables and the unrestricted model with layoff variable.

     17See Brockner, O'Nalley, et al.

     18Using 1976 industry-level statistics, only 29 out of four hundred

and fifty four-digit manufacturing industries were more capital intensive

than SIC #2621 as judged by the ratio of the value of plant, machinery,

and equipment per production employee. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Annual

Survey of Manufacturers.
