                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HAS THE U.S. FINANCE INDUSTRY BECOME LESS EFFICIENT?
      ON THE THEORY AND MEASUREMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION

                                          Thomas Philippon

                                        Working Paper 18077
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18077


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012


This has been a very long project. The first draft dates back to 2007, with a focus on corporate finance,
and without the long term historical evidence. This paper really owes a lot to other people, academics
and non-academics alike. Darrell Duffie, Robert Lucas, Raghuram Rajan, Jose Scheinkman, Robert
Shiller, Andrei Shleifer, and Richard Sylla have provided invaluable feedback at various stages of
this project. Boyan Jovanovic, Peter Rousseau, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor have shared their
data and their insights, and I have greatly benefited from discussions with Lewis Alexander, Patrick
Bolton, Markus Brunnermeier, John Cochrane, Douglas Diamond, John Geanakoplos, Gary Gorton,
Robin Greenwood, Steve Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Ashley Lester, Andrew Lo, Andrew Metrick, William
Nordhaus, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, David Robinson, Kenneth Rogoff, David Scharfstein, Hyun Shin,
Jeremy Stein, Gillian Tett, Wallace Turbeville, and Luigi Zingales, as well as seminar participants
at Stanford, Yale, NYU, Harvard, Chicago, Princeton, and the Paris School of Economics. I also thank
Paul Krugman for his discussion at the 2011 NY Area Monetary conference, Axelle Ferrière, Peter
Gross, Andrea Prestipino, Robert Turley, and Shaojun Zhang for research assistance, and the Smith
Richardson Foundation for its financial support. I gratefully acknowledge funding from the Smith
Richardson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Has the U.S. Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On the Theory and Measurement of
Financial Intermediation
Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 18077
May 2012
JEL No. E2,G2,N2

                                               ABSTRACT

I provide a quantitative interpretation of financial intermediation in the U.S. over the past 130 years.
Measuring separately the cost of intermediation and the production of financial services, I find that:
(i) the quantity of intermediation varies a lot over time; (ii) intermediation is produced under constant
returns to scale; (iii) the annual cost of intermediation is around 2% of outstanding assets; (iv) adjustments
for borrowers' quality are quantitatively important; and (v) the unit cost of intermediation has increased
over the past 30 years.


Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
    This paper is concerned with the theory and measurement of financial intermediation. Its contribution is to

construct long time series on prices and quantities of intermediation, and to provide a quantitative interpretation of
these series. Since the focus is on financial intermediation, the prices are spreads and fees earned by intermediaries,
while the quantities are stocks and flows of financial assets and liabilities.
    The role of the finance industry is to produce, trade and settle financial contracts that can be used to pool
funds, share risks, transfer resources, produce information and provide incentives. Financial intermediaries are
compensated for providing these services. The income received by these intermediaries measures the cost of financial
intermediation. This income is the sum of all spreads and fees paid by non-financial agents to financial intermediaries,
and it is also the sum of all profits and wages in the finance industry. The first contribution of the paper is empirical.
I show that the income of financial intermediaries as a share of GDP varies a lot over time. The income share grows
from 2% to 6% from 1870 to 1930. It shrinks to less than 4% in 1950, grows slowly to 5% in 1980, and then increases
rapidly to more than 8% in 2010.
    Given these large historical changes in the finance income share, it is natural to ask if there are commensurate
changes in the production of financial services. The main contribution of the paper is to construct a theory-based

measure of the “output” of the finance industry, and therefore, to obtain an estimate of the unit cost of financial
intermediation. There two main motivations for undertaking such a project.
    The first motivation is that the unit cost of intermediation is a critical parameter in many empirical and
theoretical studies. Macro-finance models include, implicitly or explicitly, an equation that says that the borrowing
rate is equal to the lending rate plus an intermediation cost: rborrow = rlend + ψ. Such an intermediation equation
plays a central role in the literature that seeks to quantify the consequences of financial development for economic
growth, while recent work has also focused on the macroeconomic consequences of a sudden increase in ψ, and on
the link between ψ and intermediary capital, leverage and liquidity.1 It is therefore crucial to know how large ψ is
and whether it is stable over time.
    The second motivation is to begin to quantify the efficiency gains from financial innovations. For instance, we
would certainly like to know if the move from the traditional banking model towards the “originate-and-distribute”
model has lowered the cost of funds for households and businesses. This is precisely what ψ should measure. It is
important, however, to understand just how difficult the measurement problem is. In the traditional banking model,

a bank would make a loan, keep it on its books, and earn a net interest income. This income would compensate
for the cost of screening and monitoring the borrower, and then managing the duration and credit risk of the loan.
In the originate and distribute model, the compensation for screening and monitoring shows up as a fee income,
while the compensation for managing duration and credit risk might show up as trading profits in some hedge fund.
  1 For an analysis financial and economic development, see Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2010), Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011),

and Midrigan and Xu (2011). For an analysis of the macroeconomic consequences of negative shocks to financial intermediation, see
Curdia and Woodford (2009), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Hall (2011), Christiano and Ikeda (2011), Corsetti, Kuester, Meier, and
Müller (2011) who all build on the classic contribution of Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999). For an analysis of liquidity, see
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Gertler and Karadi (2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2012), and Moore (2011).




                                                                 2
There would be no interest income and no direct measure of an interest rate spread. Similar issues immediately

appear when we think about mutual funds, shadow banks, credit derivatives, etc.
    Given these difficulties, my strategy is to take an aggregate view of the intermediation process and to construct
a consistent, theory-based measure of output for the finance industry as a whole. I start by introducing financial
services for firms and households in the neoclassical growth model. Conceptually, it is useful to distinguish three
types of services:2

    • (i) Liquidity (means of payments, cash management);

    • (ii) Transfer of funds (pooling funds from savers, screening and monitoring borrowers);

    • (iii) Information (price signals, advising on M&As).

Note that financial firms typically produce a bundle of such services. For instance, risk management uses all three
types of activities.
    Services of type (i) and (ii) typically involve the creation of various financial assets and liabilities. For the
credit market, I measure separately the quantities borrowed by households, farms and non-farm (non-financial)
businesses, and the government. The sizes of these markets vary significantly over time. For instance, the business
credit market is relatively large in the 1920s, small in the 1960s and large again after 1980, although not as large
as in the late 1920s. The most important trend in recent years is the increase in household debt. For the equity
market, I measure the market value of outstanding stocks as well as the flows of initial and seasoned offerings. For
liquidity I measure deposits, repurchase agreements, and money markets mutual funds. For advising fees I construct

a measure of M&A activity.
    The next step is to aggregate the various types of credit, equity issuances and liquid assets into one measure
of the quantity of services produced by the financial sector for the non-financial sector. Essentially, output should
be measured as a weighted average of the various quantities of assets, and the weights should reflect the relative
intermediation requirements. Theory provides guidance on how to do this. I use the first order conditions of the
model to interpret various micro-evidence on interest rates, prices, and fees. This allows me to estimate the weights
and construct the output measure.
    I can then divide the income of the finance industry by the estimated output measure to obtain a measure of
unit cost. I find that this (annual) unit cost is around 2% and relatively stable over time. In other words, I estimate
that it costs two cents per year to create and maintain one dollar of intermediated financial asset. I also find clear
evidence that financial services are produced under constant returns to scale. For instance, from 1947 to 1973 (a
period of stable growth without major financial crises), real income per-capita increases by 80% and real financial
assets by 250%, but my estimate of the unit cost of intermediation remains remarkably constant.
   2 This classification is motivated by the mapping between theory and measurement discussed throughout the paper. It differs a little

bit from that of Merton (1995). I do not attempt in this paper to measure the informativeness of prices. This issue is tackled by Bai,
Philippon, and Savov (2011). See the discussion in Section 5.



                                                                  3
   The final contribution of the paper is to perform quality adjustments to the output series. In corporate finance,

the mix of new and old ventures changes significantly over time. The 1920s and 1990s are times of entry by young
and risky firms, while the 1960s appear relatively more stable. Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005) have shown that
these patterns are related to waves of technological change. Similarly, for household finance we see that relatively
poor households have gained access to financial markets in recent years. The challenge is to account for the fact
that these borrowers require more intermediation (more screening or monitoring) per unit of credit extended. Once
again I rely on theory to make the quality adjustments. These adjustments appear to be quantitatively important.
In the 1990s for instance, the raw output measure is around three times GDP, while the adjusted measure is around
four times GDP.
   The adjusted unit cost is also more stable than the unadjusted one. However, even with the quality adjustment,
I find that the unit cost of intermediation has increased since the mid 1970s and is now significantly higher than
it was at the turn of the twentieth century. In other words, the finance industry that sustained the expansion of
railroads, steel and chemical industries, and later the electricity and automobile revolutions seems to have been more
efficient than the current finance industry. Surprisingly, the tremendous improvements in information technologies

of the past 30 years have not led to a decrease in the average cost of intermediation, or at least not yet. One possible
explanation for this puzzle is that improvements in information technology have been cancelled out by zero-sum
activities, perhaps related to the large increase in secondary market trading.


Related literature

Financial intermediation does not have a benchmark quantitative framework in the way asset pricing does. By using
a model to interpret long time series of prices and quantities, this paper shares the spirit of Mehra and Prescott
(1985). It also articulates a puzzle for future research to solve. But because financial intermediation is a more
heterogenous field than asset pricing, the paper builds on several strands of literature in finance and monetary
economics,
   The first strand is the theory of banking and intermediation. While stylized and focused on macroeconomic pre-
dictions, the model developed below is consistent with leading theories of financial intermediation, such as Diamond
and Dybvig (1983), Diamond (1984), Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), Holmström and Tirole (1997), Diamond and
Rajan (2001), and Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002). Gorton and Winton (2003) provide a review of the literature
on financial intermediation. The focus of this paper differs from that literature in several ways: (i) the measurement
of the costs of intermediation; (ii) the simultaneous modeling of household and corporate finance; and (iii) the use
of an equilibrium model to interpret the historical evidence.

   There is a large literature on financial development, which I do not have room to discuss here, except to say that it
tends to focus on cross-sectional comparisons of countries at relatively early stages of financial development in order
to understand the impact of finance on economic growth (e.g. Rajan and Zingales (1998)) and the determinants of



                                                           4
financial development (e.g. La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales

(2004)). The literature typically focuses on corporate finance (Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2010), Buera,
Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2011)).3 This paper is more closely related to a recent branch of the
literature that seeks to provide risk-adjusted measures of financial productivity (Haldane, Brennan, and Madouros
(2010), Basu, Inklaar, and Wang (2011)) and that considers the possibility of inefficient financial development
(Glode, Green, and Lowery (2010), Bolton, Santos, and Scheinkman (2011)). Philippon and Reshef (2007) share
the historical perspective of this paper, but study only wages and human capital in the finance industry. Kaplan
and Rauh (2010) also focus on compensation. The large historical changes in the finance share of GDP were first
documented and discussed in Philippon (2008), but that paper only focused on corporate credit, which I now
estimate to be less than half of the output of the finance industry.4
    In its account of liquidity services provided by the finance industry, the paper is also related to the classic
literature on money and banking. Lucas (2000) provides a benchmark analysis of money demand. Kiyotaki and
Moore (2008) study the interaction of liquidity, asset prices and aggregate activity. A recent branch of this literature
has focused on the rise of market-based intermediation, also called shadow banking. Pozsar, Adrian, Ashcraft, and

Boesky (2010) document the structure of shadow banking. Gorton and Metrick (2012), Stein (2012), and Gennaioli,
Shleifer, and Vishny (2011) emphasize the importance of investors demand for risk free assets. Gorton, Lewellen,
and Metrick (2012) argue that much of the shadow banking activity (pooling and tranching) happens to satisfy
this demand for risk free assets. I attempt to account for these activities by measuring shadow deposits, such as
money market mutual funds and repurchase agreements. The rise of shadow banking also diminishes the relevance
of the traditional literature focused on efficiency in banking. That literature did provide measures of productivity
in banking (see Wang, Basu, and Fernald (2008) for a discussion), but it focused on net interest income, which
is only about half of the income of today’s large banks (see the numbers for JP Morgan in the appendix). An
important point developed below is that it is difficult to break down the income earned by the finance industry into
economically meaningful components.
    Finally, it is important to emphasize some limitations of my analysis. First, it does not deal with financial
crises and risk taking. For instance, my output series include all corporate borrowing by Telecom companies in
the late 1990s and all subprime and home equity borrowing by households in the mid 2000s. In doing so, I never

ask whether borrowing is appropriate or excessive, and I therefore miss the crucial insights of Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009). Similarly, I consolidate the earnings of financial intermediaries without controlling for systemic risk taking.5
   3 My  approach is complementary to this literature and uses many of its important insights. The difference is that I focus on the
evolution of the entire U.S. finance industry. As a result, both theory and measurement must be expanded. For instance, following
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2011), the literature uses cross-country data on interest-rate spreads to estimate financing frictions,
e.g., Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2012). To study the US finance industry, it is important to recognize that non-interest income
(fees, trading revenues, etc.) is now the dominant source of income for financial firms (even for banks: see JPMorgan’s 2010 annual
report for instance), that consumer credit is at least as important as corporate credit, and that the shadow banking’s creation of safe
assets is driven by investors’ liquidity demand (all these points are discussed in details below).
   4 The paper did not consider household credit, and did not account for liquidity services, which have become important with the rise

of the shadow banking system. Other technical issues are discussed in Philippon (2012a).
   5 See for instance Adrian and Shin (2008), Krishnamurthy (2009), and Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2009) for




                                                                   5
Finally, I might be overstating the output of the finance industry because I do not adjust for the role of GSEs in

the mortgage market, analyzed by Scharfstein and Sunderam (2011) among others.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, I construct my measure of the cost of
financial intermediation. Section 2 presents the benchmark model of corporate and household finance to organize
the discussion. Section 3 presents measures of output for the finance industry, and computes the unit cost of
intermediation. Section 4 presents the quality adjustments. Section 5 discusses the role of information technology,
price informativeness, financial derivatives, risk sharing, and trading. Section 6 concludes.



1     Income Share of Finance Industry

In this section, I present the first main empirical fact: the evolution of the total cost of financial intermediation in the
US over the past 140 years. As argued in the introduction, there is no simple way to break down the income earned

by the finance industry into economically meaningful components. For instance, insurance companies and pension
funds perform credit analysis, fixed income trading provides liquidity to credit markets, and securitization severs
the links between assets held and assets originated. From a historical perspective, these issues are compounded
by regulatory changes in the range of activities that certain intermediaries can provide. Rather than imposing
arbitrary interpretations on the data, I therefore focus on a consolidated measure of income, the sum of all interest
and non interest income earned by all financial intermediaries, irrespective of whether they are classified as private
equity funds, commercial banks, insurance companies, or anything else.


1.1     Raw Data

The paper uses a lot of data sources. To save space all the details regarding the construction of the series are
provided in a separate online appendix. I focus on the following measure:

                                                       F inance Income
                                                 φ=                    .
                                                        T otal Income

Conceptually, the best measure is total income (or value added), which is the sum of profits and wages. Whenever
possible, I therefore construct φ as the GDP share of the finance industry, i.e., the nominal income of the finance
industry divided by the nominal GDP of the U.S. economy. One issue, however, is that before 1945 profits are not
always properly measured and value added is not available. In addition, it is sometimes difficult to measure the
finance industry without imputed rents from the real estate sector. As an alternative measure I then use the labor
compensation share of the finance industry, i.e., the compensation of all employees of the finance industry divided
by the compensation of all employees in the U.S. economy.
recent discussions.




                                                             6
    Figure 1 displays various measures of the share of the Finance and Insurance industry in the GDP of the United

States estimated from 1870 to 2009. For the period 1947-2009, I use value added and compensation measures from
the Annual Industry Accounts of the United States, published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). For the
post-war period, the two measures display the same trends. This means that, in the long run, the labor share in
the finance industry is roughly the same as the labor share in the rest of the economy (in the short run, of course,
profit rates can vary). For 1929-1947, I use the share of employee compensation because value added measures are
either unavailable or unreliable. For 1870-1929 I use the Historical Statistics of the United States (Carter, Gartner,
Haines, Olmstead, Sutch, and Wright, 2006).6
    There are three important points to take away from Figure 1. First, the finance income share varies a lot over
time. Second, the measures are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent. It is thus possible to create one long
series simply by appending the older data to the newer ones. Third, finance as a share of GDP was smaller in 1980
than in 1925. Given the outstanding real growth over this period, it means that finance size is not simply driven
by income per capita.




                                            Figure 1: Income Share of Finance Industry
                          .08
                          .06
                          .04
                          .02




                                1860    1880       1900        1920       1940        1960       1980       2000
                                                                        year

                                                          VA fire, Hist.               WN fire, Hist.
                                                          WN fin, NIPA                 VA fin, NIPA


Notes: VA is value added, WN is compensation of employees, “fin” means finance and insurance, “fire” means finance, insurance, and real estate.
For “NIPA”, the data source is the BEA, and for “Hist” the source is the Historical Statistics of the United States.


   6 Other measures based on Martin (1939) and Kuznets (1941) give similar values. More details regarding the various data sources

can be found in Philippon and Reshef (2007) and in the Data Appendix




                                                                       7
1.2            Adjusted Measures

Before discussing theoretical interpretations it is useful to present adjusted series and consider the impact of glob-
alization and the rise in services.


Wars

During peace time and without structural change, it would make sense to simply use GDP as the relevant measure
of total income. Two factors can complicate the analysis, however. First, WWI and WWII take resources away from
the normal production of goods and services. Financial intermediation should then be compared to the non-war
related GDP. To do so, I construct a measure of GDP excluding defense spending. The second issue is the decline
in farming. Since modern finance is related to trade and industrial development, it is also useful to estimate the

share of finance in non-farm GDP.
        The left panel of Figure 2 presents the finance share of non-defense GDP, and of non-farm, non-defense GDP
(or compensation, as explained above). Both adjustments make the series more stationary. In particular, using
non-defense GDP removes the spurious temporary drop in the unadjusted series during WWII.
        I use the defense adjusted share as my main measure. The share of finance starts just below 2% in 1880. It
reaches a first peak of almost 6% of GDP in 1932. Note that this peak occurs during the Great Depression, not in
1929. Between 1929 and 1932 nominal GDP shrinks, but the need to deal with rising default rates and to restructure
corporate and household balance sheets keeps financiers busy. Similarly, the post-war peak occurs not in 2007 but
in 2010, just below 9% of non-defense GDP.


                                      Figure 2: Income Share of Finance (alternative measures)
  .1




                                                                                 .12
  .08




                                                                                 .1
                                                                                 .08
  .06




                                                                                 .06
  .04




                                                                                 .04
  .02




        1880     1900        1920   1940         1960   1980      2000                 1920   1940          1960         1980              2000
                                       year                                                                     year

                 GDP Share          No Defense          No Farm No Defense                           Domestic          Share of Services


Notes: GDP Share is the Income of the Finance Industry divided by GDP, constructed from the series in Figure 1. “No Defense” uses GDP minus
defense spending, and “No Farm No Defense” uses non-farm GDP minus defense spending. Domestic shares excludes net exports of finance and
insurance companies. Share of Services uses the BEA definition of services.




                                                                             8
Other Services

Is finance different from other service industries? Yes. The right panel of Figure 2 also plots the share of finance in
service GDP. It is mechanically higher than with total GDP, but the pattern is the same (the other fast growing
service industry is health care, but it does not share the U-shaped evolution of Finance from 1927 to 2009).


Globalization

Figure 1 shows finance income divided by U.S. GDP. This might not be appropriate if financial firms export some
of their services abroad. It turns out, however, that globalization does not account for the evolution of the finance
income share. There are two ways to show this point.
    The right panel of Figure 2 displays the ratio of domestic finance income to (non-defense) GDP. Domestic income

is defined as income minus net exports of financial services. The figure is almost identical to the previous one. The
reason is that the U.S., unlike the U.K. for instance, is not a large exporter of financial services. According to IMF
statistics, in 2004, the U.K. financial services trade balance was +$37.4 billions while the U.S. balance was -$2.3
billions: the U.S. was actually a net importer. In 2005, the U.K. balance was +$34.9 billions, and the U.S. balance
was +$1.1 billions. In all case, the adjustments are small.
    The timing of globalization also cannot explain the evolution of the U.S. financial sector. Estevadeordal, Frantz,
and Taylor (2003) show that the period 1870-1913 marks the birth of the first era of trade globalization (measured
by the ratio of trade to output) and the period 1914-1939 its end. The period between 1918 and 1930, however, is
the first large scale increase in the size of the finance industry, precisely as globalization recedes. For the more recent
period, Obstfeld and Taylor (2002) and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) show that financial globalization
happens relatively late in the 1990s, while Figure 1 shows that the growth of the financial sector accelerates around
1980.



2       Benchmark Model

I now introduce a model of the economy with an explicit finance industry that provides services to households and
businesses.7 The model is useful for three reasons. First, the model provides comparative statics: which ratios
should be constant on the balance growth path, what should be the impact of improvements in intermediation
on these ratios, etc. Second the model provides guidance for constructing a well-defined measure of output for
the finance industry: for instance, how should we compare deposits, residential mortgages, and corporate equity?
Finally, an explicit model will be required to perform quality adjustment for heterogenous borrowers.
   7 It is critical to model financial services explicitly. It is well known that the properties of two-sectors models depend on the elasticity

of substitution between the two sectors (Baumol, 1967). For instance, the nominal GDP share of sector i increases with relative
technological progress in sector i if and only if the elasticity of substitution is less than one. In the context of financial intermediation,
I will show that the elasticity depends both on the shape of the distribution of borrowers and on the efficiency of the supply of financial
services. It is therefore not possible to take this elasticity as an (exogenous) parameter.




                                                                      9
    The model economy consists of households, a non-financial business sector, and a financial intermediation sector.

The economy is non-stationary. The driving force is the labor-augmenting technological progress At = (1 + γ) At−1 .
In the benchmark model borrowers are homogenous. This provides a tight characterization of equilibrium interme-
diation. I discuss heterogeneity and quality adjustments later.


2.1     Households

In the model, the finance industry provides two kinds of services to households: liquidity and credit, for transactions
and consumption smoothing. Since household debt has an important life-cycle component (i.e., mortgages), I
consider a setup with two types of households: some households are infinitely lived, the others belong to an

overlapping generations structure.8 Households in the model do not lend directly to one another. They lend to
intermediaries, and intermediaries lend to firms and to other households.


Long-Lived Households

Long-lived households (index 0) own the capital stock and have no labor endowment. Liquidity services can be
modeled using a cash-in-advance framework, or with money in the utility function. I use the later for simplicity,
                                                            (Ct Mtν )1−ρ
and I specify the utility function as u (Ct , Mt ) =            1−ρ      ,   where C is consumption and M measures holdings of
liquid assets. As argued by Lucas (2000), these homothetic preferences are consistent with the absence of trend
in the ratio of real balances to income in U.S. data, and the constant relative risk aversion form is consistent
with balanced growth. Let r be the interest rate received by savers. The budget constraint becomes St+1 + Ct +
ψm,t Mt ≤ (1 + rt ) St , where ψm is the price of liquidity services, and S are total savings.9 The Euler equation
uC (t) = βEt [(1 + rt+1 ) uC (t + 1)] can then be written as

                                                              h                        i
                                           ν(1−ρ)    −ρ                     ν(1−ρ) −ρ
                                        Mt          C0,t = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) Mt+1 C0,t+1   .


The liquidity demand equation uM (t) = ψm,t uC (t) is simply


                                                           ψm,t Mt = νC0,t .
    8 The pure infinite horizon model and the pure OLG model are both inadequate. The infinite horizon model misses the importance

of life-cycle borrowing and lending. The OLG model ignores bequests, and in the simple two-periods version households do not actually
borrow: the young ones save, and the old ones eat their savings. The simplest way to capture all these relevant features is the mixed
model. The standard interpretation is that long-lived households have bequest motives, and are therefore equivalent to infinitely lived
agents. See also Mehra, Piguillem, and Prescott (2011) for a model where household save for retirement over an uncertain lifetime.
    9 See Lucas and Stokey (1987) and Sargent and Smith (2009) for a discussion of cash-in-advance models. Lucas (2000) uses the
                                                                                           1−ρ
framework of Sidrauski (1967) with a more flexible functional form of the type Ct ϕ M     C
                                                                                           t
                                                                                                   . I use a Cobb-Douglass aggregator for
simplicity given the complexity of the rest of the model. A more important difference with the classical literature on money demand is
that I do not focus on inflation. Households save S at a gross return of 1 + r, while liquid assets yield (1 + r) /(1 + ψm ). So this model
implies a constant spread between the lending rate and the rate on liquid assets. This is consistent with my interpretation of liquidity
as not only money, but also money market funds shares and repurchase agreements.




                                                                    10
Overlapping Generations

The other households live for two periods and are part of on overlapping generation structure. The young (index
1) have a labor endowment η1 and the old (index 2) have a labor endowment η2 . We normalize the labor supply to
one: η1 +η2 = 1. The life-time utility of a young household is u (C1,t , M1,t )+βu (C2,t+1 , M2,t+1 ) . I consider the case
where they want to borrow when they are young (i.e., η1 is small enough). In the first period, its budget constraint
is C1,t + ψm,t M1,t = η1 W1,t + (1 − ψc,t ) Btc . The screening and monitoring cost is ψc,t per unit of borrowing. In the

second period, the household consumes C2,t+1 + ψm,t+1 M2,t+1 = η2 Wt+1 − (1 + rt+1 ) Btc . The Euler equation for
short-lived households is

                                                                   h                          i
                                                ν(1−ρ)    −ρ                     ν(1−ρ) −ρ
                                 (1 − ψc,t ) M1,t        C1,t = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) M2,t+1 C2,t+1   .


Their liquidity demand is identical to the one of long-lived households.


2.2     Non Financial Businesses

Non-financial output is produced with constant returns technology Yt = F (At nt , Kt ). The capital stock Kt de-
preciates at rate δ. Each unit of capital requires 1 − x̄ units of screening and monitoring from intermediaries.
Section 4 derives x̄ endogenously from a standard moral hazard model, but for now I take it as a parameter. Let
ψk,t be the price of corporate financial intermediation. Non financial firms therefore solve the following program
maxn,K F (At n, K) − (rt + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk,t ) K − Wt n. Capital demand equates the marginal product of capital to

its user cost:
                                             ∂F
                                                (At nt , Kt ) = rt + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk,t .                                           (1)
                                             ∂K

Similarly, labor demand equates the marginal product of labor to the real wage:

                                                          ∂F
                                                     At      (At nt , Kt ) = Wt .                                                  (2)
                                                          ∂n

Finally, I assume that the production function is Cobb-Douglass.10

                                            α
Assumption: F (At nt , Kt ) = (At nt ) Kt1−α

    The key point to understand is that this model is fundamentally a user-cost model. The capital-output ratio is

pinned down by equation (1), and improvements in finance lower the user cost of capital. For simplicity I describe
intermediaries’ services as screening and monitoring of primary issuances, but the model also captures business risk
management. One well-understood benefit of risk management is to reduce the cost of financial distress, which is the
  10 Philippon (2012a) discusses the consequences of assuming different production function. The main issue is the elasticity of sub-

stitution between capital and labor, which is 1 under Cobb-Douglass technology. It turns out that this does not entail much loss of
generality because qualitatively different results only happen for elasticity values above 6, which is far above the range of empirical
estimates.



                                                                  11
net present value of the deadweight losses incurred in states of the world where firms are in financial distress. These

deadweight losses include bankruptcy costs and foregone investment opportunities (see Almeida and Philippon
(2007) for a discussion). The standard way to model financial distress is to assume that it destroys a fraction of the
firm’s capital. The risk of future financial distress is then equivalent to a higher depreciation rate δ, and, conversely,
risk management leads to a lower δ. Since the user cost is r + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk,t , it does not matter whether δ decreases
or whether ψk,t decreases. Therefore my framework will properly account for improvements in risk management.


2.3    Intermediation Equilibrium

There is a long tradition of modeling financial services. I do not attempt to do justice to this rich literature. Rather,

I highlight the macroeconomic implication of technological progress in the finance industry on the size of credit
markets and the GDP share of the industry.
   Financial services are produced with capital and labor with constant returns to scale. Philippon (2012a) discusses
in details the implications of various production functions, when financial intermediaries explicitly hire capital and
labor. These issues are not central here, and I therefore assume financial services are produced from final goods
with a marginal cost ζt . The quantity of financial services is given by


                                             Ytφ = µ̄c Btc + µ̄m Mt + µ̄k Btk ,                                       (3)


where Btk = (1 − x̄) Kt and µ̄ measures the required intermediation intensity. For instance, if it is more complicated
to monitors entrepreneurs than households, we would have µ̄k > µ̄c . It is immediate from (3) that for each market
j = c, m, k we have
                                                       ψj,t = ζt µ̄j .                                                (4)

The parameters µ̄’s are convenient to describe various properties of the model. For instance, a decrease in µ̄k can
be interpreted either as an improvement in the creditworthiness of businesses, or as an improvement specific to
corporate finance intermediation. Finally, note that µ̄j is really the average intermediation intensity of market
j. The benchmark model abstracts from heterogeneity within each market, but heterogeneity among firms and

households will play a critical role when we study quality adjustments in Section 4.
   An equilibrium in this economy is a sequence for the various prices and quantities listed above such that
households choose optimal levels of credit and liquidity, financial and non financial firms maximize profits, and the
labor and capital markets clear. This implies nt = 1 and


                                                    St = Kt+1 + Btc .




                                                            12
Aggregate GDP in this economy is defined by Ȳt ≡ Yt + ζYtφ and the finance share of GDP discussed in Section 1 is

                                                               ζt Ytφ
                                                     φt ≡                   .
                                                            Yt + ζt Ytφ


2.4    Balanced Growth

Let us now characterize an equilibrium with constant productivity growth in the non-financial sector (γ) and
constant efficiency of intermediation (ζ). From now on, I use lower-case letters for de-trended variables, i.e. variables
                                                                                                Kt                                       Ci,t
scaled by the current level of technology. For instance, for capital I write k ≡                At ,   for consumption of agent i ci ≡   At ,

and for the productivity adjusted wage: w ≡ Wt /At . Let us discuss the main features of the equilibrium. On the
balanced growth path, M grows at the same rate as C. The Euler equation for long-lived households becomes
                        ν(1−ρ)−ρ 
                     Ct+1
1 = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) Ct                , so the equilibrium interest rate is simply pinned down by


                                                                                θ
                                                   β (1 + r) = (1 + γ) .                                                                  (5)


where θ ≡ ρ − ν (1 − ρ) . With Cobb-Douglass technology, the capital labor ratio is

                                                                                     α1
                                             k               1−α
                                               =                                            .
                                             n         r + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk

Since n = 1 in equilibrium, this is also the aggregate stock of capital. Non financial GDP is y = k 1−α . The real
wage is
                                                    w = αk 1−α = αy.

The wage is increasing in the efficiency of corporate finance. Note that the capital stock and corporate intermediation
are independent of consumer credit and liquidity. The fact that consumer credit does not crowd out corporate credit
is not a general property, it comes from the simplifying assumption that finance uses no labor. In the general case,
there is crowding out (see Philippon (2012a)).

   Given the interest rate in (5), the Euler equation of short lived households is simply

                                                                        1
                                                    c1 = (1 − ψc ) θ c2 .                                                                 (6)


In addition, we have ψm m = νc for each cohort. The budget constraints are therefore (1 + ν) c1 = η1 w + (1 − ψc ) b
                        1+r
and (1 + ν) c2 = η2 w − 1+γ b. We can then use the Euler equations and budget constraints to compute the borrowing
of young households
                                                                   1
                                                       (1 − ψc ) θ η2 − η1
                                            bc =                            1             w.                                              (7)
                                                                                    1+r
                                                   1 − ψc + (1 − ψc ) θ             1+γ

If ψc is 0, we have perfect consumption smoothing: c1 = c2 . From the perspective of current consumption, borrowing


                                                              13
costs act as a tax on future labor income. If ψc is too high, no borrowing takes place and the consumer credit

market collapses. The bigger the ratio η2 /η1 the larger the borrowing. For instance, increased years schooling
generates more borrowing, and a larger financial sector. Improvements in corporate finance increase household debt
bc because they increase w, but bc /y remain constant since w = αy.
    The quantity of services produced of the finance industry is


                                                    y φ = µ̄c bc + µ̄m m + µ̄k bk .


We already know bc and bk , and liquidity demand is

                                                                    νc
                                                             m=        .
                                                                    ψm

Since ψm = ζµm , so we only need to measure aggregate consumption as

                                                     1
                                               c=       (w − ψc bc + (r − γ) k) .
                                                    1+ν

Improvements in corporate finance increase liquidity demand because they increase the consumption output ratio.
When ψk goes down, k/y goes up while b/y is unchanged, therefore νc0 /y goes up.
    The dollar value of the finance industry’s output is ζy φ = ψc bc + ψm m + ψk bk and the finance share of GDP is

                                                                   ζy φ
                                                           φ=             .
                                                                 y + ζy φ

One important point is that the model does not predict an income effect, i.e., just because a country becomes richer
does not mean that it should spend a higher fraction of its income on financial services. This is consistent with
the fact that the finance share of GDP in Figure 1 is the same in 1980 as in 1925.11 The following proposition
summarizes the predictions of the theory.

Proposition 1. There is a unique balanced growth path where the finance share of GDP φ, the unit cost of financial

intermediation pφ , and the financial ratios M/Y , B c /Y and K/Y are constant. The equilibrium has the following
features
   (i) Improvements in corporate finance increase output, the real wage, and the capital-output ratio, household
debt increases proportionally to GDP, and liquidity increases more than proportionally;
   (ii) Improvements in household finance increase household debt, consumption and liquidity, but do not affect the
real wage;
  11 Similarly, Bickenbach, Bode, Dohse, Hanley, and Schweickert (2009) show that the income share of finance has remained remarkably

constant in Germany over the past 30 years. More precisely, using KLEMS for Europe (see O’Mahony and Timmer (2009)) one can see
that the finance share in Germany was 4.3% in 1980, 4.68% in 1990, 4.19% in 2000, and 4.47% in 2006.




                                                                  14
    (iii) Improvements in liquidity management increase consumption, but do not affect household debt or the real

wage;
    (iv) Demand shifts (e.g. η2 ) increase the finance income share while supply shifts (ζ) have an ambiguous impact
on the income share.

Proof. See Appendix.



3     Output and Unit Cost
                                                              m bc bk
In this section I construct empirical proxies for             y ; y ; y     as well as other elements of what the finance industry
does. Note that financial derivatives are discussed in Section 5.


3.1     Credit Markets

Figure 3 presents credit liabilities of farms, households and the business sector (corporate and non-corporate). The
first point to take away is the good match between the various sources. As with the income share above, this allows
us to extend the series in the past. Two features stand out. First, the non-financial business credit market is not as

deep even today as it was in the 1920s. Second, household debt has grown significantly over the post-war period.12


                                                        Figure 3: Debt over GDP
                          1
                          .5
                          0




                                 1920     1930     1940     1950     1960 1970         1980     1990     2000     2010
                                                                        year

                                              Farm, Hist                               Farm, FoF
                                              Household, Hist                          Household, FoF
                                              Nonfarm Business, Hist                   Nonfarm Business, FoF


Notes: “FoF” is flow of funds, “Hist” is Historical Statistics of the United States. Business includes non-farm corporate and non-corporate debt.

   12 I have also constructed credit liabilities of financial firms. Financial firms have recently become major issuers of debt. Banks used

to fund themselves with deposits and equity, and almost no long term debt. Today they issue a lot of long term debt. Note that it
is critical to separate financial and non-financial issuers. What should count as output for the finance industry are only issuances by
non-financial firms.




                                                                       15
    To extend the credit series before 1920, I use data on home mortgages provided by Schularick and Taylor

(forthcoming). I also use the balance sheets of financial firms. I measure assets on the balance sheets of commercial
banks, mutual banks, savings and loans, federal reserve banks, brokers, and life insurance companies. I define total
assets as the sum of assets of all these financial firms over GDP. I use this series to extend the total non-financial
debt series (households & non corporates, farms, corporates, government). I regress total credit on total assets and
use the predicted value to extend the credit series.
    In the theory outlined earlier, there is no distinction between outstanding assets and new issuances. In the data
the two can be different and it is useful to consider stocks and flows separately. Figure 4 shows the issuances of
corporate bonds by non-financial corporations as well as a measure of household credit flows.13 Note that issuances
collapse in the 1930s when the debt to GDP ratio peaks, in part because of deflation. There is thus a difference of
timing between measures of output based on flows (issuances) versus levels (outstanding). Figure 4 also shows a
measure of household debt issuance.

                                                                         Figure 4: Debt Flows
                                       .04




                                                                                                                    .2
                          Gross Corp. Bond Issuance
                                                .03




                                                                                                                                    .15
                                                                                                                    Flow Households
                                     .02




                                                                                                                           .1
                           .01




                                                                                                                    .05
                                       0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                      1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                                  year

                                                               Gross Corp. Bond Issuance        Flow Households


  Notes: Gross Issuance of Corporate Bonds is a three-year centered moving average of gross issuances of bonds by non-financial firms, from
      Baker and Wurgler (2000). Household Issuance is based on the Flow of Funds and the Historical Statistics of the United States and




3.2      Equity Market

The equity market is difficult to deal with because of valuation effects. Stocks, unlike bonds, are recorded at market
value. The ratio of the market value of equity to GDP can fluctuate without any intermediation services (i.e.,
without any issuance of equity). Another problem is that net issuances are often negative. However, negative net
  13 When I do not have a separate measure of flows, I assume a runoff rate consistent with the average ratio of flow to level, and I

create the flow measure from the level series. Details are in the data appendix.


                                                                                   16
issuances do not imply that no intermediation services are produced. To deal with these problems I use three

measures of equity production: total market value over GDP, IPO proceeds over GDP, and gross (non-financial)
equity offerings over GDP. The advantage of using IPOs is that they provide a good measure of entry and growth by
young firms, whose screening and monitoring requirements are certainly higher than those of established companies.
Thus, the IPO series will allow me to control for heterogeneity. Quality-adjustments based on heterogeneity among
borrowers are presented in the next section.


                                                 Figure 5: Equity Value and Gross Issuance over GDP
                                   .03




                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                Market Value of Equity
                        Gross Equity Issuance
                                         .02




                                                                                                                                 1
                          .01




                                                                                                                  .5
                                   0




                                                                                                                0
                                                1880    1900     1920      1940     1960    1980      2000
                                                                            year

                                                       Gross Equity Issuance           Market Value of Equity


Notes: Market Value of non-financial corporate firms from the Flow of Funds and from CRSP. Gross Equity Issuance is a three-year centered
                     moving average of gross issuances of stocks by non-financial firms, from Baker and Wurgler (2000)




3.3     Money and Liquidity

In addition to credit (on the asset side of banks), households, firms and local governments benefit from payment and
liquidity services (on the liability side of banks and money market funds). For households, I use the total currency
and deposits, including money market fund shares, held by households and nonprofit organizations. The left panel
of Figure 6 shows the evolution of this variable.
    An important issue in the measurement of liquidity provision is the rise of the shadow banking system. Gorton,
Lewellen, and Metrick (2012) argue that a significant share recent activities in the financial sector was aimed at
creating risk free assets with money-like features. For firms (incorporated or not), I follow Gorton, Lewellen, and
Metrick (2012) and I treat repos as shadow deposits. The series is thus the sum of checkable deposits and currency,
time and savings deposits, money markets mutual funds shares, and repos (by non financial firms).14
  14 I have experimented with an adjustment for the fact that deposit insurance provided by the government makes it cheaper for private

agents to create deposits. The adjustments seem rather arbitrary and did not make a significant difference so I dropped it. But more


                                                                               17
                                                  Figure 6: Liquidity: Depos and Repos




                                                                                .25
  .6
  .5




                                                                                .2
  .4




                                                                                .15
  .3




                                                                                .1
  .2
  .1




                                                                                .05
       1860   1880    1900     1920       1940   1960     1980     2000               1860   1880    1900     1920       1940   1960     1980     2000
                                        year                                                                           year

                 Household Depo, Hist            Household Depo, Fofunds                       Corp & Gov Depo, Hist            Corp & Gov Depo, Fofunds


 Notes: Deposits, Repurchase Agreements, and Money Market Mutual Funds shares over GDP. Sources are Historical Statistics of the United
                                                             States and Flow of Funds.



3.4       Aggregation

The model presented in Section 2 suggests measuring the output of the finance industry as the weighted sum of
assets intermediated. More precisely, we have y φ = µ̄c bc + µ̄m m + µ̄k bk + µ̄g bg , where bk is corporate intermediation,
bc is household borrowing, m are deposits, and bg is government debt. The main issue is that, as explained earlier,

there is no satisfactory way to link a particular income to a particular activity, especially over long periods of time.
This precludes a direct estimation of the µ̄’s.15 It is possible, however, to obtain indirect estimates by using the
first order conditions of the model together with microeconomic evidence on the prices of various financial services.
I proceed in two steps. I first assume that the µ̄’s are constant over time, and in Section 4, I estimate time varying
quality adjustments to the µ̄’s.
    Households save S at a gross return of 1 + r, while liquid assets yield (1 + r) / (1 + ψm ). In the first order
condition for liquidity demand, ψm is the price that investors are willing to pay for liquidity, and it can be measured
as an opportunity cost to savers. Table 1 presents the relevant rates and returns. Over the period 2002-2011, the
Vanguard Short Term Treasury fund has returned 3.65%, with an expense ratio of 0.22.16 This is the opportunity
cost of cash, but cash is a relatively small fraction of liquid assets. Over the same period, the Vanguard Prime
Money Market fund has returned 1.82% with an expense ratio of 0.20. The difference in returns between these two
essentially risk free instruments is 1.8%. One can also interpret ψm as the cost of creating liquid assets. This cost
can be charged as a redemption fee for investors. This fee is around 2% and is consistent with the trading costs

incurred by mutual funds upon withdrawals (see Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010) for a discussion). Based on this

quantitative work would clearly be needed here.
  15 This is not a simple accounting issue. Financial tasks are deeply intertwined. Insurance companies and pension funds perform their

own independent credit analysis. Banks act as market makers. Investment banks behave as hedge funds. In addition, the mapping from
industry to tasks has changed over time with the development of the originate and distribute model in banking.
  16 Vanguard data accessed on March 11, 2012.




                                                                           18
                                   Table 1: U.S. Interest Rates and Returns, 2002-2011

                                Variable                                               Value (%)
                                Average 3M Treasury Bills                                1.79
                                Average 1M Certificate of Deposits                       2.14
                                Average 1Y Gov. Bond                                     2.10
                                Average 10Y Gov. Bond                                    3.95
                                Average Aaa Corporate                                    5.47
                                Average Prime Bank Loan                                  5.02
                                Average 30Y Conventional Mortgage                        5.71
                                Average Baa Corporate                                    6.64

                                Vanguard Prime Money Market Fund Return                    1.82
                                Vanguard Short Term Treasury Fund Return                   3.65

                               Source: FRED, and Vanguard. All values are average over 2002-2011.


discussion, I will therefore assume that ψm = 2%.
   Next I need to compare the intermediation requirements of households and businesses. Corporate intermediation
itself is made of equity and debt financing, hence µ̄k bk = µ̄dk dk +µ̄ek ek , where ek is corporate equity and dk is corporate
debt. For corporate issuances, Altinkilic and Hansen (2000) report fees of 3% to 4% for equity and about 1% for

bonds. For flows, I therefore assume µ̄ek = 3.5µ̄dk . These numbers seem to be in line with recent reports by large
investment banks. For instance, JP Morgan’s 2010 annual report suggests underwriting fees around 0.70% for debt,
and around 2.46% for equity (see Appendix). For households we can look at the mortgage market. Sirmans and
Benjamin (1990) report fees of 0.50% to 0.70%. For other types of consumer credit these fees are certainly larger.
Table 1 suggests that once issued, high quality corporate and consumer debt trades at similar prices. I therefore
set µ̄dk = µ̄c so that it is equally difficult to extend credit to firms or to households.
   I now need to construct two series for each type of output, one for the flow of new assets, and one for the level
of outstanding assets.17 Before doing so, however, I need to discuss M&A activities.


M&As

An important activity of financial intermediaries is advising on mergers and acquisitions. Scharfstein (1988) argues
that the threat of takeover can improve managerial incentives. Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) show that M&As
differ from other types of investment and require specific search efforts. From 1980 to 2010, I use data from SDC
and Bloomberg to compute the value of merger deals. I then use historical data from Jovanovic and Rousseau
(2005) to extend the series back to 1890. The next step is to apply the proper weight to the M&A series. M&A
fees typically range from 1% for large deals to 4% for smaller ones. I assume that merger fees are 2% of the volume.
This assumption is probably a bit higher than the weighted average fee, but there are also probably some ancillary

activities associated with mergers and for which the finance industry is compensated.
 17 Notethat both measures are relevant in theory. Screening models apply more directly to the flow of new issuances, while trading
and monitoring models apply to both the flows and the levels.



                                                                19
Level and Flow Measures

The discussion so far suggests µ̄dk = µ̄c and ψm = 2%. It turns out that the average cost of intermediation is also
around 2%. This then implies that µ̄m = µ̄c . Anticipating this, and for ease of exposition, I therefore simply assume
that µ̄m = µ̄c (and this will in fact be consistent).
   I also need to take into account the debt of the government. The issue is which weight to apply. On the
one hand, government debt is risk-free and liquid, and it might actually help the functioning of financial markets

(Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010), Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2011)). One option would then be
to ignore government debt, i.e., to assume that it requires no intermediation services. But long term debt carries
duration risk, and it needs to be traded, so intermediation requirements are not exactly zero. To be conservative, I
                                                                                                     µ̄g
assume that government debt intermediation requirements are 1/10 of that of private debt:            µ̄c   = 0.1.
   Finally, for the level measure, I treat equity and debt similarly. The level measure is therefore:


                               φ
                              ylevel = blevel
                                        c     + dlevel
                                                 k     + elevel
                                                          k     + mlevel + 0.1blevel
                                                                               g
                                                                                        level
                                                                                     + yM&A   .


Flows correspond to issuances. I calibrate the relative weights using underwriter fees as explained earlier. The flow
measure is therefore:


                            yfφlow = bfc low + dfk low + 3.5efk low + mf low + 0.1bfg low + yM&A
                                                                                             f low



The two series are displayed in the left panel of Figure 7. The production of financial services increases steadily
until WWI, and rapidly from 1919 to 1929. It collapses during the great depression and WWII. The flow and level
measures share the same trends, but there are clear differences at medium frequencies. The flow measure is more
stationary than the level measure. The flow measure collapses quickly during the great depression while the level
measure peaks later in 1932-33 (this is exacerbated by deflation). A similar pattern seems to emerge during and

after the great recession of 2008-2009.


Composite measures

As explained above, I have constructed two output series for the finance industry. One using the flows (gross

issuances over GDP) and one using the levels (debt and equity over GDP). I now wish to combine the flow and
level measures. On average, in the post-1950 period (where the data is most reliable), the ratio of the flow measure
to the level measure is .118. In other words, the level measure is about 8.5 times the flow one. I therefore set
λ = ȳfφlow /ȳlevel
               φ
                     = 0.118 and I construct the composite measure as


                                                                        yfφlow
                                                                                 !
                                                  φ 1       φ
                                                y =        ylevel   +                                               (8)
                                                    2                     λ



                                                             20
        .5
                                                          Figure 7: Output of Finance Industry




                                                                                4



                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                 1.5
        .4




                                                                                             3
                                                                                Level Measure
  Flow Measure




                                                                                                 1
       .3




                                                                                2



                                                                                                 .5
        .2




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                1
        .1




                                                                                                       1880   1900        1920        1940      1960     1980       2000
                 1880   1900   1920     1940      1960       1980        2000                                                            year
                                           year
                                                                                                                     Business Credit & Equity          Household Credit
                               Flow Measure              Level Measure                                               Liquidity Services                M&As


Notes. Left: aggregate measures of output for US finance industry, levels and flows, as shares of GDP. Right: composite measures (average of
                                                              levels and flows) across broad functions.



There is no theoretical reason to prefer one measure over the other, so it seems logical to put equal weights on
both. In any case, since the flow and level measures share the same trend, changing the weight changes the short
run behavior of the composite measure, but not its long run behavior. Equation (8) implies that the scale of
the composite measure is comparable to the scale of the level measure, so that one can interpret the unit cost of
intermediation as an annual interest rate spread.

      The right panel of Figure 7 presents the composite measures corresponding to 4 broad functions discussed earlier:
credit and equity intermediation services to firms (farms, corporate, non-corporate), credit intermediation services
to households, liquidity services to both, and M&A activities. In each case, the composite measure is based on the
stock and flow measures aggregated as in (8). Note that the liquidity and M&A measures are not in fact composite
measures since I do not have an independent flow measure for deposits or and independent level measure for M&As.
It is clear from Figure 7 that credit intermediation for firms and households are the most volatile series. There is
also a significant increase in liquidity services in the 2000s. M&As play a significant role mostly in the 1990s.


3.5               Unadjusted Unit Cost

Figure 8 estimates the cost of financial intermediation, defined as income divided by output. For income, I use
domestic income, i.e., income minus net exports, as explained in Section 1. For output, I use the composite measure
of equation (8), and also, as a robustness check, the simple level measure. There are two main points to take away.
The first is that the ratio is relatively stable. Recall that we started from a series in Figure 1 that fluctuates by a
factor of 5 (9% relative to less than 2%). All the debt, deposit and equity series also vary a lot over time. But their
ratio, properly scaled, is quite stable. On Figure 8 it stays roughly between 1.5% and 2.5% over 130 years. One
must also keep in mind that the model ignores business cycles and assumes constant real interest rates.



                                                                                         21
   The second main point is that the finance cost index has been trending upward since the 1970s. A possible

explanation is that the characteristics of borrowers have changed over time. In the next section, I show how quality
adjustments go some way towards solving this puzzle. Before doing so, however, I present evidence of constant
returns to scale in financial intermediation.

                         .03
                         .025
                         .02
                         .015
                         .01
                         .005
                         0                        Figure 8: Unadjusted Unit Cost




                                1880     1900         1920         1940        1960         1980         2000
                                                                      year

                                                      Composite Based                   Level Based


 Notes: Total intermediation costs divided by production of credit assets, equity and deposits. Composite measure uses average of levels and
                                                                   flows.




3.6     Evidence of Constant Returns to Scale

An important assumption of the model is that financial services are produced under constant returns to scale.
Figure 9 presents evidence consistent with this assumption. It uses the period 1947-1973, for two reasons. First, the
post-war data is the most reliable, and stopping in 1973 allows me to exclude major oil shocks, inflation and other
factors that might create short term noise in my estimates. Second, as I will discuss shortly, quality adjustments
are not important over this period. Since these adjustments are difficult to implement, it is more convincing to first
present the evidence without them.

   From 1947 to 1973, real GDP per-capita increases by 80% and real financial assets by 250% (the finance output
measured in constant dollars), but my estimate of the unit cost of intermediation remains fairly constant (all series
are presented as ratios to their values in 1950). By 1973 people are a lot richer, financial markets are a lot larger,
but the unit cost is the same. This provides clear evidence that the production of financial services has constant
returns to scale.




                                                                     22
                                                Figure 9: Constant Returns to Scale




                         3.5
                         3
                         2.5
                         2
                         1.5
                         1




                                   1950                             1960                              1970
                                                                     year

                                          Unit Cost               Real Fin. Output                 Real GDP PC


Notes: Unit cost of financial intermediation, composite measure of finance output, and real GDP per capita. Series normalized to one in 1950.



4     Quality Adjustments

The quantities of intermediation should be adjusted for the difficulty of monitoring/screening borrowers. Suppose
that, for some reason, borrowers become harder to screen. A given amount of lending requires more intermediation.
The income share of finance increases. Without proper quality adjustment, the raw measure would register a
spurious increase in intermediation cost (i.e., a spurious decrease in efficiency of the finance industry). I now
present quality adjustments to business borrowing and to household borrowing.


4.1     Corporate Finance

The homogenous borrower model described above is a useful benchmark, but it fails to capture some important
features of corporate finance. To give just one example, corporate finance involves issuing commercial paper for
blue chip companies as well as raising equity for high-technology start-ups. The monitoring requirements per dollar
intermediated are clearly different in these two activities. More generally, my benchmark measure of business
intermediation is an average of credit flows with different intermediation intensities. Measurement problems arise
when the mix of high- and low-quality borrowers changes over time. Constant heterogeneity does not pose a
problem: it amounts to a simple rescaling of the unit cost in Figure 8. Changes in the share of hard-to-monitor
projects, however, present a challenge.
    Let us therefore consider a model with heterogeneity and decreasing returns at the firm level.18 Let kt be the
  18 Decreasing returns in production are required to make room for heterogeneity since with constant returns borrowers that have even

a slight financial disadvantage would not be able to enter.



                                                                     23
                                            Table 2: Summary of Models

                                           Benchmark Model (Section 2)

                                                                ∂F
                      User Cost                    ψk           ∂K   = r + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk
                      Intermediation Intensity     µ̄k                  exogenous
                      Unit Cost                     ζ                   ψk = ζ µ̄k
                      Intermediated Credit         bk                 bk = (1 − x̄) k
                      Real Intermediation          ykφ                  ykφ = µ̄k bk

                                           Endogenous Monitoring Model

                                                   µjk   µjk = r + δ − π (w) + (1 + r) ξk − xj
                                                                                                 
                      Monitoring requirement
                      Real Intermediation          ykφ              ykφ = kl µlk + kh µhk
                                                                               yφ
                      Intermediation Intensity     µ̄k                  µ̄k = bkk
                                                                               kl
                      Share of Low Cash Firms      sk                  sk = kl +k h




(endogenous) number of firms, and let nt be employment per-firm (so aggregate employment is n̄t = kt nt ). Each

firm needs exactly At units of capital and aggregate capital is Kt = At kt . If it hires n workers it produces At f (n)
units of output, where f is increasing and concave. As before, we can scale all the variables by At to obtain a
stationary model where k and n are constant over time. Firms choose employment to maximize (detrended) net
income π (w) ≡ maxn f (n) − wt n. The labor demand schedule is the decreasing function n (w) implied by the
optimality condition f ′ (n) = w.
   To capture financial intermediation in a tractable way, I assume that capital can be diverted and that the
interests of the firm (or of the entrepreneur running it) are aligned with those of residual claimants who own a share
x of the capital stock. In practice we can interpret x as inside equity or as retained earnings. I consider a model
with two types of firms l and h, with xl < xh , and I study equilibria with free entry of l-firms and a given number,
kh , of h-firms. The Appendix describes the details of moral hazard and endogenous monitoring. For simplicity, I
interpret x as cash on hand, and I refer to l-firms as low cash firms. The key point is that the model delivers the
following monitoring demand function


                                       µ (x) = r + δ − π(w) + (1 + r) (ξ − x) ,


where ξ measures the degree of diversion that would prevail without monitoring. The function µ (x) measures the
quantity of intermediation services required for a firm with cash on hand x (and therefore external financing needs
of 1 − x). Firms with high values of x require less monitoring than firms with low values of x.

   Table 2 summarizes the key variables and how they are related. The first half of the table refers to the
benchmark model of Section 2, and the second half to the extended model with heterogenous borrowers presented
in the Appendix.
   Low cash firms mechanically need to raise more external finance than high cash firms. The important point is


                                                          24
that they also require more intermediation services per-unit of borrowing. As a result, the intermediation intensity

is an increasing function of the share of low cash firms. In the Appendix, I show that

                                                                               µhk + (1 + r) xh − xl sk
                                                                                                     
                                                                   µ̄k (sk ) =
                                                                                 1 − xh + (xh − xl ) sk

                                   kl
where sk ≡                      kl +kh   is the fraction of high monitoring (low-cash) firms in aggregate investment. If sk = 0, we have
                                                                             µh
the benchmark model with x̄ = xh and µ̄k =                                    k
                                                                            1−xh    which is the monitoring intensity for the high type.19
        The next step is to implement the adjustment. This requires a calibration of some parameters as well as
empirical measure of sk . Philippon (2008) uses Compustat to construct an empirical proxy for sk , namely the
share of aggregate investment that is done by firms that must borrow more than 3/4 of their capital spending.
The measure is displayed in the left panel of Figure 10. Since it is based on Compustat, it is available only from
1950 onwards. Figure 10 also shows IPO proceeds, based on the work of Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001) and Ritter
(2011). The two series are highly correlated in the post-war period, and I use the IPO series to extend the low
cash share series before 1950. As argued by Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001), the IPO market of the 1920s was
remarkably active, even compared to the one of the 1990s. IPO firms were of similar ages, and the proceeds (as
share of GDP) were comparable. The next step is to estimate the adjustment. To do so I calibrate the complete
model with household finance.

                                                             Figure 10: Inputs for Quality Adjustments
           .006




                                                                                       .5



                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                       Share of Low Cash Firms
                .004
     IPO Proceeds




                                                                                                                  .3
                                                                                                   .3
  .002




                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                         .2



                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                       .1
           0




                         1880     1900     1920   1940     1960      1980    2000                                      1880   1900      1920       1940        1960      1980      2000
                                                   year                                                                                               year

                                   IPO Proceeds           Share of Low Cash Firms                                             Share of Low Cash Firms          Share of Low Wealth Households


 Notes: The share of low cash firms is from Philippon (2008). The IPO series is a three-year centered moving average of IPO proceeds over
 GDP. Sources are Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001) and Ritter (2011). The Share of Low Wealth Households in borrowing is estimated from
                                                                  Census Data and from Piketty and Saez (2003).


                                                                                                                                                             1+r
 19 In                 this case the high type would be the marginal type with a monitoring requirement per firm of µh                                             ξk − xh .
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                     k =                                     1+ζ




                                                                                                      25
4.2    Household Finance and Calibration

It is also important to take into account heterogeneity among households. On a per-dollar basis, it is more expensive
to lend to poor households than to wealthy ones, and we know that relatively poor households have gained access to
credit in recent years. Using the Survey of Consumer Finances, Moore and Palumbo (2010) document that between
1989 and 2007 the fraction of households with positive debt balances increases from 72% to 77%. This increase
is concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution. For households in the 0-40 percentiles of income, the

fraction with some debt outstanding goes from 53% to 61% between 1989 and 2007. In the mortgage market, Mayer
and Pence (2008) show that subprime originations account for 15% to 20% of all HMDA originations in 2005.
   To capture the impact of household heterogeneity, I use a model similar to the one I have used above for firms.
There are two types of households i = l, h. They differ by their labor incomes when they are young: η1l < η1h .
The low-cash households end up using more intermediation per unit of borrowing than their richer counterparts,
as explained in the appendix. In the model, the share of low cash households in the credit market depends on
inequality among households, i.e. to η1h − η1l . Empirically, I use historical data from Piketty and Saez (2003) to
measure inequality. Together with the data on low cash firms described above, this gives two time series that
measure changes in the composition of borrowers over time. These two series are displayed on the right panel of
Figure 10.
   The last step is to calibrate the model and construct the required quality adjustments. Table 3 presents the
parameters. Some parameters (in the first row) are set using values that are standard in the literature. The
finance-specific parameters are chosen to match a set of moments. The moments are presented in the second row

of the table, and the implied parameters in the last row. I calibrate the model using 1980 as a reference year. Low
cash firms cover about 10% of their expenditures, so I set xl = 0.1. They account for 20% of investment in 1980
                                                                            Bk Bc M
(see Figure 10), so I use sk = 0.20 as a target. I also target the ratios   Y ; Y ; Y   in 1980, and the finance share
of income, φ = 5%. For households one must keep in mind that, in the model, the long term households earn all
the capital income, and the short term households earn only labor income. Within this group, I assume that η1l is
the income of 30th percentile and η1h that of the 70th percentile. Using Census data (Jones and Weinberg, 2000), I
calibrate the be ratio η1h /η1l = 2.5 for 1980.
   Using the model, I can now adjust the output series of Figure 7. The adjustment factors are presented in the
left panel of Figure 11. The normalization is such that when the low cash share is zero, the adjustment factor is
one. When the low cash firms account for 20% of investment, the adjustment factor is around 1.18. This means
that the correctly adjusted output is approximately 18% higher than the unadjusted one.
   The bottom panel of Figure 11 shows the output measures with quality adjustments. As argued earlier the quality
adjustments are small between 1947 and 1973, which makes it an ideal period to test the constant returns to scale

assumption. Adjustments to consumer credit are small until 1995, while adjustments to business intermediation
are important both before 1935 and after 1980. Given that the adjustment is roughly zero in 1960, this implies


                                                         26
                                                          Table 3: Calibration and Estimation

                                                                       Direct Calibration
                                      Rate                  Deprec.         Growth       Labor Sh.                  CRRA
                                    r = 0.05                δ = 0.1         γ = 0.02      α = 0.7                   ρ=1

                                                          Targets for Estimation (as of 1980)
                                  Business                Household    Liquidity   Fin. Share                      l-Firms
                                  Bk                      Bc           M
                                  Y = 0.90                 Y = 0.75    Y  = 0.75     φ = 0.05                     sk = 0.20

                                                                  Implied Parameters
                                     h
                                  x = 0.56                η2 = 0.73 ν = 0.0125      ζ = 0.21                       ξ = 0.92


that the unadjusted measure of business intermediation in Figure 7 underestimates the increase in intermediation
between 1960 and 1980 by about 20%.


                                                                Figure 11: Quality Adjustments
                          Business Adjustment Factor


                                                                                        5
      1.35
       1.3
      1.25
       1.2
                                                                                        4



      1.15
       1.1
      1.05
        1
                                                                                        3




             0   0.1     0.2                0.3           0.4         0.5
                               Share of Low Cash Firms

                          Consumer Adjustment Factor
                                                                                        2




       1.4


       1.3


       1.2
                                                                                        1




       1.1                                                                                  1880   1900          1920    1940       1960   1980       2000
                                                                                                                            year
        1
             0   0.05      0.1              0.15                0.2         0.25
                        Excess Share of Poor Households                                            Fin. Output          With bus Adj.      With bus & Houh. Adj.


                                      Notes: Adjustments are computed using the calibrated model (Table 3).




4.3      Adjusted Unit Cost

Figure 12 estimates the cost of financial intermediation, defined as income divided by output. For output, I use the
composite measure of equation (8) adjusted for changes in the composition of borrowers, as in Figure 11. Figure 12
is the main contribution of the paper. It brings together the theory and the historical/empirical work of Section 3.
There are two main points to take away. The first is that the ratio is remarkably stable. Recall that we start from

an income series that fluctuates by a factor of 5 (9% relative to less than 2%). All the debt, deposit and equity
series also vary a lot over time. But their ratio is stable. The series in Figure 12 has a mean of 1.76%, a standard
deviation of 18.5 basis points, a minimum of 1.46% and a maximum of 2.18%. The series in Figure 8 has a mean
of 1.935%, and a standard deviation of 24.3 basis points. The adjustments reduce the volatility of the unit cost
measure by a quarter.


                                                                                   27
    The second main point is that the finance cost index has increased since the mid-1970s. This is counter-intuitive.

If anything, the development of information technologies (IT) over the past 40 years should have disproportionately
increased efficiency in the finance industry. How is it possible for today’s finance industry not to be significantly
more efficient than the finance industry of John Pierpont Morgan a century ago? Figure 12 presents a puzzle for
future research. In the next (and last) section, I discuss some recent research that sheds light on this puzzle.


                              Figure 12: Quality-Adjusted Unit Cost of Financial Intermediation
                       .03
                       .025
                       .02
                       .015
                       .01
                       .005
                       0




                              1880     1900         1920         1940        1960         1980         2000
                                                                    year

           Notes: Total intermediation costs divided by quality-adjusted composite measure of financial intermediation output.




5     Discussion

5.1    Information Technology

Advances in information technology (IT) should lower the physical transaction costs of buying, pooling and holding

financial assets. This seems especially relevant for equity markets. An important point of the empirical work is
that I measure equity at market value. In equilibrium, if the cost of holding a diversified portfolio of stocks goes
down, then the value of the portfolio should go up. Notice that my measure would attribute the entire increase in
the price-earnings ratio to an improvement in financial intermediation.
    In the model, advances in IT lower the unit cost of financial intermediation, but not necessarily the amount
spent on intermediation. The main reason is that a decrease in ζ can give access to finance to borrowers who were
previously priced out. When this extensive margin is elastic, a drop is ζ can lead to an increase in the finance income
share. Conversely, for services that are used by (almost) all agents (e.g., deposits and checking accounts, but also
more recently mutual funds) a decrease in ζ should lead to a decrease in the finance income share. An apt analogy


                                                                   28
is with retail and wholesale trade. Indeed, in these sectors Philippon (2012b) shows that larger IT investment

coincides with lower (nominal) GDP shares. In finance, however, exactly the opposite happens: IT investment and
the income share are positively related. From this perspective, IT seems to deepen the puzzle instead of solving
it. One could argue, however, that it is through its impact on secondary market trading that IT really matters, as
discussed below.


5.2       Price Discovery and Risk Sharing

Using the GDP share of finance to measure the costs of financial intermediation is fairly straightforward. It ignores
hidden costs of systemic risk, but it captures all fees and spreads. The output measure developed above, however,

might not fully capture the production of information via prices, and the provision of insurance. Going back to
the theory, it is important to ask the following question: If improvements in financial intermediation lead to more
informative prices or better risk sharing, where would these improvements be seen in equilibrium?


Price Discovery

The simplest way to test the hypothesis that prices have become more informative is to directly test the signal-to-
noise ratio of asset prices. Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2011) ask if current firm-level equity and bond prices predict
future firm productivity and if this forecasting power has changed over time. They find that the forecasting power
has been remarkably stable over the past 50 years (for comparable sets of firms). In other words, while bid-ask
spreads have decreased, and while many have claimed that financial markets have become more liquid, this does
not appear to translate into “better” prices. I am not aware of direct evidence regarding other asset classes. For
commodity prices, some practitioners (e.g., Hadas 2011) seem to argue that prices have become less informative.
See also Tang and Xiong (2011) for recent research on commodity prices.


Derivatives and Risk Management

The market for financial derivatives is extremely large. Since these contracts are in zero net supply, however, they
do not enter directly into my calculations of output for the finance industry. The question is: Should they? The
answer is essentially no, because the benefits of derivatives are already indirectly taken into account.
   One thing is clear: it would make no sense to count derivatives at face value.20 Rather, one should take the
perspective of standard economic theory and recognize that derivatives can add real value in one of two ways: (i)
risk sharing; (ii) price discovery. I have already discussed price discovery. Let me now discuss risk management,
by financial firms, and by non financial firms. Risk management among banks lowers intermediation costs as banks

lay off excess risk inventories when making markets. This type of risk sharing among financial intermediaries does
 20 For  instance, consider the following example. Without derivatives, corporation A borrows from bank B and bank B retains the
credit and duration risks on its books. With derivatives, bank B buys insurance against credit risk from fund C using a CDS. The sum
of B and C holds exactly the same risk. Absent other frictions, the two models are equivalent.



                                                                29
not create any bias in my measurements. Improvements in risk sharing among banks would simply lead to lower

borrowing costs and cheaper financing, and this would be correctly captured by the model.21
    For the non-financial sector, I have already explained in Section 2 how the model captures improvements in
risk management. In equilibrium, risk management translates into a lower used cost of capital, more issuances
and more investment. Better risk management could also increase TFP if high productivity projects are risky.
Better risk management would then translate into higher average firm value. But since I measure business capital
at market value, I already capture these effects. Also remember that the liquidity measure accounts for cash and
liquidity management. I conclude that the business risk management functions of derivatives are unlikely to bias
my estimates.22


Risk Sharing and Consumption Smoothing

At the household level, better risk sharing should lead to less consumption risk. As with business risk management,
the relevant question is whether my measure captures risk sharing among households. Let me start with an
example where the measure works well. There is evidence of improved consumption smoothing in the housing
market. Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen (2010) find that the purchase price of a household’s home predicts its future
income. The link is stronger after 1985, which coincides with important innovations in the mortgage market. The
increase in the relationship is more pronounced for households more likely to be credit constrained. The model of
Section 4 captures correctly these effects: an improvement in household finance leads to more borrowing and better

consumption smoothing, especially for relatively poor households. More generally, consumption smoothing that
entails the creation of credit flows does not create a bias in my estimation. Smoothing over the life cycle fits into
this category. My measures are also correct if consumers use credit cards to smooth out income shocks.
    It is nonetheless useful to look directly at risk sharing. Income inequality has increased dramatically in the
U.S. over the past 30 years. If financial markets improve risk sharing, however, one would expect consumption
inequality to increase less than income inequality. This is a controversial issue, but Aguiar and Bils (2011) find
that consumption inequality closely tracks income inequality over the period 1980-2007. It seems difficult to argue
that risk sharing among households has improved significantly over time. It is also difficult to point to a financial
innovation in the past 30 years that would have directly improved risk sharing opportunities among households.
    I would like to conclude this section with some caveats. First, my measures would not correctly capture all
 21 To    see why let us go back to the simple example. Suppose there are frictions that rationalize why B and C should be separate
entities, and why they gain from trading with each other (i.e., B has a comparative advantage at managing duration risk, and C at
managing credit risk). Then the existence of CDS contracts can improve risk sharing among intermediaries, lower the risk premia, and
lead to a decrease in the borrowing costs of A. Hence, with free entry, the total income going to intermediaries B+C would decrease.
This could then increase the demand for borrowing, as explained earlier. All these effects would be captured by the model: either
borrowing costs would go down, or borrowing volumes would go up, or both. In all cases, my approach would register an increase in
efficiency.
   22 In any case, I am not aware of any direct evidence suggesting significant improvements in corporate risk management. One obvious

index, that of precautionary savings by businesses, suggest even the opposite: corporate cash holdings have increased over the past 30
years. I am also not aware of direct evidence of credit derivatives leading to better risk management. For instance, it is commonly
believed that hedging represents only a small fraction of all trades in the CDS market.




                                                                 30
types of improvements in financial intermediation. For instance, the measures would be biased if households started

trading large quantities of derivatives to improve risk sharing. There would be an improvement in welfare without
an increase in credit flows. However, in practice, derivatives are mostly used by businesses, and for businesses the
user cost framework correctly captures the value of risk management. And when households do use instruments for
consumption smoothing, these instruments typically are not derivatives, and therefore are captured by the flow of
funds.
    A second caveat I have treated risk management and price discovery as two separate issues, but they need not
be. In DeMarzo and Duffie (1991) for instance, financial hedging is fundamentally linked to private information
about firm value, and in DeMarzo and Duffie (1995) hedging interacts with incentives and accounting disclosure.
Those complex and fascinating issues are beyond the scope of this paper.


5.3      Trading

At this point, we are left with a puzzle. Even accounting for all the financial assets created in the U.S., the unit
cost of intermediation appears to have increased. Finance has obviously benefited from the IT revolution and this
has certainly lowered the cost of retail finance. So why is the non-financial sector still transferring so much income
to the financial sector?
    One proximate cause might be secondary market trading. Trading costs have decreased (Hasbrouck, 2009), but
trading volumes have increased even more, and active fund management is expensive. French (2008) estimates
that investors spend 0.67% of asset value trying (in vain on average, by definition) to beat the market. French’s
calculations are only for the equity market. In Figure 12, a drop in the intermediation cost index of 50 to 60 basis
points would indeed bring it back towards its historical average. With output at 4 times GDP, this suggests that
about 2% of GDP, or about $280 billions annually, are either wasted or at least difficult to account for.

    Why do people trade so much? Financial economics does not appear to have a good explanation yet. An obvious
but unsettling reason might be that they simply enjoy it. Another explanation is overconfidence, as in Odean (1998).
Recent work by Glode, Green, and Lowery (2010) and Bolton, Santos, and Scheinkman (2011) explains why some
type of informed trading might be excessive. Pagnotta and Philippon (2011) present a model where trading speed
can be excessive. In these models, advances in IT do not necessarily improve the efficiency of financial markets.



6     Concluding Remarks

I have provided benchmark measures of production and efficiency for financial intermediation in the U.S. over the
past 130 years. The cost of intermediation represents an annual spread of 2%. This spread is quite stable but it has
increased over the past 30 years. This increase does not reflect better risk sharing or better information production.

It represents a puzzle to the extent that one would expect information technology to lower the cost of intermediation



                                                         31
in finance, as it did in other sectors. The increasing cost might reflect inefficiencies driven by zero-sum trading

activities or by inefficient regulations. More research is needed to answer these important questions.




                                                         32
                                                          Appendix

A     Proof of Proposition 1
Let us start with the market clearing conditions. Long-lived households own the capital stock: St = Kt+1 + Btc .
Adding up the budget constraints we have

                    Wt + (1 + r) St−1 + (1 − ψc ) Btc − (1 + r) Bt−1
                                                                 c
                                                                     − ψm Mt = C0t + C1t + C2t + St

The two sides of GDP are

                         Yt       =    Wt + (r + δ + ψk ) Kt
                         Yt       =    Kt+1 + C0t + C1t + C2t − (1 − δ − ψk ) Kt + ψm Mt + ψc Btc

Combining them we get

                                  Kt+1 + C0t + C1t + C2t = Wt + (1 + r) Kt − ψc Btc − ψm Mt

Combining with the budget constraint and capital market equilibrium we get (1 − ψc ) Btc = −ψc Btc + Btc which is
simply the zero profit condition for consumer credit intermediaries. On the balanced growth path we have

                              y    =    (1 + γ) k + c0 + c1 + c2 − (1 − δ − ψk ) k + ψm m + ψc bc
                              y    =    (γ + δ + ψk ) k + c0 + c1 + c2 + ψm m + ψc bc

Aggregate consumption and money demand are

                                                                 1
                                        c0 + c1 + c2      =          (w − ψc bc + (r − γ) k)
                                                               1+ν
                                                                ν
                                                     m    =        c
                                                               ψm

The budget constraints of short-lived and long-lived households imply

                                                                     1+r c               r−γ c
                        (1 + ν) (c1 + c2 )      = w + (1 − ψc ) bc −     b = w − ψc bc −     b
                                                                     1+γ                 1+γ
                                                                  bc
                                                                     
                                   (1 + ν) c0   = (r − γ) k +
                                                                1+γ

We have the Euler conditions

                                                                                 θ
                                                     β (1 + r)     =     (1 + γ)
                                                                                     1
                                                              c1   =     (1 − ψc ) θ c2

and, using n = 1,

                                                                                         α1
                                                                     1−α
                                                 k    =
                                                               r + δ + (1 − x̄) ψk
                                                w     =   αk 1−α .




                                                                    33
It is clear from these equations that the solution is unique. That homogeneity in production is required for balanced
growth is not surprising. What is more interesting is that it is sufficient even if the production technologies
differ between the financial and non-financial sectors (see Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) and Philippon (2012a)
for detailed discussions). Regarding liquidity demand, balanced growth comes from the assumed preferences, as
discussed in Lucas (2000). Under these assumptions the model predicts no income effect (i.e., no mechanical
tendency for the finance income share to grow with per-capita GDP).
     Proposition 1 contains 4 results of comparative statics:
     (i) Suppose µ̄k goes down or x̄ goes up. Then (1 − x̄) ψk goes down, and k, w, and k/y increase. We have

                                                                        1
                                                             (1 − ψc ) θ η2 − η1
                                                  bc =                       1         w.
                                                                                 1+r
                                                         1 − ψc + (1 − ψc ) θ    1+γ


Since w/y is constant, so is bc /y. But c/y increases because k/y increases, and so does m/y.
    (ii) Suppose µ̄c goes down. Then ψc goes down and bc , c and m go up. Since the user cost of capital is not
affected, k and w are constant.
    (iii) Essentially the same as (ii).
    (iv) Suppose η2 goes up. Then bc goes up while k, w and y are unchanged. Then c and m go down, but one can
check that µ̄c bc + µ̄m m goes up. We have

                                                   yφ    = µ̄c bc + µ̄m m + µ̄k bk
                                                               ζy φ
                                                     φ   =
                                                           y + ζy φ

Therefore y φ and φ increase. Suppose now that ζ goes down. There are two effects: the direct effect and the fact
that y φ and y go up. So the impact but φ is ambiguous. See Philippon (2012a) for an analysis of functional forms
and of the impact of heterogeneity.



B      Quality Adjustments
This section presents the model with heterogenous firms and households.


B.1      Firms
There are k firms. Firm i is endowed with xi A. Each firm needs to borrow (1 − xi )A to operate a technology that
produces according to f (n) = Anα . With Cobb-Douglass technology, we get net income

                                                                               α
                                                                         α  1−α
                                                   π (w)     = (1 − α)
                                                                          w
                                                                      1
                                                                α  1−α
                                                         n   =
                                                                 w

For any value of x, the payoffs are as follows. If the firm behaves well, it pays back its outside investors (1 + r) (1 − x)
and inside investors receive

                          π(w) + 1 − δ − (1 − x)(1 + r) − ζµk = π (w) − δ − r − ζµk + (1 + r) x,

where ζ is the unit cost of intermediation and µk the quantity of monitoring used by the firm. Monitoring reduces the
risk of diversion. If the firm cheats, outside investors receive nothing and inside investors keep (1 + r) ξk −(1 + ζ) µk ,
where ξk measures the degree of diversion.23 The incentive constraint is therefore π (w) − δ − r − ζµk + (1 + r) x ≥
(1 + r) ξk − (1 + ζ) µk .
  23 this assumes that firms cannot divert bankers’ fees. The analysis is essentially the same if they can, one must simply carry an extra

term ζµk in the formulas.




                                                                   34
   The program of the firm is to minimize the cost of monitoring subject to the incentive and break-even constraints:

                                                                min µk           s.t.
                                                              µk ≥0
                                       π (w) − δ − r + (1 + r) x            ≥ (1 + r) ξk − µk ,
                                                           π(w)             ≥ r + δ + ζµk .

Firms always use the minimal amount of intermediation services:

                                     µk (x) = max (0; r + δ − π(w) + (1 + r) (ξk − x)) .

The second constraint binds for marginal firms, i.e., firms that are indifferent between entering and staying out.
   We consider a model with two types of firms l and h, with xl < xh . We study equilibria where the number of
high cash ventures is exogenously given by kh and l is the marginal type. There is free entry of low types, therefore
we have
                                               π(w) = r + δ + ζµlk ,
and
                                                                1+r
                                                        µlk =       ξk − xl .
                                                                           
                                                                1+ζ
This pins down the required profit rate, and therefore the equilibrium wage:

                                                                     ζ
                                                                        (1 + r) ξk − xl .
                                                                                       
                                            π (w) = r + δ +
                                                                    1+ζ

The h-firms earns rents since π > r + δ + ζµhk . The relative monitoring intensity is captured by

                                                    µlk − µhk = (1 + r) xh − xl
                                                                                        


Corporate finance intermediation services are measured by
                                                       X
                                                 ykφ =    kj µjk
                                                                       j

To be consistent with our previous notations, we define the amount of monitoring services per unit of firm borrowing
as
                                                            yφ
                                                       µ̄k = k .
                                                             bk

By definition, we have bk = kh 1 − xh + kl 1 − xl , so
                                                    


                                                           µhk + (1 + r) xh − xl sk
                                                                                 
                                               µ̄k (sk ) =
                                                             1 − xh + (xh − xl ) sk

                kl
where sk ≡   kl +kh   is the fraction of high monitoring (low-cash) firms in aggregate investment.


B.2    Households
There are two types of households i = l, h, with different labor incomes when young: η1l < η1h . Young households
borrow but can run away with ξc η2 Wt+1 if not monitored or with ξη2 Wt+1 − At µic when At µic units of monitoring
are used. The household’s problem is

                                           max                     u (C1,t , M1,t ) + βu (C2,t+1 , M2,t+1 ) ,
                                     i ,C i
                             µic,t ,C1,t                       i
                                         2,t+1 ,M1,t ,M2,t+1 ,Bt




                                                                      35
subject to

                              C1,t + ψm,t M1t + ζAt µic,t      ≤ η1i Wt + Bti
                                  i
                                 C2,t+1 + ψm,t+1 M2,t+1        ≤ η2 Wt+1 − (1 + rt+1 ) Bti
                                           (1 + rt+1 ) Bti     ≤ η2 Wt+1 (1 − ξc ) + At µic,t

With the preferences assumed in the paper, this leads to the Euler equation (written with detrended variables):
                                                                         1
                                               ci1 = (1 − ζ (1 + r)) θ ci2
the budget constraints

                                           (1 + ν) ci1     = η1i w + bi − ζµic
                                                                     1+r i
                                           (1 + ν) ci2     = η2 w −        b
                                                                     1+γ c

and the monitoring demand
                                           1+r i                      µic
                                               bc = η2 w (1 − ξc ) +
                                           1+γ                       1+γ

We can then solve for µic and for bic . Finally total monitoring per household’s borrowing µ̄c is

                                                           sc µlc + (1 − sc )µhc
                                             µ̄c (sc ) =
                                                           sc blc + (1 − sc )bhc

where sc is the share of poor households in the population.
   Finally, for the calibration in the paper, I restrict the moral hazard parameters to be the same for businesses
and consumers: ξc = ξk .



C     JP Morgan 2010
According to its 2010 annual, total net revenue for JPM Co was $103 billion, 51b of interest income and 52b of
non-interest income. The investment bank earned $26 billion, 15 from fixed income markets, 5 from equity markets,
and a bit more than 6 in fees. Of the 26, non interest income accounted for 18, including 6.2b in fees (3.1 and 1.6
for debt and equity underwriting, and 1.5 for advisory fees), 8.4b from principal transactions, and 2.5b from asset
management fees. For its private clients, the investment bank raised 440b in debt and 65b in equity. This suggests
underwriting fees of 3.1/440 = 0.70% for debt, and 1.6/65 = 2.46% for equity. The cost of equity underwriting
is therefore about 3.5 times the cost of debt underwriting. The bank also raised 90b for US governments and
non-profits. The bank advised 311 announced M&A (a 16% market share). The bank also loaned or arranged 350b.




                                                              36
References
Acemoglu, D., and V. Guerrieri (2008): “Capital Deepening and Non-Balanced Economic Growth,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 116(3), 467–498.
Acharya, V. V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2009): “Measuring Systemic Risk,”
 Working Paper NYU.
Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2008): “Financial Intermediary Leverage and Value at Risk,” Federal Reserve Bank
 of New York Staff Reports, 338.
Aguiar, M., and M. Bils (2011): “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?,” Working Paper,
 University of Rochester.
Almeida, H., and T. Philippon (2007): “The Risk-Adjusted Cost of Financial Distress,” Journal of Finance,
 62(6), 2557–2586.
Altinkilic, O., and R. S. Hansen (2000): “Are There Economies of Scale in Underwriting Fees? Evidence of
 Rising External Financing Costs,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 191–218.
Bai, J., T. Philippon, and A. Savov (2011): “Have Financial Markets Become More Informative?,” .
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler (2000): “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock Returns,” Journal
 of Finance.
Basu, S., R. Inklaar, and J. C. Wang (2011): “The Value of Risk: Measuring the Services of U.S. Commercial
 Banks,” Economic Inquiry, 49(1), 226–245.
Baumol, W. J. (1967): “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of the Urban Crisis,” American
 Economic Review, 57, 415–426.
Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine (2011): Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-
 Country Comparison of Banks Markets, and Developmentchap. The Financial Structure Database, pp. 17–80.
 MIT Press, Cambridge.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and R. Lumsdaine (2002): “Dating the Integration of World Capital Markets,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 65, 203–249.
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The financial accelerator in a quantitative business cycle
 framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1C. Elsevier Science,
 North Holland.
Bickenbach, F., E. Bode, D. Dohse, A. Hanley, and R. Schweickert (2009): “Adjustment After the Crisis:
  Will the Financial Sector Shrink?,” Kiel Policy Brief.
Bolton, P., T. Santos, and J. Scheinkman (2011): “Cream Skimming in Financial Markets,” Working Paper,
 Columbia University.
Brunnermeier, M., and L. Pedersen (2009): “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” Review of Financial
 Studies, 22, 2201–2238.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors,” The
 American Economic Review, 101(5), 1964–2002.
Carter, S., S. Gartner, M. Haines, A. Olmstead, R. Sutch, and G. Wright (eds.) (2006): Historical
 Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition OnlineCambridge University Press.
Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang (2010): “Payoff complementarities and financial fragility: Evidence from
 mutual fund outflows,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97(2), 239 – 262.
Christiano, L., and D. Ikeda (2011): “Government Policy, Credit Markets and Economic Activity,” mimeo
 Northwestern.
Corsetti, G., K. Kuester, A. Meier, and G. J. Müller (2011): “Sovereign risk and the effects of fiscal
 retrenchment in deep recessions,” .
Curdia, V., and M. Woodford (2009): “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,” mimeo Columbia.
DeMarzo, P. M., and D. Duffie (1991): “Corporate financial hedging with proprietary information,” Journal
 of Economic Theory, 53(2), 261–286.
         (1995): “Corporate Incentives for Hedging and Hedge Accounting,” Review of Financial Studies, 8(3),
  743–71.

                                                     37
Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of Economic Studies, 51,
  393–414.
Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983): “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 91, 401–419.
Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2001): “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial Fragility: A
  Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 287–327.
Estevadeordal, A., B. Frantz, and A. M. Taylor (2003): “The Rise and Fall of World Trade, 1870-1939,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 359–407.
French, K. R. (2008): “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing,” The Journal of Finance, 63(4),
 1537–1573.
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2011): “A Model of Shadow Banking,” Working Paper, Harvard
 University.
Gerardi, K. S., H. Rosen, and P. Willen (2010): “The Impact of Deregulation and Financial Innovation on
 Consumers: The Case of the Mortgage Market,” Journal of Finance, 65(1), 333–360.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2011): “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 58, 17–34, Working Paper NYU.
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,”
 Working Paper, NYU.
Glode, V., R. C. Green, and R. Lowery (2010): “Financial Expertise as an Arms Race,” forthcoming in
 Journal of Finance.
Gorton, G., S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick (2012): “The Safe-Asset Share,” NBER WP.
Gorton, G., and G. Pennacchi (1990): “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,” Journal of Finance,
 45(1), 49–72.
Gorton, G., and A. Winton (2003): “Financial Intermediation,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, ed.
 by G. M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, pp. 431–552, North Holland. Elsevier.
Gorton, G. B., and A. Metrick (2012): “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of Financial
 Economics.
Greenwood, J., J. M. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2010): “Financing Development; The Role of Information
 Costs,” The American Economic Review, 100(4), 1875–1891.
        (2012): “Quantifying the Impact of Financial Development on Economic Development,” Working Paper,
  University of Pennsylvani.
Greenwood, R., S. Hanson, and J. Stein (2011): “A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt
 Maturity,” Working Paper Harvard University.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004): “The Role of Social Capital in Financial Development,”
 American Economic Review, 94, 526–556.
Hadas, E. (2011): “Commodity prices are failing New Zealand test,” Financial Times.
Haldane, A., S. Brennan, and V. Madouros (2010): “What is the contribution of the financial sector: Miracle
 or mirage?,” in The Future of Finance: The LSE Report, ed. by A. T. et al. LSE.
Hall, R. E. (2011): “The High Sensitivity of Economic Activity to Financial Frictions,” Economic Journal.
Hasbrouck, J. (2009): “Trading Costs and Returns for U.S. Equities: Estimating Effective Costs from Daily
 Data,” Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1445–1477.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review of Economic Studies.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the Real Sector,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 112, 663–691.
Jones, A., and D. Weinberg (2000): “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s Income Distribution: 1947-1998,”
  Discussion paper, US Census Bureau.
Jovanovic, B., and P. L. Rousseau (2001): “Why Wait? A Century of Life Before IPO,” AER paper and
  proceedings, 91, 336–341.


                                                      38
Jovanovic, B., and P. L. Rousseau (2005): “General Purpose Technologies,” in Handbook of Economic Growth,
  ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf. Elsevier, Chapter 18.
Kaplan, S. N., and J. Rauh (2010): “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Rise in the Highest
 Incomes?,” Review of Financial Studies, 23(3), 1004–1050.
Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2002): “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation for the Coexistence
 of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance, 57, 33–73.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (2008): “Liquidity, Business Cycles and Monetary Policy,” mimeo, Princeton.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2009): “Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises,” NBER WP.
Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2010): “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,” Working
 Paper Kellogg School of Management.
Kuznets, S. (1941): “National Income and Its Composition, 1919-1938,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): “Law and Finance,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 106, 1113–1155.
Lucas, R. E. J. (2000): “Inflation and Welfare,” Econometrica, 68(2), 247–274.
Lucas, R. E. J., and N. L. Stokey (1987): “Money and Interest in a Cash-in-Advance Economy,” Econometrica,,
  55(3), 491–513.
Martin, R. F. (1939): National Income in the United States, 1799-1938. National Industrial Conference Board,.
Mayer, C., and K. Pence (2008): “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?,” Staff Paper Federal
 Reserve Board.
Mehra, R., F. Piguillem, and E. C. Prescott (2011): “Costly financial intermediation in neoclassical growth
 theory,” Quantitative Economics, 2(1), 1–36.
Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: a Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 15,
 145–161.
Merton, R. C. (1995): “A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation,” Financial Management, 24, 23–41.
Midrigan, V., and D. Y. Xu (2011): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level Data,” Working
 Paper, NYU.
Moore, J. (2011): “Leverage Stacks and the Financial System,” Ross Prize Lecture.
Moore, K. B., and M. G. Palumbo (2010): “The Finances of American Households in the Past Three Recessions:
 Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Staff Paper Federal Reserve Board.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor (2002): “Globalization and Capital Markets,” NBER WP 8846.
Odean, T. (1998): “Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit when all traders are above average,” Journal of Finance,
 53, 1887–1934.
O’Mahony, M., and M. P. Timmer (2009): “Output, Input and Productivity Measures at the Industry Level:
 The EU KLEMS Database,” The Economic Journal, 119(538), F374–F403.
Pagnotta, E., and T. Philippon (2011): “Competing on Speed,” NBER WP 17652.
Philippon, T. (2008): “The Evolution of the US Financial Industry from 1860 to 2007: Theory and Evidence,”
 NBER WP No. 13405.
         (2012a): “Equilibrium Financial Intermediation,” Working Paper NYU.
         (2012b): “Finance vs. Wal-Mart: Why are Financial Services so Expensive?,” in Lessons from the Crisis,
  ed. by A. Blinder, A. Lo, and R. Solow.
Philippon, T., and A. Reshef (2007): “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry: 1909-2006,”
 NBER WP 13437.
Piketty, T., and E. Saez (2003): “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 118(1), 1–39.
Pozsar, Z., T. Adrian, A. Ashcraft, and H. Boesky (2010): “Shadow Banking,” NY Fed Staff Report.


                                                       39
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales (1998): “Financial Dependence and Growth”„” American Economic Review, 88,
 559–586.
Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2009): This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
 Princeton University Press.
Rhodes-Kropf, M., and D. T. Robinson (2008): “The Market for Mergers and the Boundaries of the Firm,”
 The Journal of Finance, 63(3), 1169–1211.
Ritter, J. R. (2011): “Initial Public Offerings,” mimeo available online.
Sargent, T. J., and B. D. Smith (2009): “The Timing of Tax Collections and the Structure of "Irrelevance"
  Theorems in a Cash-in-Advance Model,” mimeo NYU.
Scharfstein, D. (1988): “The Disciplinary Role of Takeovers,” The Review of Economic Studies, 55, 185–199.
Scharfstein, D., and A. Sunderam (2011): “The Economics of Housing Finance Reform,” Working Paper
  Harvard Business School.
Schularick, M., and A. M. Taylor (forthcoming): “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
  Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,” American Economic Review.
Sidrauski, M. (1967): “Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,” American Economic
  Review, 57, 534–544.
Sirmans, C. F., and J. D. Benjamin (1990): “Pricing fixed rate mortgages: Some empirical evidence,” Journal
  of Financial Services Research, 4, 191–202, 10.1007/BF00365422.
Stein, J. (2012): “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1),
  57–95.
Tang, K., and W. Xiong (2011): “Index Investment and Financialization of Commodities,” NBER WP 16385.
Wang, J. C., S. Basu, and J. G. Fernald (2008): “A General-Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Approach to the
 Measurement of Nominal and Real Bank Output,” NBER WP No. 14616.




                                                        40
