                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




PRICING REGULATION AND IMPERFECT COMPETITION ON THE MASSACHUSETTS
                    HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGE

                                      Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
                                            Amanda Starc

                                        Working Paper 18089
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18089


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




This paper previously circulated as "Age-Based Heterogeneity and Pricing Regulation on the Massachusetts
Health Insurance Exchange." We thank Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Mark Duggan, Jonathan Gruber,
Larry Katz, Jon Kolstad, David Laibson, Ariel Pakes, Mark Pauly, Jim Rebitzer, Bob Town, and seminar
participants at the University of Pennsylvania, Boston University, and the Southern Economic Association
for their thoughtful comments. We acknowledge funding from the Lab for Economic Applications
and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard University and the National Science Foundation. Funding was provided
by the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard University and the National
Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Keith M. Marzilli Ericson and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange
Keith M. Marzilli Ericson and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 18089
May 2012, Revised October 2012
JEL No. I11,I13

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze consumer demand and model the effect of pricing regulation under imperfect competition
using data from the Massachusetts health insurance exchange. We identify consumer demand using
coarse insurer pricing strategies. There is substantial heterogeneity in preferences by consumer type,
with younger consumers twice as price sensitive as older consumers. As a result, older consumers
face higher markups over costs. Modified community rating links prices for consumers that differ
in both costs and preferences. Constrained prices are not simply the population-weighted average of
unconstrained prices, because community rating changes the marginal consumer firms face. Tightening
rating regulations transfers resources from low cost to high cost consumers, but also reduces firm profits
and increases overall consumer surplus. We use our model to examine other insurance regulations.
For instance, minimum loss ratios (designed to limit firm profits) will also alter the transfers between
consumers. Moreover, risk adjustment will be insufficient to equalize prices across consumer types,
as markups still differ. As a result, without a mandate, the market can unravel due to differences in
preferences alone


Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu

Amanda Starc
University of Pennsylvania
astarc@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18089
1       Introduction
Health insurance exchanges (HIEs)—government-run marketplaces for private insurance—raise
new questions about the regulation of insurance markets. On exchanges, consumers choose
from a set of plans that vary not only in financial characteristics, but also in brand, repu-
tation, and provider network. As a result, insurance plans are imperfect substitutes, giving
insurers market power that allows them to charge markups over costs. Insurance markets
are also heavily regulated, and these regulations are controversial—for instance, the role of
modified community rating and the eﬀect of mandates to purchase a minimum level of in-
surance coverage. However, there is a lack of research that examines how insurance pricing
regulation functions in imperfectly competitive markets.
   This paper begins by estimating consumer demand on the Massachusetts HIE, the first
HIE established in the United States.1 Our estimated price elasticities of demand show how
insurers’ markups over cost can vary by type of consumer. Based on these results, we model
the impact of modified community rating regulation, which restricts how prices can vary
across consumers within a market. Accounting for imperfect competition is crucial. The
traditional analysis of community rating focuses on how the regulation links prices for con-
sumers with diﬀerent costs, and under the assumption of perfect competition, average prices
will match average costs. However, community rating also links prices for consumers with
diﬀerent preferences—particularly, how responsive consumers are to price. These preferences
matter for price-setting under imperfect competition. Firms set prices to the marginal, not
the average, consumer. Modified community rating changes the marginal consumer and thus
the level of markups in the market. Changes in this regulation alter both consumer surplus
and firm profits in imperfectly competitive markets.
    We use our empirical estimates of consumer demand and our model of pricing under mod-
ified community rating to simulate the results of making the community rating regulations
more or less strict, and show that stricter regulation raises total consumer surplus, lowers
firms’ profits, but entails substantial transfers away from lower cost, more price sensitive,
younger consumers. We then show how modified community pricing regulation interacts
with other important and controversial insurance market regulations: minimum loss ratios
(which attempt to limit insurer profits), risk adjustment (which attempts to equalize in-
surers’ costs from diﬀerent groups), and mandated insurance purchase (which attempts to
ensure market participation). Our results show that risk adjustment based on costs alone
is not suﬃcient to equal prices across demographic groups, because price sensitivity and
    1
    See also Frank and Lamiraud (2009) on the health insurance market in Switzerland, which bears many
similarities to the ACA’s exchanges.



                                                  2
markups vary across groups. Our simulations show that if the mandate is removed, markets
can unravel—even with perfect risk adjustment— due to diﬀerences in preferences alone if
participation elasticities are large enough.
       HIEs are an ideal context to study these issues, as they oﬀer a wide range of choice
to consumers. HIE are also interesting and important in themselves. The 2010 Aﬀordable
Care Act (ACA) calls upon states and the federal government to set up HIEs to facilitate
the purchase of insurance, and a projected 20 million individuals will purchase through
the exchanges (CBO 2012). HIE are novel regulatory environments, and states will have
substantial latitude in designing and regulating these exchanges. Their choices will shape
the market for individually-purchased health insurance. For instance, HIEs can control what
types of insurance plans are oﬀered, how information about them is presented to consumers,
how prices can vary across consumers, the defaults individuals face, and the frequency of
the open enrollment period. However, little is known about the nature of demand for health
insurance in such a setting. Understanding consumer demand and insurer incentives is
important for both exchange design and for the broader regulation of insurance markets.
    The Massachusetts HIE provides an early look at a comprehensive HIE in action, as
it is similar to the ACA’s exchanges, but was created by Massachusetts’ own reforms and
has been providing coverage since 2007. While regulation of HIEs is still in flux, HIEs
diﬀer in important ways from the way most individuals in the U.S. currently obtain health
insurance: employer-sponsored insurance or government-provided coverage (i.e. Medicare or
Medicaid). Other markets also oﬀer insight into HIEs, but have crucial diﬀerences. Medicare
Part D’s insurance exchange has been a fruitful field of research,2 but oﬀers a limited type
of coverage (prescription drug insurance) to a narrow age range (the elderly). Employer-
sponsored insurance typically oﬀers a limited range of choice (see Dafny, Ho, and Varela
[2010] on the value of choice in these contexts), though some large employers may oﬀer a
range of choice akin to an HIE. However, employer-sponsored insurance diﬀers from HIEs in
how it is regulated (e.g. plans cannot price diﬀerentially by age in employer plans) and in the
nature of competition (the employer negotiates directly with insurers). Finally, individual
markets for direct purchase of insurance are currently small and decentralized (covering only
about 5% of the population), with high search costs (Maestas, Schroeder, and Goldman
[2009]) and limited public data.
    Our analysis of consumer choice on the Massachusetts HIE provides the basis for coun-
terfactual simulations that examine how modified community rating regulation interacts
   2
     Abaluck and Gruber (2011) find systematic mistakes in choice, Ericson (2012) shows the role of inertia
in firm pricing, and Ketcham et al. (forthcoming) argue that consumers learn over time. See Duggan, Healy
and Scott Morton (2008) for more detail on the Medicare Part D reform.



                                                    3
with insurer incentives under imperfect competition. We build on the existing literature
that shows evidence of insurer market power in other contexts (see Dafny, Duggan, Rama-
narayanan [forthcoming], Dafny [2010], and Starc [2010] for examples). We knit together this
literature with the literature on community rating laws, which has examined the eﬀect of
community rating on coverage rates (Simon [2005], Zuckerman and Rajan [1999]), and equi-
librium outcomes assuming perfect competition (see Finkelstein, Poterba, and Rothschild
[2009] on gender-based pricing in annuities, Geruso [2011] on preference heterogeneity un-
der perfect competition). Our work, however, emphasizes the importance of accounting for
imperfect competition when analyzing these regulations.
   We focus on a particular form of modified community rating: age-based pricing regu-
lation, which plays a major role in HIEs, but has been relatively neglected by researchers.
Under this regulation, older individuals pay higher prices than younger individuals only
within a certain band, up to the maximum allowable price ratio (MAPR). In Massachusetts,
this ratio is 2, so the oldest enrollees cannot be more than twice the price charged to the
youngest. Age-based pricing regulation has a substantial eﬀect on the prices individuals
face. Limits on age-based pricing are a type of modified community rating, which restricts
how insurers can vary prices based on consumer characteristics. Pure community rating, in
which all consumers in a risk pool face the same price, creates a trade-oﬀ: welfare losses from
adverse selection, against which are weighed welfare gains from insuring consumers against
the possibility of being a bad risk by having higher expected medical spending. Modified
community rating, in which insurers are allowed to vary premiums across consumers—but
only within limits—attempts to mitigate some of the welfare loss.
   We estimate a discrete choice model of consumer demand on the Massachusetts HIE,
focusing on how price sensitivity varies by age.3 We use discontinuities in the ways firms set
their prices by age to overcome the endogeneity problem and identify consumers’ response
to price.4 There is substantial variation by age in demand elasticities: younger consumers
are more than twice as price sensitive than their older counterparts. Price-sensitivity varies
by age, thus insurers would want to price discriminate and charge higher prices to older
enrollees, even if health costs did not vary by age. In contrast, existing work has assumed that
insurers price diﬀerentially by age solely due to cost diﬀerentials (e.g., Blumberg, Buettgens,
and Garrett 2009), so assumes that regulations only bind to the extent the ratio of costs
   3
     Existing estimates of price sensitivity for health insurance vary substantially by context, and most
examine employer-sponsored health insurance. The only work addressing HIEs specifically is Ericson and
Starc (2012), whose measures of price sensitivity do not account for the endogeneity of premiums; instead,
that paper focuses on the role of heuristics in choice. See also Carlin and Town (2007), Gruber and
Washington (2006), Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2008) and Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)..
   4
     Plan prices are constant within five year age blocks (e.g. 30 to 34), and then jump.



                                                    4
exceeds the maximum allowable ratio of prices by age. In general, though, profit maximizing
insurers will price discriminate by responding to heterogeneity in consumer demand that is
correlated with observable tags. Here we study age, but similar rationales apply to family
size, gender, and geographic location.
   Using our estimates, we simulate insurers’ optimal pricing under various models of mar-
ket structure and examine the potential welfare eﬀects of alternative pricing regulations.
We conduct a counterfactual exercise in which estimate the distributional consequences of
eliminating or tightening age-based pricing rules. Accounting for price discrimination is cru-
cial in estimating the eﬀect of such regulation. Compared to unconstrained insurer prices,
the Massachusetts maximum allowable price ratio of 2 is estimated to raise prices on young
consumers by 22%. However, even constraining the ratio of prices by age to ratio of costs
by age (i.e. a maximum allowable price ratio of 2.75, near that of the ACA’s ratio of 3) still
leads to price increases on younger consumers of 7%; these increases would not occur under
perfect competition.
    Despite these transfers5 , modified community rating improves surplus overall. The im-
perfectly competitive insurers price to the marginal, rather than the average, consumer.
The marginal consumer in a plan is likely to be a young consumer with a relatively high
price elasticity and relatively low medical expenditures. As a result, with binding modified
community rating, average prices, profits, and markups are lower than without regulation.
Moreover, minimum loss ratios, which cap insurer profits, maintain competitive pressure on
insurers while dampening transfers between groups, since they reduce insurers’ incentives to
set high prices for price-insensitive older consumers.
    Finally, modified community rating can lead to severe welfare losses in the absences of
an eﬀective mandate. Even if risk-adjustment were perfect, so that insurer costs did not
diﬀer by enrollee age, diﬀerences in preferences alone can lead to this market unraveling. If
consumers are allowed to opt out of coverage, modified community rating restrictions will
lead the most price-sensitive consumers opt out. As these consumers opt out, less price-
sensitive consumers are left in the market, leading to higher markups. This, in turn, leads
more price-sensitive consumers to opt out of the market. If the participation elasticities are
high enough, a death spiral can result (Cutler and Reber 1998) where there are only price
insensitive consumers left in the market. As a result, a weak or absent mandate may negate
the consumer surplus gains achieved from modified community rating.
    The preference heterogeneity that we identify is critical for analyzing policy, and this
implies that choosing the set of consumers who form a risk pool is critical for determin-
  5
    We note that it is not clear why one would want to transfer from younger to older consumers in this
way.



                                                  5
ing the functioning of and allocation of surplus within insurance markets. When defining
which segments of consumers to include in a health insurance exchangem such subsidized
enrollees, younger consumers eligible for catastrophic plans, or employees in small groups,.
understanding diﬀerences in preferences is as critical as understanding diﬀerences in cost.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the Massachusetts HIE, rating reg-
ulation, and some reduced-form results. Section 3 details our identification strategy, and
develops and estimates our model of consumer demand. Section 4 derives optimal pricing
behavior under imperfect competition and modified community rating regulation. Section 5
simulates insurance market outcomes under alternative age-based pricing regulations and ex-
amines the eﬀect of minimum loss ratios. Section 6 describes the eﬀect of removing insurance
mandates. Section 7 concludes.


2       The Massachusetts Connector: Context and Data
2.1     Massachusetts’ Health Reform
The state of Massachusetts signed its health care bill into law in April 2006, with the goal of
providing universal coverage for its residents; the reform, in turn, served as a national model
for health reform. This reform had many features, including expansions in public coverage,
and individual and employer mandates. A key feature of this reform was the individual
mandate, which required all Massachusetts residents to purchase a minimal level of health
insurance coverage (minimum creditable coverage),. or face a penalty equal to half of the
premium of the lowest cost health insurance plan oﬀered through the exchange. To facilitate
consumers purchasing insurance, the state required employers with 11 or more employees
to make a fair and reasonable contribution to employees’ health insurance costs. It also
established the Commonwealth Care Program, which provided free or subsidized coverage
to lower income residents, who earned up to 300% of the federal poverty level.6
    Finally, the reform established an unsubsidized health insurance exchange that is the
focus of this paper. The Massachusetts HIE (known as the Commonwealth Choice Program)
was designed to facilitate nongroup coverage purchased directly by households and small
group purchase of insurance. It has oﬀered health insurance since May 1, 2007 (with the
mandate taking eﬀect July 1, 2007). Both the HIE and the Commonwealth Care Program are
run by the Commonwealth Connector Authority (the "Connector"), a quasi-public agency
that shapes the market for individual coverage in Massachusetts in a number of ways. The
    6
    The Commonwealth Care program is quite diﬀerent from the HIE established by the ACA, as enrollees
do not choose among plans of diﬀerent generosities, but are assigned to a plan tier based on their income.
Additionally, prices in Commonwealth Care do not vary by age.


                                                    6
Connector operates the exchange’s website,7 actively negotiates with insurers, and chooses
which features of insurance plans are highlighted.
   After the Massachusetts reform, the rate of uninsurance dropped. By 2009, 97.3% of
the population was insured (Long and Phadera 2009); the insurance rate for residents above
300% of the poverty line (i.e. those eligible for the exchange) was 99.1%. Increases in the in-
sured came from individuals purchasing insurance through the Massachusetts HIE, through
increased oﬀering of employer-provided health insurance, and through expansions in subsi-
dized coverage (Gruber 2011). Kolstad and Kowalski (2010) show that the Massachusetts
reform not only increased coverage, but also decreased hospitalization for preventable condi-
tions. However, the eﬀect of the health reform and the HIE on the level and growth rate of
premiums is a point of contention. By characterizing consumer demand and market structure
in this paper, we provide a foundation for future analysis of the impact of the reform.8


2.2     Regulation of the Health Insurance Exchange
In addition to the individual mandate to purchase insurance, there are three other important
regulations for the HIE that we consider:
     Minimum creditable coverage (MCC): MCC is the least generous plan that is suf-
ficient to comply with the mandate. The Connector is responsible for determining MCC for
the state based on a combination of actuarial value, out-of-pocket maximum, deductibles,
covered physician visits, and prescription coverage. In Massachusetts, MCC includes pre-
scription drug coverage and three check-ups, caps deductibles at $2000 for an individual
and $4000 for a family, and caps out-of-pocket expenditures at $5000 for an individual and
$10,000 for a family. A large number of policies just satisfying MCC are available, and they
are quite popular. Therefore, regulation regarding the definition of MCC is likely to be
important in a market with a mandate.9
    Modified Community Rating: Modified community rating rules apply to pricing on
the exchange. Prices for products can vary by age (and geography), but the ratio of a price
for a given product for any two individuals cannot exceed the maximum allowable price ratio,
which is 2 in Massachusetts. This establishes an age-band within which prices can vary. In
addition, no medical underwriting is allowed, and plans are guaranteed issue (no one can be
denied coverage). These rating rules are critical in shaping premiums in the market. Age,
in particular,. is a critical feature of pricing.
   7
     The website is http://www.mahealthconnector.org.
   8
     For an overview of the Massachusetts reform and its various components, see Ericson and Starc (forth-
coming), Gruber and Levy (forthcoming), Miller (forthcoming), and Long (forthcoming).
   9
     Finkelstein (2004) finds that minimum standards can reduce enrollment by potentially exacerbating
adverse selection. However, in the presence of a mandate, such concerns are much less pressing.


                                                    7
       Figure 1 shows that age-based pricing regulations are binding: the average monthly
premium for a 27-year-olds is just over $300, which the premiums for older consumers are
just over $600. While the ACA specifies a 3:1 maximum allowable age rating band in
the individual health insurance exchanges, states can impose more strict regulation. For
example, Maryland has chosen a price ratio of 2.8 (Carey and Gruber 2010). The choice
of this ratio will alter the both the size and division of surplus among young consumers,
older consumers, and firms. We note that price discrimination through plan design (second
degree) is largely prohibited by the mechanisms in place by the regulator, especially minimum
creditable coverage, which outlaws catastrophe plans with extremely high deductibles (i.e.
$10,000/year).
   Minimum Loss Ratios: Minimum (medical) loss ratios require that insurers pay out
a certain percentage of premiums in medical claims. The Massachusetts reforms did not
contain minimum loss ratio regulation, and no such regulations were in eﬀect during the
time period we analyze. However, the ACA requires a minimum loss ratio of 0.80 for indi-
vidual/small group markets and 0.85 for large employers beginning in 2011.


2.3       Making Choices on the Exchange
The exchange oﬀers a variety of health plans administered by the major private insurers
in the state.10 Insurers had relatively wide latitude in designing these plans, which were
grouped into tiers based on actuarial value: bronze, silver, and gold.11 Bronze plans are
generally less generous (higher cost-sharing) and therefore tend to be cheaper. Gold plans
are the most generous, and hence most expensive, while silver plans forge a middle ground.
In addition to this main market, there is a separate market for young adult consumers aged
18 to 26, in which plans tend to have more limited coverage, such as optional prescription
drug coverage.
    Consumers face a number of steps when purchasing insurance from the exchange. (Screen-
shots from the purchasing process are included in the Appendix.) After entering demographic
information, consumers are oﬀered a choice of plans that vary along a number of dimensions,
including copayments, deductibles, and premiums. Importantly, the plans are placed into
tiers; this grouping might aﬀect consumer choice. Even within each tier, consumers must
  10
     In our sample, the following firms sold insurance via the connector: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massa-
chusetts, Fallon Community Health Plan, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, Health New England, Neighborhood
Health Plan, and Tufts Health Plan. All of these insurers are non-profit, but Dafny and Ramanarayanan
(2012) show that for-profit and not-for-profit insurers behave similarly.
  11
     Note the ACA requires that HIEs contain four tiers (it adds platinum), with slightly diﬀerent definitions
for the tiers. Also, beginning in 2010 (after our sample), the Connector required plans to take one of six
standardized forms (bronze low, bronze high, etc.), though plans may still diﬀerentiate themselves based on
their provider networks.


                                                      8
weigh multiple dimensions of plans (copayments, coinsurance, dental coverage).12 Finally,
the consumers enroll.
   The website itself, in addition to regulation, has the potential to shape consumer choices.
Tiering can also aﬀect how insurers design plans; for example, they may design plans to meet
the minimum level of generosity in a tier. The way information is presented, plan features
highlighted, and the order in which plans are sorted, may also aﬀect consumer behavior. For
instance, Ericson and Starc (2012) finds a discontinuity in preference for the minimum choice
plan. During the initial period, the website sorted plans according to price (as opposed to,
for example, consumer satisfaction) so consumers may have inferred that price was the most
important variable diﬀerentiating these plans.


2.4     Data and Descriptive Statistics
We use transaction-level data (purchase, cancellation, and payments) from the unsubsidized
market (Commonwealth Choice) from its launch in July 2007, until December 2009. We ob-
serve approximately 50,000 transactions. There are large spikes in initial enrollment during
the first month of the exchange’s operation, as well as just before the individual mandate’s
financial penalties took eﬀect in December 2007, with a steady-state enrollment of approxi-
mately 1,000 households per month. Appendix Figure A.1 plots a histogram of the number
of individuals choosing single coverage joining the Connector for the first time, by month
(the majority of purchases are for single coverage).
    Table 1 describes the demographics of these consumers: most are young, with an average
age of approximately 35. Most purchase individual, rather than family, plans, and a sizable
percentage lives in Middlesex County (which includes Boston suburbs like Cambridge and
Somerville). The average premium paid is about $420.30 per month, but varies substantially
by age and plan tier. The median consumer tenure in the HIE is 1.25 years, with only small
diﬀerences between tier of plan chosen. For more detail on duration of enrollment in the
exchange, see Ericson and Starc (forthcoming).
    We limit our sample to enrollees purchasing coverage for the first time from the ex-
change,13 and focus on consumers purchasing individual coverage (as opposed to household
coverage), since the majority of plans sold are of this type. We exclude consumers eligible
for young adult insurance (those aged 26 and under) from this sample because they have a
diﬀerent choice set and rarely purchase plans other than young adult insurance plans. Our
choice analyses focus on a subset of the data: November-December 2009. Because we observe
  12
     Beginning in 2010 (after our sample period), the financial characteristics of plans were standardized in
each subtier.
  13
     We exclude repeat purchases since they may display inertia (Ericson 2012; Handel 2009).


                                                     9
transaction-level data, we do not observe all the plan prices that individuals face. However,
for November and December 2009, we collected an extensive set of price quotes from the
exchange’s website using a Perl script, allowing us to create the plan menu faced by each
enrollee. The Data Appendix gives more details. We are also able to run robustness checks
on a subset of the data that extends back until July 2009 (see Data Appendix). The choice
of sample period does not have an eﬀect on our results.


3      Model of Consumer Demand
3.1     Theoretical Model of Demand
We model consumers’ choice of insurance plan using a standard discrete-choice logit model.
We assume that consumer i’s utility of plan j in market m is given by:

                                     uijm = δ jm + μijm + εijm ,

where δ jm is the mean utility of a plan in market m, μijm represents the (mean-zero) com-
ponent of a plan’s utility that varies based on observed individual characteristics (e.g., age),
and εijm is an error term that is independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) extreme
value. This implies shares can be written as:
                                                             
                                              exp δ jm + μijm
                                  sijm   =                       ,
                                           1 + Σj exp δ jm + μijm

where sijm represents the probability that consumer i purchases product j in market m. In
the absence of individual heterogeneity μijm , the δ jm parameters simply represent an inver-
sion of the observed market shares for each plan. The mean utility δ jm can be decomposed
at price into price and plan characteristics, where δ jm =αpjm + Xjm β + ζ jm , with Xj being
either a vector of plan fixed eﬀects or a vector of plan characteristics, such as insurer (brand),
deductibles, and copayments or, alternatively, plan fixed eﬀects, pjm is the price, and ζ jm
is any unobserved product characteristic.14 A given insurance plan (e.g., HMO Blue Basic
Value) is oﬀered to all ages 27-65, and in multiple (but not necessarily all) geographical
markets.
  14
    When plan fixed eﬀects are included, this is the market specific deviation from the mean, as in Nevo
(2001).




                                                   10
3.2     Identification Strategy: Coarse Firm Pricing By Age
The level of consumer price sensitivity is an important feature of demand that aﬀects both
policy design and insurer price-setting behavior. Estimates of price sensitivity are diﬃcult
to identify because unobserved plan characteristics may be correlated with price. We use a
discontinuity identification strategy based on coarse pricing rules used by firms to identify
the eﬀect of price on choice. By law, firms may vary prices continuously (within broad limits)
by age. However, firms do not, in fact, set a diﬀerent price for each age: they price more
coarsely. The listed premium given plan has discrete changes at ages ending in 0 or 5 (30,
35, 40, etc.). Figure 1 shows jumps at each age in the average premium for a constant set
of plans.15 These jumps translate into very similar consumers facing very diﬀerent vectors
of premiums: the underlying preferences of a 39-year-old and 40-year-old will likely be very
similar; however, they will face diﬀerent premiums for the same plan. Appendix Section
A.2 runs regressions that show exactly how much prices change at each discontinuity. It
also motivates the discrete choice model by showing that reduced form regressions of total
spending on price will be misleading if they do not take into account that fact that consumers
are constrained (about half of enrollees are already choosing the least generous tier of plan).
    Our identification strategy relies on the discontinuity in price being unrelated to demand;
i.e. preferences evolve continuously as an individual ages, so turning 40 is like turning 39
or 38. Based on our conversations with insurance firms, these discrete jumps in price result
from firms’ menu costs when setting premiums. The combination of age bins and zip codes
alone gives rise to over 40,000 potential prices, all of which must be submitted to a regulator
for approval. Moreover, Chu, Leslie, and Sorenson (2011) show that firms can obtain profits
close to a perfectly price discriminating firm using coarse pricing rules. Finally, while insurers
price coarsely in this time period, more recent data (August 2012) show that some firms have
begun to allow prices to vary continuously by age. This supports our identification strategy;
that demand and costs do not jump at round-numbered ages.
    While firms could price in discrete age blocks if the cost of an insured individual changed
dramatically at each age cutoﬀ, this alternative explanation for the jump in prices is not
supported by the data. While diagnostic tests (such as mammograms) are recommended for
patients beginning at the age cutoﬀs, observed medical spending in the Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS) rises smoothly and shows no systematic discontinuities in health
expenditures at round numbered ages. Thus, diﬀerences in spending are unlikely to account
for such large price jumps.
  15
    The marginal cost of choosing a more generous plan jumps correspondingly, as shown by Appendix
Figure A.2. The ratio of the cost of the average gold plan to that of the average bronze plan varies slightly
within each age category but stays between 1.8 and 2.


                                                     11
       We identify the premium coeﬃcient α under the assumption that preferences evolve
continuously with age, so that discontinuities in mean utilities at round-numbered ages are
solely attributable to discontinuous changes in premiums.16 More formally, let δ j + μj30 be
the mean utility of product j oﬀered to consumers who are age 30, and δ j + μj29 be the
mean utility of product j oﬀered to a consumer who is age 29. Our choice model gives us
consistent estimates of both utilities. Then in the absence of age trends, the price coeﬃcient
can be simply written as:                          
                                                       μj30 − μj29
                                          α = Ej                   .
                                                       pj30 − pj29
Of course, there are age trends in preferences. We allow for uij to evolve continuously over
ages, but limited data require that we place some structure on how it does so. Estimating
a separate linear spline in age for each of the 21 diﬀerent plans would allow a great deal
flexibility but is infeasible in our data. We allow for preferences for plan tier (bronze, silver,
gold) to evolve flexibly with age. Further, we allow diﬀerent plans within a tier to have
diﬀerent qualities. In other specifications, we allow a linear trend in the age-plan fixed
eﬀect interaction. Ultimately, the assumption that identifies the price coeﬃcient in these
specifications is that age-specific deviations in preference for plans within a given tier are
not correlated with prices. This seems a reasonable assumption, and our results do not
change substantially when we allow for more variability in age-specific preference for plans.
    We use coarse geographical pricing to define markets. Instead of varying prices for each
zip code, firms set prices for larger geographic regions that roughly correspond to hospital
referral networks; these may be a good proxy for underlying insurer costs. For example, Blue
Cross Blue Shield charges three sets of premiums: one set for western Massachusetts, one
set for the greater Boston area, and one set for Cape Cod. We use this variation to define a
geographical region that is a set of zip codes in which prices do not vary within a plan-age
cell. (See Data Appendix for details.)
    Appendix Table A.2 supports our identification strategy by showing that characteristics of
enrollees’ zip codes do not change discontinuously between age categories, with the exception
that enrollees over age 55 seem to be slightly more wealthy, employed, and white. This may
lead us to slightly underestimate the price sensitivity of this age category. Similarly, the
density of individuals enrolling in the exchange does not change at the various age cutoﬀs.
Figure A.3 shows the number of enrollees in each one-year age bin (we do not have exact
  16
    Without assuming that preferences evolve smoothly, the premium coeﬃcient is not separately, nonpara-
metrically identified from variation in preferences over plans. This is because the premium is itself a (highly
nonlinear) function of demographic characteristics, such as age, that may also impact preference for plans or
benefit designs. This is why allowing flexible preferences over plans is crucial for correctly identifying price
sensitivity.



                                                       12
birthdate, only age in years). Visual inspection indicates there is no general pattern of
densities dropping at round numbered ages, with perhaps an anomalous low enrollment for
individuals aged exactly 50 years. The final column of Appendix Table A.2 shows that the
density doesn’t change discontinuously at any breakpoints, with the potential exception of
the age 50 breakpoint.17 In reduced-form analyses (available in the appendix), we find
that total spending rises nearly one-for-one with price increases. However, this misleadingly
suggests little consumer response to price. Consumers are already clustered at the cheapest
plans (25% choose the cheapest plan available to them in our sample period), they have little
ability to reduce insurance spending in response to price increases. A discrete choice model
is therefore more appropriate in measuring the value that consumers place on plans, as it
takes into account their limited potential range of substitution.


3.3     Estimation of Consumer Demand
The model is estimated using a conditional logit approach in Table 2. This allows us to
interact consumer characteristics, such as age, with plan characteristics, such as price. Panel
A, Column 1 estimates the model without allowing for consumer heterogeneity, while column
2 allows price sensitivity to vary linearly by age. The data strongly reject constant price
sensitivity by age. Furthermore, by comparing columns 2 and 3 we see that accounting for
variation in preferences is important to estimating the level of price sensitivity as well. The
estimates in column 3 indicate that the oldest consumer in our sample (64) is roughly half
as price sensitive as the youngest consumer in our sample.
    Alternative specifications confirm the pattern of lower price sensitivity by age. Panel B
of Table 2 separately estimates the model by five-year age bands. These results for each
10-year age bin still show the variation in price sensitivity by age, indicating our structural
assumptions are not too restrictive. Finally, for use in some counterfactual exercises, Panel
C of Table 2 divides the age span in the exchange in half, and runs the model separately
for those under age 45 and age 45 and older. The younger consumers are substantially more
price sensitive, and the diﬀerence is statistically significant. Furthermore, the results indicate
semi-elasticities (which describe the percent change in enrollment given a $100 increase in
premiums) for younger consumers of around -3, and for older consumers of just above -
1. Figure 2 maps out these price elasticities under various specifications, highlighting the
pattern in semi-elasticities over the life cycle.
    Table 3 shows additional specifications. The first two specifications break out price
sensitivity into five-year age bands. Column 2, in particular, shows that the trend may
  17
     The results using the expanded July-December 2009 robustness check sample are similar and, in fact,
do not contain any significant diﬀerences in zipcode characteristics at age 55.


                                                  13
not be linear, but that the oldest consumers have substantially diﬀerent preferences than
their younger counterparts. Column 3 estimates a nested logit, in which consumers first
choose a plan tier (gold, silver, or bronze), and then choose a policy from within that tier.
The dissimilarity parameter is an inverse measure of the correlation between error terms in
each nest, and a dissimilarity parameter of one would indicate the model collapses to the
conditional logit. The low dissimilarity parameter for bronze and silver plans indicates that
consumers see these plans as fairly close substitutes. However, with an estimated dissimilarity
parameter near 1, gold plans are not close substitutes, indicating that networks and brand
name factor highly in the decisions of consumers who are likely to purchase gold plans.
Column 4 includes mixed logit results, in which the price coeﬃcient α is allowed to take
on a log-normal distribution, shifted by age category. The results show that distribution
is shifted toward zero (less price sensitive) for older consumers. Nonetheless, because of
data limitations and the flexibility the specifications provide, these results are somewhat
noisy. Additional robustness checks that replicate the results for a smaller "bandwidth" are
available in Appendix Table A.3.
   Taken together, the results from Tables 2 and 3 are striking. The elasticities of the
youngest group, those 27 to 35, are nearly twice as large in magnitude as those of the
oldest group. The raw data driving these results can be summarized as follows: For older
consumers, the marginal cost of gold plans relative to bronze plans is much higher than
for younger consumers (Appendix Figure A.2). Despite these diﬀerences, the fraction of
consumers purchasing bronze plans stays relatively flat with age. This indicates that older
consumers have a lower distaste for price relative to their preference for more generous
coverage.
    Various demographic factors could be driving the preference heterogeneity that we see
in the data. For the pricing exercise in the next section, it does not necessarily matter
whether age is simply a signal for another demographic factor correlated with preferences
or not—insurers can price diﬀerently by age, but not on other factors correlated with age
(such as income). We note that younger consumers are not from lower income zipcodes in
our data. However, because older individuals are more likely to be married, the selection
of older consumers into the exchange may diﬀer, as some married consumers have access
to insurance through a spouse. In addition, older consumers are less likely to report that
they are in excellent health; Strombom et al. (2002) report that older and sicker consumers
tend to be less price sensitive. Finally, the relatively older consumers in our sample might
be more financially sophisticated, leading them to more heavily weigh characteristics other
than price when making decisions.



                                              14
3.4    Accounting for Selection into the Exchange
While our data describes purchase conditional on participation in the exchange, we know
very little about the behavior of consumers outside the exchange. We address selection
in a number of ways. First, we discuss in detail what alternative options consumers have
besides the exchange, and how this may aﬀect our estimates. Second, we run robustness
checks in our model of consumer demand to ensure that our results are not sensitive to
the exact definition of the outside good. Furthermore, Section 6 explores the impact of
non-participation in the HIE through additional simulations.
   Potential enrollees (those above 300% of the poverty line) in the Connector have few
close substitutes. If they (or their spouse) are oﬀered employer-sponsored insurance, they
are not eligible to enroll in the exchange. Their alternative to the exchange plans are either
1) remain uninsured, or 2) purchase an individual plan from a broker or directly from the
insurer. Uninsurance among this group is extremely low (compliance with the mandate is
extremely high.) The uninsurance rate is only 0.9% for Massachusetts residents above 300%
of the poverty line (calculated from Phadera and Long’s [2010] detailed tabulations of 2010
Massachusetts Health Insurance Survey), suggesting very limited scope for consumers to
substitute into the HIE if insurer prices were lowered.
   The second alternative is individual plans not purchased from the exchange, which we do
not have data on. However, we can compare whether there is diﬀerential selection based on
age into the exchange versus the individual market. The American Community Survey (ACS)
provides information on the number of individuals who purchase insurance directly from the
insurance company. The 2008-2010 ACS for Massachusetts shows that age distribution of
people who directly purchase is relatively flat with respect to age (See Appendix Table A.4),
with slightly more under 30 year olds. This pattern is quite similar to the age distribution of
individuals in the exchange (see Figure A.3), indicating that there is no systematic selection
into the HIE by age.
    In addition to comparing our data to other sources, we can also do a number of robustness
checks to ensure that the results are not sensitive to the exact specification of an outside
option. Table A.5 shows that the diﬀerence in price sensitivity by age is robust to assuming
gold and silver plans to be the outside option and identifying oﬀ variation in bronze prices
alone. As a result, selection into the exchange has little eﬀect on the pattern of our demand
estimates. By contrast, in the absence of mandate, accounting for non-participation in the
market would be quite important; this is addressed in Section 6.




                                              15
4        Firm Pricing and Age-Based Pricing Regulation
4.1       Motivation
In this section, we model how age-based pricing regulation aﬀects markets in the presence
of imperfect competition and age-based heterogeneity in price sensitivity. We develop the
model in the context of age, but the same logic would apply to any observable tag by which
costs and preferences varied.
   We analyze the eﬀect of three types of age-based pricing regulations:

       • Age-Pooling: firms cannot vary prices by age.

       • Age-Bands: firms can vary prices by age, but with a maximum allowable price ratio of
         θ (the ratio of the highest price to lowest price).

       • Age-Unconstrained: firms can vary prices by age.

       In all cases, we assume that if a plan is oﬀered, it must be oﬀered to all ages. Note further
that pooling and unconstrained prices are simply special cases of Age-Bands (where θ =1
and ∞, respectively). On the Massachusetts HIE, θ = 2, while the ACA requires states to
set θ ≤ 3.


4.2       Model and Theoretical Predictions
Consider two types of consumers, old and young, who are purchasing an insurance plan.18
Costs rise with age, so the old have an average cost (to the insurer) of cH , greater than the
cost of the young cL . Let fraction σ of the population be old, and fraction 1 − σ be young.
There are N ≥ 2 profit-maximizing insurers, each oﬀering a single plan19 that is available to
the young and the old. Insurers can determine whether an individual is old or young, but
cannot further determine the expected cost of the individual. Hence, each insurer can set
two prices, one for old and one for young individuals: pH and pL .
   We first examine how regulation aﬀects pricing in perfectly competitive markets, in which
products are identical and firms make zero profits.20 Stricter limitations on age-based pricing
transfers resources from old individuals to young individuals in addition to changing the level
  18
     Here, we assume both groups have a high enough willingness to pay to purchase insurance, so that
selection out of the market is not an issue (i.e., that the mandate is eﬀective). Section 6 examines the
consequences of selection with a weak or absent mandate.
  19
     We abstract away from adverse selection between policies of diﬀerent quality.
  20
     Formally, let there be a continuum of consumers normalized to measure 1. When multiple firms oﬀer a
plan at the same price, consumers are evenly distributed across the firms.


                                                  16
of prices. Age-bands are only binding up to the ratio of costs between the two groups. Prices
under perfect competition are summarized below:

   • Under the Age-Pooling regulation, prices are equal to population average cost: p̄ =
     σcH + (1 − σ) cL .

   • Under the Age-Unconstrained regulation, prices are equal to each type’s average cost:
     pH = cH and pL = cL .

   • Under the Age-Bands regulation with θ ≤ ccHL , prices for the young are above their cost,
                                                                     1
     and for the old are below their cost: p∗H = θp∗L and p∗L = (1−(1−θ)σ) [σcH + (1 − σ) cL ] .
                cH                                          ∗              ∗
     When θ > cL , the regulation does not bind, and so pH = cH and pL = cL .

   However, in an imperfectly competitive market, the prices set by insurers for each group
are determined not only by costs, but also by that group’s elasticity of demand. Hence,
prices for old and young consumers may diﬀer due to a price discrimination motive as well
as a cost diﬀerential motive. Thus, we must consider how characteristics other than cost
aﬀect prices when modeling age-based pricing regulations. Price discrimination can amplify
price diﬀerences if high-cost consumers have lower price sensitivities, while it can reduce (or
even reverse the direction of) price diﬀerences if low-cost consumers are less price sensitive
(the "worried-well"; see Starc [2012]).
    Now let the market be imperfectly competitive. Let s̃ja reflect the share of age group a
that purchases insurance at firm j, and let sjH = σs̃jH and sjL = (1 − σ) s̃jL be the number
of each group purchasing insurance at firm j. Then, we can write the profits of firm j as:

                             Πj = sjH (pjH − cH ) + sjL (pjL − cL ) .

Firms set prices based on their first-order conditions (which we assume are unique), subject
to the age-based pricing regulations they face. We drop the j subscripts below. We define a
few terms: let sH and sL be functions of pH and pL , respectively, so that si gives the change
in type i s enrollment as pi changes. Let total enrollment be S = sH + sL . For use in the
Age-Bands pricing, define weighted demand S̄ = θsH + sL . When the bands are binding,
                                                                              dS̄
write pH as an implicit function of pL , and S̄ as a function of pL , so that dpL
                                                                                  = θ2 sH + sL .

Proposition 1 Assume markets are imperfectly competitive. Then, under the Age-Pooling
regime, pP ool = dS1                     S
                      (sH cH + sL cL ) − dS . Under Age-Unconstrained, pUHn = cH − ssH and pUL n =
                   dp                    dp                                         H

                                                    θs     s 
cL − ssL . If Age-Bands are binding, pBandL    = dS̄H cH + dLS̄ cL − dS̄S̄ and pBand
                                                                                 H     = θpBand
                                                                                           L    .
      L                                           dpL       dpL         dpL




                                                17
Proof. Immediate from first-order condition.
  Proposition 1 shows that under the Age-Unconstrained policy, firms simply set prices
for each group equal to cost, plus a markup inversely proportional to the elasticity of that
group’s demand. An insurer can only set one price under Age-Pooling, which is equal to
a markup term inversely related to the elasticity of population demand, plus a cost term,
where the relative weight on each cost term is that groups’ share of the marginal change in
demand. Note that firms price to marginal cost, not average cost: more weight will be put
a group that is more price sensitive.
   The optimal price under binding Age-Bands is similar to that under Age-Pooling, except
the markup term is now inversely related to weighted demand S̄, and the weight on each cost
term is given by θ. The first-order condition thus takes into account that the price for the
high-cost group is θ times that for the low-cost group. If the low-cost group (young) is more
price sensitive than the high-cost group (old), there are two reasons for the high-cost group
to prefer a pooling or pseudo-pooling arrangement. First, as always, more low-risk types
have lower costs. However, more price-sensitive individuals also lower the optimal markup
of the insurer. We use these first-order conditions for price setting in the counterfactual
exercise that follows.
    We then adapt this pricing rule to account for the multiple products firms oﬀer, as firms
take into account changing price on one plan has on their other plans’ enrollment. Let firms
oﬀer N plans, and let pi , ci , si be the 1 × N vectors of prices, costs, and enrollment for age
group i (=L or H). Denoting the N × N matrix of cross price derivatives for consumers of
type i as Mi , the optimal price for the young group for any θ is given by:
                                              −1
                       pBand
                        L    =      θ2 MH + ML     (θMH cH + ML cL )
                                      2         −1
                                   − θ MH + ML       (sL + θsH ).

The first-order condition implies that the prices are related to both the mix of cost-type and
preferences across diﬀerent groups of consumers.


5     The Eﬀect of Alternative Regulations
5.1    Simulation Method and Assumptions
In this section, we examine how alternative age-based pricing regulations would aﬀect prices
and welfare on the Massachusetts HIE. We first examine how age-based pricing interacts
with imperfect competition, and compare the predicted prices to those we would expect


                                              18
under perfect competition. Then, we examine how changes in the maximum allowable price
ratio (θ) aﬀects transfers between the young and old, as well as between consumers and
firms. We then show how minimum loss ratio regulation would interact with restrictions on
age-based pricing.
   Simulating firm prices requires that we specify firms’ 1) demand curve, 2) costs, and
3) pricing rule. Consumer demand is derived from the preferences estimated in Table 2.21
We use the multiproduct pricing rule developed in the previous section, and simultaneously
solve the system of optimal pricing equations for a new vector of prices under each set of
regulations. We infer costs from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, as described below.
(An alternative method to infer insurer costs from observed prices under the assumption
of profit maximization. That route is problematic for two reasons. However, the prices
we observe are constrained by age-pricing regulation, limiting our ability to identify the
relative costs of young and old. Moreover, since insurers are using coarse pricing rules, the
assumption of perfect profit maximization is problematic.)22
    Insurer costs are an important component of our simulations, but they are not directly
observed. To estimate insurer costs, we rely on data from the 2008 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS) on the health costs of diﬀerent groups. To construct the table, we
restrict the sample to individuals 27-64 and with moderate to high incomes and private
insurance, to mimic the population in the Massachusetts Commonwealth Choice program.
In the MEPS data, older consumers have higher medical expenditures, but also pay a higher
percentage of those medical expenditures out of pocket. Therefore, as a measure of relative
costs to the insurer, we form the ratio of insured costs of older groups to the insured costs of
the average insured costs of 27 to 30 year-old consumers.23 For our simulations, we assume
that insurer’s cost for a bronze plans is 60% of the total age-specific health costs, 70% for
silver and 90% for gold plans; these correspond to the approximate actuarial values of each
type of plan as set by the Connector.
    The ratio of insured expenditure for the oldest consumer group (55-64 year olds) rela-
tive to those 30 and under is 2.7, implying that insurers would be constrained by a θ of 2
even in the absence of price discrimination motives. Yet, the cost ratios for slightly younger
consumers (i.e. 50-54 or 45-49) is much lower (about 1.5). This suggests that price discrim-
  21
     For simplicity, this specification does not allow for any unobserved heterogeneity, though the results are
robust to alternative specifications.
  22
     However, if the researcher is willing to assume a ratio of costs between the oldest and youngest consumers,
costs can then be estimated. If we assume a cost ratio of 2.75:1, the costs estimates and counterfactuals we
run are very similar to those we get when we use the MEPS. Results are available in the Online Appendix.
  23
     A limitation of this analysis is that it does not account for diﬀerential selection into the exchange:
the consumers who lacked coverage in the employer-based market are not representative of the population.
However, in the absence of better cost data, it provides a useful baseline.



                                                      19
ination explains part of the pricing pattern in the data. Specifically, consider 45-49 year old
consumers. Cost estimates indicate that these consumers cost only slightly more (20%) to
the insurer than consumers 27-30, yet premiums are 40% higher. This is easily rationalized
by diﬀerences in elasticities: consumers age 27-30 have an elasticity that is over twice the
elasticity for the older group.


5.2    Unconstrained Prices with Perfect and Imperfect Competi-
       tion
Figure 3 shows our estimate of what prices would be if firms did not face age-based pricing
regulation. It plots premiums by age under both perfect and imperfect competition, assum-
ing the costs in the MEPS data, the preferences in the demand system, and no regulation.
Diﬀerences in preferences amplify this diﬀerence in costs, leading older consumers to have
a much larger gap between prices under perfect and imperfect competition. The simulated
prices under imperfect competition are more extreme than actually observed in the market
(the prices for older consumers are higher than observed, and the prices for younger con-
sumers are lower than observed), because the prices are unconstrained by age-based pricing
regulation in this simulation. Note that margins on the oldest consumers can be quite large
at around $100 per month, or 20% of the purchase price. By contrast, the margins on the
youngest consumers are quite slim.


5.3    Eﬀects of Alternative Age-Bands
Here, we examine the eﬀect of alternative age-bands (value of θ), and consider maximum
allowable price ratios that range from full pooling (θ = 1) to the ACA’s maximum value
(θ = 3).To conduct our simulation of alternative age-bands, we split the sample at age 45
into young and older consumers, and use the parameter γ to indicate the relative cost of
older consumers, such that cH = γcL . Following the MEPS we set γ = 2.75, with average
total medical expenditures of $2500/year for younger consumers.
     Table 5 describes the simulation results, presenting change in premiums relative to the
baseline of Age-Unconstrained prices. We find that conditional on the age-band being set
at the cost ratio (θ = γ = 2.75), the prices for the younger group are 7% higher than they
would be under Age-Unconstrained pricing. The Massachusetts age-band of 2 leads to 22%
higher premiums for younger consumers conditional on a cost ratio of 2.75. We conduct
additional simulations to isolate the eﬀect of preference heterogeneity, in which we assume a
maximum price ratio θ and a cost ratio γ both at 2. In that case, the prices for the young are
still 10% higher than they would be under Age-Unconstrained pricing. Thus, for reasonable

                                              20
parameters, it seems that the transfers from younger to older consumers are due in equal
parts to cost diﬀerences and preference diﬀerences.
   Changes in age-based pricing do not merely transfers between consumers—they alter total
consumer surplus as well. Table 5 compares consumer surplus under bands of 1 (full pooling),
2, 2.75, and 3 to unregulated pricing to capture the welfare impact of regulation. In each
case, consumer welfare is higher with the pricing regulation in place than it would be in the
absence of regulation; the positive compensating variation for the older consumers is larger
in magnitude that the negative compensating variation for younger consumers, who must be
paid to be made whole.
       Insurers price to the marginal, rather then average consumer. Since the marginal con-
sumer is likely to be a young consumer, prices fall when age bands are narrower than the
cost diﬀerentials. Recall the equation for prices under Age-Bands in Proposition 1. The
cost term represents the (weighted) cost of the marginal consumer, and is less than a simple
average cost whenever the ratio of the price sensitivity of the younger, more price sensitive
group to the older, less price sensitive group is suﬃciently large.24
   Premiums for the older consumers fall more than the premiums of the younger con-
sumers rise (even though the older consumers value the reductions less). In our simulations,
the unconstrained average prices are around $200/month for the younger consumers and
$600/month for older consumers. If you were simply to take an average in the Age-Pooling
case, you would expect a $200/month increase in the premiums of younger consumers. But
because insurers price to the marginal consumer, the increase in premiums on younger con-
sumers is only $100/month, for an average premium of only $300/month in the full pooling
case.
   The regulation aﬀects firm profits as well. The bottom row of Table 5 shows that firm
profits fall (compared to unconstrained pricing) as the maximum allowable price ratio is
lowered. The 2:1 age bands allow consumers to capture more of the surplus generated
without leading to negative profits on the part of insurers. Total surplus (consumer surplus
plus firm profits) increases as the maximum allowable price ratio is lowered because the price
vector in equilibrium more closely reflects prices based on the cost of the marginal consumer.
This allows consumers to sort more eﬃciently across plans.25
  24
     Specifically, larger than θ − θ2 , which is true in all our simulations in which the maximum allowable
price ratio binds. In fact, in the community rating case, the insurers would lose money. This provides a
rationale for why community rating arrangements that would be possible under perfect competition may be
more likely to fail under imperfect competition.
  25
     Section 6 also shows age-based pricing regulation can have an eﬀect on eﬃciency when the mandate is
dropped or ineﬀective.




                                                    21
5.4     Minimum Loss Ratio Regulation
Minimum loss ratios (MLR) require that insurers pay out a certain percentage of premiums
in health costs or refund the diﬀerence to consumers, creating a pseudo-price cap. While
the Massachusetts insurers were not subject to minimum loss ratios during our time period,
we simulate the eﬀect of the ACA’s 80% MLR and how it interacts with age-based pricing
regulation.26
   Table 6 shows how premiums change for younger consumers with and without MLRs
under diﬀerent levels of the maximum allowable price ratio. The comparison case is a
minimally regulated market, with no restrictions on age-based pricing, no MLR, no subsidies;
the table shows zero change in that case.
   MLRs mitigate the transfers from younger consumers to older consumers that would
otherwise occur under binding age-based pricing regulation. The bottom row shows the
current Massachusetts age-band of 2: in the absence of MLR regulation, there are price
increases of approximately 22% relative to the base case, but the introduction of the MLR
regulation lowers that increase to about 17%. Intuitively, the MLR regulation dampens the
incentive for insurers to set higher prices for younger consumers to gain slack against the age
rating regulation. In the face of the MLRs, the insurers cannot collect the higher margins
on older consumers.


6      Market Participation Without a Mandate
6.1     Participation Model
Removing the mandate to purchase insurance and allowing for non-participation in the
market increases the impact of modified community rating regulations. Thus far, we have
assumed all consumers purchase insurance: that the mandate is eﬀective. In the absence
of a mandate, consumers may opt out of coverage. Indeed, just as the market can unravel
when costs diﬀer, the market can also unravel when preferences diﬀer.
    In this simulation, we show how pricing under age-bands can lead to selection into and
out of the exchange. The participation rate aﬀects both market shares, which aﬀect optimal
markups, and costs. When limited by maximum allowable price ratios, insurers raise prices
  26
    We impose MLRs at the insurer-state level. This level of aggregation is likely to be used by states to
reduce noise and administrative complexity. MLR regulations would have slightly diﬀerent eﬀects if they
instead were implemented plan-by-plan or age-by-plan group. We mechanically calculate the loss ratio using
an enrollment weighted average across plans, and impose the restriction that insurers cannot set prices such
that they violate the MLRs, abstracting from the possibility that the firms may end up issuing refunds. In
addition, we abstract from the idea that firms trade-oﬀ Type I and Type II error when setting prices given
that they want to get as close as possible to the MLR without violating the regulation.


                                                    22
on younger consumers. Some younger consumers opt out of the market completely, leading
prices to adjust and exacerbating the transfers from the younger consumers left in the market
to older consumers.
       We expand the model to allow consumers to opt out of the market. Participation rates
depend on a group’s take-up elasticity and the prices they face. Denote the participation
rate of consumer group i under an age band of θ by ρθi , and their take-up elasticity by
εi . Further, let p0i represents the price (or price index) under unconstrained pricing and p∗iθ
represents the optimal price (or price index) for consumer group i under a MAPR of θ. We
assume full participation under unconstrained pricing as a benchmark. The participation
rate can then be written as
                                                         
                                  ρiθ = 1 − εi p0i − p∗iθ

   We allow participation to vary by health status and allow health status to vary by age.
We split the sample by age again as young or old (under- versus over-45). We then split by
good or bad health status as taken from the MEPS, and group individuals in "excellent",
"very good", or "good" health together as one group, and those in "fair" or "poor" health
as another. There are thus four demographic groups, each an age-health-status cell.
    We need a number of additional assumptions for this simulation as well. First, we take
extensive margin elasticities for both relatively healthy and relatively sick (in "fair" or "poor"
self-reported health) from the CBO (2005): they are -.57 and -.34, respectively. In addition,
we assume that younger consumers in "fair" or "poor" health are 3.75 times more costly to
insure than consumers in "excellent", "very good", or "good" health, again following MEPS
estimates.27 We continue to assume that average cost of older v. younger individuals are
given as in the MEPS.


6.2       Simulation with Mandate Removed
Table 7 describes results of removing the mandate and allowing non-participation. Selection
into the exchange leads to prices that are dramatically higher, regardless of the age-band.
In addition, we see that healthy, young consumers are likely to leave the market. Under
the Age-Pooling regulation, approximately 60% of healthy, young consumers opt out of the
market, along with 45% of the sicker consumers. In addition, there is significant unravelling
with a maximum allowable price ratio of 2.75, and none of the transfers are due to diﬀerences
in costs alone.
    While full unravelling does not occur given these parameter estimates, consumers are
  27
    The relative costs of the healthy older individuals versus sick older individuals does not play a role in
our simulations, as the older individuals continue to participate in the market.



                                                     23
made worse oﬀ by the higher prices and there is an ineﬃciency resulting from uninsurance.
Hence, without a mandate, there is a trade-oﬀ between the welfare benefits of pooling (as in
the previous section) and the costs of uninsurance. Finally, we note that a statutory penalty
can reduce or eliminate opting out of insurance. For example, a statutory penalty equal to
half of the cheapest bronze premium (as it is set in Massachusetts) leads to no uninsurance
in the simulation above.
    The optimal price tends to increase when the mandate is removed for three reasons. First,
in our simulation, the consumers that leave the market are younger consumers, who are both
less expensive to insure and more price-sensitive: prices for older consumers are always lower
under age-based pricing regulation than with unconstrained pricing. In addition, with the
larger exit of healthy consumers from the market, average cost to insure goes up even further.
Finally, the marginal consumer changes. Since there are simply fewer younger consumers in
the market, the marginal consumer is more likely to be older, and more expensive to insure.
This further increases prices.


6.3       Death Spiral Even With Perfect Risk Adjustment
The HIE market can unravel due to diﬀerences in preferences alone if the participation
elasticity is high enough. To show this, we conduct a simulation of what can occur even with
perfect risk adjustment, in which insurers’ costs do not vary by age of enrollee.28 As a result,
prices would not vary by age due to costs, but they will vary due to a price discrimination
rationale. Under Age-Pooling regulation without an eﬀective mandate, the young would face
higher markups, and some would substitute out of the market.
     We simulate the eﬀect of allowing for opting out in the absence of a mandate in Fig-
ure 4. Using intermediate values from the previous simulations, we assume firms’ optimal
markup is 15% for the younger consumers, and 35% for the older consumers. We assume
full market participation among the older group (they always face lower prices than they
would if insurers were unconstrained), but consider a range of participation elasticities for
the young consumers. Estimates of health insurance take-up elasticities in the literature
vary substantially, from near zero to -2 (Washington and Gruber 2005, Cutler and Reber
2002). However, elasticities from the employer-sponsored insurance may not correspond well
to this new environment. Therefore, we simulate the optimal markup under take-up elastic-
ities ranging from zero (full participation) to -5. (We use optimal markups for each group
as estimated above, and assume equal population shares for the young and old.)
    We can get a "death spiral" from diﬀerences in preferences alone for a take-up elasticity
 28
      Note, there is no risk adjustment in the Massachusetts HIE during our sample.



                                                    24
of -5 and larger:29 no younger consumers participate in the market and the optimal pooled
markup is equal to the optimal markup for older consumers. Our results emphasize the
heterogeneity in consumer preferences for insurance that has been noted in the literature,
and connects this idea to the response of insurers facing regulation in a new market, a health
insurance exchange. Modified community rating rules have a large impact on this market,
even in the presence of a mandate. However, if the mandate were dropped or were not
eﬀective, heterogeneity in preferences alone can lead to a death spiral eﬀect in which all
price-sensitive consumers exit the market.


7      Conclusion
This paper has analyzed consumer behavior and pricing regulation using a novel data set
in a health insurance exchange that serves as a model for national health reform. We find
strong evidence of heterogeneity in preferences, with younger consumers who are more than
twice as price sensitive than their older counterparts. Price discrimination gives insurers a
motive, in addition to costs, to increase premiums on older consumers, amplifying variation
in insurance prices.
    Our simulations show that age-based pricing restrictions increase consumer surplus by
leading insurers to price to marginal, young, inexpensive consumers, but transfers money
from younger consumers to older consumers. However, minimum loss ratios can mitigate
these transfers while retaining the incentive for insurers to price to the marginal, rather than
average consumer, when setting prices. With the ACA’s maximum allowable price ratio and
minimum loss ratios, consumer surplus is increased by relative to unconstrained age pricing.
However, partial unravelling and dramatic premium increases can occur in the absence of an
eﬀective mandate. This furthers the importance of statutory penalties, which may mitigate
these concerns.
   For each of the regulations we consider—modified community rating and age-based pricing
limitations, minimum loss ratios, and mandates—assuming a perfectly competitive market
would have led to misleading results. Insurance market regulations must not only consider
the nature of consumer demand, but also strategic insurer pricing in the face of consumer
demand. Our results from Massachusetts provide a starting point for researchers who study
HIE and related markets, as well as for regulators designing the exchanges.

  29
     So long as the older consumers are less responsive to price than the younger consumers, a death spiral
will exist if the participation elasticities of the younger group are large enough.




                                                    25
References
 Blumberg, L., Buettgens, M., and Garrett, B. (2009). Age rating under comprehensive
    health care reform: Implications for coverage, costs, and household financial burdens.
    Timely Analysis of Immediate Health Policy Issues. Available at: http://www. urban.
    org/UploadedPDF/411970_age _rating. pdf.
 Carlin, C. and Town, R. (2007). Adverse selection, welfare and optimal pricing of employer-
    sponsored health plans. U. Minnesota Working Paper.
 Chu, C., Leslie, P., and Sorensen, A. (2011). Bundle-Size Pricing as an Approximation to
   Mixed Bundling. The American Economic Review, 101(1):263—303.
 Cutler, D. and Reber, S. (1998). Paying for health insurance: The trade-oﬀ between
    competition and adverse selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):433—
    466.
 Dafny, L. (2010). Are health insurance markets competitive? American Economic Review,
    100(4):1399—1431.
 Dafny, L., Duggan, M., and Ramanarayanan, S. (forthcoming). Paying a premium on your
    premium: Consolidation in the u.s. health insurance industry. American Economic
    Review.
 Dafny, L., Ho, K., and Varela, M. (2010). Let them have choice: Gains from shifting
    away from employer-sponsored health insurance and toward an individual exchange.
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15687.
 Dafny, L. and Ramanarayanan, S. (2012). Does it matter if your health insurer is for-
    profit? eﬀects of ownership on premiums, insurance coverage, and medical spending.
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18286.
 Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Cullen, M. (2010). Estimating welfare in insurance markets
    using variation in prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125:877—921.
 Ericson, K. M. (2012). Consumer inertia and firm pricing in the medicare part d prescrip-
    tion drug insurance exchange. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
    18359.
 Ericson, K. M. and Starc, A. (2012). Heuristics and heterogeneity in health insurance ex-
    changes: Evidence from the massachusetts connector. The American Economic Review,
    102(3):493—497.
 Finkelstein, A. (2004). Minimum standards, insurance regulation and adverse selection:
    evidence from the medigap market. Journal of Public Economics, 88(12):2515—2547.
 Finkelstein, A., Poterba, J., and Rothschild, C. (2009). Redistribution by insurance market
    regulation: Analyzing a ban on gender-based retirement annuities. Journal of financial
    economics, 91(1):38—58.
 Frank, R. and Lamiraud, K. (2009). Choice, price competition and complexity in markets
    for health insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 71(2):550—562.
 Geruso, M. (2011). Community rating in employer health insurance: Ineﬃciencies beyond
    adverse selection. Working Paper.

                                            26
Gruber, J. (2010). The tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance. National
   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15766.
Gruber, J. (2011). Massachusetts points the way to successful health care reform. Journal
   of Policy Analysis and Management.
Gruber, J. and Washington, E. (2005). Subsidies to employee health insurance premiums
   and the health insurance market. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2):253—276.
Handel, B. (2011). Adverse selection and switching costs in health insurance markets:
  When nudging hurts. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17459.
Health Connector (2010). Report to the Massachusetts Legislature: Implementation of
   Health Care Reform, Fiscal Year 2010.
Ilayperuma Simon, K. (2005). Adverse selection in health insurance markets? evi-
    dence from state small-group health insurance reforms. Journal of Public Economics,
    89(9):1865—1877.
Ketcham, J., Lucarelli, C., Miravete, E., and Roebuck, M. (2010). Sinking, swimming, or
   learning to swim in medicare part d. American Economic Review.
Kolstad, J. and Kowalski, A. (2010). The impact of an individual health insurance mandate
   on hospital and preventive care: Evidence from Massachusetts. National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Long, S. and Phadera, L. (2009). Estimates of health insurance coverage in Massachusetts
   from the 2009 Massachusetts Health Insurance Survey. Commonwealth of Massa-
   chusetts, Division of Health Care Finance and Policy.
Maestas, N., Schroeder, M., and Goldman, D. (2009). Price variation in markets with
  homogeneous goods: The case of medigap.
Nevo, A. (2000). A practitioner’s guide to estimation of random-coeﬃcients logit models
   of demand. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4):513—548.
Sethi-Iyengar, S., Huberman, G., and Jiang, W. (2004). How much choice is too much?
   Contributions to 401 (k) retirement plans. Pension design and structure: New lessons
   from behavioral finance, pages 83—95.
Simon, K. (2005). Adverse selection in health insurance markets? evidence from state
   small-group health insurance reforms. Journal of Public Economics, 89:1865—1877.
Starc, A. (2010). Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: Evidence from medigap. Manu-
   script. Harvard University.
Strombom, B., Buchmueller, T., and Feldstein, P. (2002). Switching costs, price sensitivity
   and health plan choice. Journal of Health economics, 21(1):89—116.
Zuckerman, S. and Rajan, S. (1999). An alternative approach to measuring the eﬀects of
   insurance market reforms. Inquiry, pages 44—56.




                                           27
                               700        600
                     Monthly Premium in $
                  300    400     500
                               200




                                                25   30       35       40        45       50   55      60          65
                                                                                Age

                                                      Average List Premium                      Average Spending
                                                      Average Spending at Age 30 Prices




Figure 1: Average Prices and Spending, By Age. Notes: Data: Nov. and Dec. 2009. Average
list premium is the plan-weighted average using the Nov. plan-zipcode price. Average
spending is person-weighted. Average spending at age 30 prices uses actual choices but
prices for a 30-year old in Nov. in that zipcode.




                                                                             28
                            0      -1
                   Semi-Elasticity
                        -2  -3
                            -4




                                             30          40                  50               60             70
                                                                          Age

                                                          Linear Age Trend         By Discontinuity
                                                          Fitted Values




Figure 2: Semi-Elasticities By Age. Notes: Semi-elasticity gives the percent reduction in
market share resulting from a $100 increase in monthly premium. Linear age trend is plotted
using results from Column 3 of Panel A of Table 3. Discontinuity results plot the average
semi-elasticity obtained from Panel B of Table 3. The fitted values fit a quadratic trend to
these estimates.
                            600
                            500 400
                   Monthly Premium
                   200   300100
                            0




                                        35        40            45                50            55           60
                                                                          Age

                                                  Imperfect Competition                Perfect Competition




Figure 3: Simulated Monthly Premiums With Unconstrained Pricing. Notes: Weighted
average based on observed choices. Assumes no age-based pricing regulation. Under perfect
competition, we assume insurers charge at cost, with costs taken from the 2008 MEPS (see
Table 6). Under imperfect competition, we assume firms charge the optimal markup based
on age-specific price sensitivity calculated in Table 3 Panel B.


                                                                     29
                                             0.36                                                                             1


                                                                                                                              0.9

                                             0.34
                                                                                                                              0.8
                  Markup Under Age-Pooling




                                                                                                                                    Participation Rate, Young
                                                                                                                              0.7
                                             0.32

                                                                                                                              0.6


                                              0.3                                                                             0.5


                                                                                                                              0.4

                                             0.28
                                                                                                                              0.3


                                                                                                                              0.2
                                             0.26

                                                                                                                              0.1


                                             0.24                                                                             0
                                                    0   0.5   1   1.5         2          2.5         3    3.5   4   4.5   5
                                                                  Participation Elasticity of the Young




Figure 4: Optimal Markups and Non-Participation in the Absence of a Mandate.




                                                                                    30
                 Table 1: Demographics of the Connector

                                                Full Sample Nov-Dec 2009
                                                Demographics
Age                                                    35.93       36.15
% Female                                              0.4524      0.4925
# of Lives Covered                                     1.311       1.291
Premium Paid (Monthly)                                349.77       375.3
                                                Tiers
Bronze                                                 39.65       37.87
Bronze Plus                                              1.8        3.09
Silver                                                 13.24       14.01
Silver Plus                                             2.86        2.36
Silver Select                                           5.16        5.51
Gold                                                    7.42        7.01
Young Adult                                            29.87       30.15
                                                Insurers
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts                31.47       30.55
Fallon Community Health Plan                           15.38       17.94
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care                             22.7       21.19
Health New England                                      2.76        2.84
Neighborhood Health Plan                               20.51       20.33
Tufts Health Plan                                       7.18        7.15
Note: Numbers represent simple averages from the raw data.




                                                 31
                        Table 2: Price Sensitivity by Age in Conditional Logit Model
                          Panel A: Basic Conditional Logits (All Ages)
                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)
      Premium                   -0.357***              -2.018***              -2.266***
      (in $100s)                 (0.122)                (0.306)                 (0.369)
      Premium*age                                      0.0298***               0.0267**
                                                       (0.00488)               (0.0114)
      Fixed Eﬀects                 Plan                   Plan             Plan, Plan*Age
      N Person*Plan               20,838                 20,838                 20,838
                            Panel B: Conditional Logits by Age Group
                            27-34        30-39     36-44        40-49    46-54          50+
      Premium             -3.574*** -2.611*** -2.354*** -2.271*** -1.512*** -1.234***
      (in $100s)           (0.533)      (0.560)   (0.606)      (0.508)  (0.572)       (0.316)
      N Person*Plan         8,512         5,396    4,380        4,459     3,745        5,628
                       2
      Plan and Tier*Age      Yes           Yes      Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
32




                     Panel C: Conditional Logits For Counterfactual Exercise
                                    Under Age 45                        Age 45+
      Premium                          -2.747***                       -0.752***
      (in $100s)                        (0.382)                         (0.266)
      Plan and Tier*Age2                   Yes                             Yes
      N Person*Plan                      12,892                           7,946
     Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Panels B and
     C include plan fixed eﬀects, and tier eﬀects interacted with age trends (both linear and quadratic terms).
          Table 3: Age-based Price Sensitivity in Additional Specifications
                                         (1)              (2)         (3)           (4)
                                         CL               CL          NL            ML

 Premium in Hundreds of $                -3.211***        -3.207***   -1.398***
                                         (0.416)          (0.456)     (0.165)
 ...*1(30-34)                            0.602***         0.440*      0.138         0.475***
                                         (0.181)          (0.237)     (0.119)       (0.180)
 ...*1(35-39)                            0.779***         0.461       0.195         0.585***
                                         (0.255)          (0.378)     (0.130)       (0.202)
 ...*1(40-44)                            0.938***         0.572       0.326***      0.609***
                                         (0.328)          (0.461)     (0.121)       (0.210)
 ...*1(45-49)                            1.084***         0.780       0.218*        0.470**
                                         (0.390)          (0.492)     (0.121)       (0.216)
 ...*1(50-54)                            1.471***         1.305**     0.398***      0.736***
                                         (0.450)          (0.515)     (0.128)       (0.242)
 ...*1(55+)                              1.892***         1.855***    0.707***      1.197***
                                         (0.500)          (0.519)     (0.0994)      (0.211)
 Bronze Dissimilarity Parameter                                       0.531***
                                                                      (0.0777)
 Silver Dissimilarity Parameter                                       0.608***
                                                                      (0.0933)
 Gold Dissimilarity Parameter                                         0.977***
                                                                      (0.208)
 Mean Premium Parameter                                                             1.019***
                                                                                    (0.0945)
 S.D. Premium Parameter                                                             0.345***
                                                                                    (0.0400)
 Fixed Eﬀects                            Plan     Plan                              Tier
                                         Plan*Age Plan*Age            Tier*Age      Tier*Age
                                                  Plan*Age2           Insurer       Insurer
 N Person*Plan                           20,838   20,838              20,838        20,838
 Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Columns 1 and 2 contain conditional logit specifications. Column 3 estimates and nested logit
and reports dissimilarity parameters, where a dissimilarity parameter equal to one collapses to a
conditional logit. Column 4 reports a mixed logit specification in which the price coeﬃcient is
allowed to take on a lognormal distribution. Additional mixed logit specifications by age confirm
the general pattern in Table 3.




                                                     33
                                   Table 4: Comparison of Costs Across Age Groups

                         Population Avg. Annual Expense     Percent Paid... Avg. Insurer Cost Ratio:
                     (in thousands)        ($ per capita) Out of by Private                ca ca /c27
                                                          pocket Insurance
           Total              98968                     $ 3,992      18.5          76.5               $ 3,054
      Age group:
           27-30               7226                     $   2,401    17.4          79.7               $   1,914    1.00
           31-34              11715                     $   2,509    18.3          77.5               $   1,945    1.02
           35-39              12866                     $   2,723    23.3          73.9               $   2,012    1.05
           40-44              13863                     $   3,279    18.7          76.6               $   2,512    1.31
           45-49              13652                     $   3,241    19.6          71.6               $   2,320    1.21
           50-54              15092                     $   4,046    18.9          75.9               $   3,071    1.60
           55-64              24554                     $   6,627    17.2          78.1               $   5,175    2.70
      Note: Data taken from 2008 MEPS, with authors’ calculations. Sample selection: people age 27-64 with middle or high
34




     incomes with any private insurance. Avg. insurer cost is mean private insurer expenditure for this sample.
              Table 5: Surplus Change, Relative to No MAPR Regulation
                                                               Max. Allowable Price Ratio
 Compared to Unconstrained Price:                          1        2         2.75    3
 % Change in Premium:
 ...Older Consumers                                        -49.92% -16.38% -3.75% -1.01%
 ...Younger Consumers                                      33.22% 22.31% 6.78% 1.65%
 Surplus Change, $ per consumer:
 ...Older Consumers                                        298.37   93.99     21.18     6.33
 ...Younger Consumers                                      -49.70   -37.36    -12.16    -3.25
 ...Total                                                  248.67   56.63     9.02      3.08

 Change in Firms’ Profits ($ Per Consumer) -124.33                  -28.31    -4.51     -1.53
 Note: Source: Data and authors’ calculations. Taken from a series of counterfactuals in which the
maximum allowable price regulation (MAPR) is altered, as described in the text. Surplus change
represents the compensating variation required to provide consumers with the same level of utility
relative to unconstrained premiums. Percentage increase or decrease in each age group’s premium
is taken as a percent of their premium under θ = ∞.
Table 6: Percent Change in Premiums for
Younger Group, Relative to a Minimally Reg-
ulated Market: Results of Simulations
                  Minimum Loss Ratio
                  Yes   No
 MAPR = ∞         -9.1 0.00
 Cost MAPR (2.75) -0.50 6.8
 Mass. MAPR (2)   16.5 22.3
 Source: Data and authors’ calculations. Taken from
a series of counterfactuals in which the impact of var-
ious regulations is examined simultaneously, as de-
scribed in the text. "MAPR" represents the maxi-
mum allowable price regulation. All percentages re-
ported are the change in price for the younger group
of consumers.




                                                      35
 Table 7: Participation       in the HIE without a Mandate: Results of Simulations
       With Mandate:            Without Mandate:
       % Increase               % Increase % of Healthy Young % of Sick Young
MAPR in price                   in price    Participating       Participating
1          33.2                107.8           40.1                      64.3
2          22.3                69.0            59.5                      75.9
2.75       6.8                 39.1            79.6                      87.8
3          1.7                 30.4            85.5                      91.4
Source: Data and authors’ calculations. Taken from a counterfactual in which healthy and sick
younger consumers opt out of the market at diﬀerent rates, as described in the text. The first two
columns represent the percent increase in price that results in moving from unconstrained pricing
to full pooling. The increase is larger in the absence of the mandate because healthier consumers
opt out of the market. The second two columns represent the percentage of consumers (of each
type) participating in the market.




                                               36
