NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO WELFARE POLICIES MATTER FOR LABOR MARKET AGGREGATES? QUANTIFYING
SAFETY NET WORK INCENTIVES SINCE 2007
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 18088
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18088

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

I appreciate conversations with Gary Becker, Christian Ferrada, Elizabeth Lower-Basch, Bruce Meyer,
and Rob Shimer, seminar participants at the University of Chicago and the UC-Irvine, and the research
assistance of Sophie Wang. I also appreciate the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for
the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Do Welfare Policies Matter for Labor Market Aggregates? Quantifying Safety Net Work
Incentives since 2007
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 18088
May 2012
JEL No. E24,H31,I38
ABSTRACT
Inflation-adjusted spending on means-tested subsidies has increased sharply since 2007, and most
of the growth was due to changes in eligibility rules, and increases in subsidies per eligible person,
rather than increases in the number of people who would have been eligible under pre-recession subsidy
rules. In 2007, the non-elderly parts of the safety net paid about $10,000 in benefits per person-year
that non-elderly heads of household or spouses were unemployed. By the end of 2009, the annual subsidy
rate per person-year unemployed was up to $16,000. As a result, the average private returns to employment
are substantially less than they were in 2007. One result of the paper is a monthly time series for the
overall safety net’s marginal income tax rate from the point of view of the average marginal worker.

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18088

During the recession, a variety of private and public sector practices moved in a direction
that would likely distort the labor market, and thereby reduce labor hours and increase output per
hour. Among those are recent changes in regulations, such as the federal minimum wage hikes
of 2007, 2008, and 2009.

In addition, markets and governments have been allocating an

increasing amount of resources on the basis of “means”: household income and employment
status. This paper documents the surprisingly large changes in means-tested resource allocation
since 2007.
One increasingly prevalent instance of means-tests resulted from the large number of
homeowners who owed more on their mortgage than their house was worth, and both private and
public sector renegotiations of the mortgage contracts served as a massive implicit tax on their
earning during the recession because borrowers can expect their earnings to affect the amount
that lenders will forgive (Mulligan 2009). A new home buyers’ $8000 tax credit was made
available, but phased out as annual family income varied beyond the income limitation. Other
parts of the 2009 “stimulus law” increased the generosity of means-tested subsidies like food
stamps, and employment-tested subsidies like unemployment insurance.
All of these safety net expansions help cushion individuals and businesses from
reductions in their incomes. A necessary, but presumably unintended, byproduct of means-tested
benefits is that they act as a penalty for raising one’s market income: the more someone earns,
the more of the “cushion” he has to give back. The penalty reduces the rewards to activities that
raise market incomes, and thereby causes at least some people to do less toward earning their
own market income. The magnitude of these effects depends on the amount and characteristics
of safety net expansions (the subject of this paper) and the sensitivity of work hours to those
expansions.
Many economists noticed that the allowable duration of unemployment benefit payments
was extended during the recession, and have attempted to determine the extensions’ impact on

2

employment.2 However, aside from the duration extensions, much analysis of the labor market
since 2007 assumes that marginal tax rates have otherwise been constant. 3 This paper’s
measures of marginal tax or “replacement” rates since 2007 suggest that other changes to the
safety net increased the overall replacement rate significantly more than duration extensions did.
Moreover, given that the overall replacement rate change is similar in magnitude to estimates of
labor market distortion changes based on productivity, work hours, and consumption behavior, it
could potentially explain a large fraction of the reduction in labor hours since 2007.
The quantitative incentive effects of many, if not all, of the safety net events since 2007
are complex and varied, and might therefore seem beyond the reach of aggregate analysis. The
purpose of this paper is to select the large subset of these events that can be characterized as
changing means-tested transfers to individuals either from the government or from lenders, begin
to quantify the combined amount of labor market distortion that they might create, and begin to
identify the types of workers that might be most affected.

A Framework for Quantifying the Generosity of the Safety Net as a Whole
This paper examines the social safety net for the purpose of quantifying changes in work
incentives. One of the challenges of the exercise is that the benefits received from any one safety
net program depend on the participating household’s characteristics: its income, assets,
employment status, presence of children, knowledge of the program, and other factors. As a
result, the degree of safety net generosity varies by demographic groups, some of which are more
relevant for aggregate outcomes than others. At the same time, convenient summary measures of
program activity, such as program spending, are often a complicated mixture of changes in
program rules and changes in the relative size of demographic groups that differ in terms of the
program benefits they are awarded. The former have the potential of affecting labor market
behavior, whereas the latter are merely reflective of it.

2

A few of these are Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2010), Shimer (2010), and the studies cited in Council of Economic
Advisers (December 2010).
3
Mulligan (2008) and Herkenhoff and Ohanian (2011) consider the safety net created by loan discharges. Research
on prior business cycles, such as Braun (1994) and McGrattan (1994) has considered marginal tax rates, especially
from income and payroll taxes.

3

The task is complicated by interactions among the programs. For one, an increased
generosity of safety net program A might reduce labor hours, and the reduced labor income
obligates safety net program B to spend more, even though program B’s benefit rules were
unchanged. From the point of view of program B, it appears that “the recession” caused it to
spend more, but in fact at least part of its spending growth derives from an overall safety net that
became increasingly generous because that safety net includes program A.
Second, a single program’s quantitative impact on the labor market depends on the
generosity of the rest of the safety net, because an important determinant of labor market
behavior is the effect of working on a person’s disposable income. A person earning, say,
$30,000 per year might react differently to program A’s $5,000 annual benefit for non-workers
when the rest of the safety net provided nothing, than he would when the rest of the safety net
provided $25,000 in annual benefits for non-workers. In the first case, not working would mean
giving up $25,000 of disposable income ($30,000 in lost income from working, minus program
A’s $5000 benefit) whereas, in the second case, the $5,000 benefit from program A makes it
possible to stop working without losing any disposable income. More generally, the benefit paid
by a single program to people with low incomes has a larger percentage impact on the reward to
earning income the more that the rest of the safety net helps people with low incomes.
My approach begins by forming two time series for each safety net program j: a statutory
eligibility index {Ejt} and a statutory benefit-per-participant index {Bjt}.

Each index, and

therefore their product, changes only at dates t when new program rules (“statutes”) go into
effect. A time series for overall statutory safety net generosity {bt} is obtained by aggregating
the product of the two indices across programs using a set of time-invariant program weights j.

bt   j  j E jt B jt

(1)

where t indexes time and j indexes safety net programs. Any program’s weight depends on the
population of interest, and is estimated as the fraction of the population of interest that typically
participates in the program, holding eligibility constant.

For example, the unemployment

4

insurance program would receive a positive weight if unemployed people were the population of
interest, but zero weight if persons out of the labor force were the population of interest.
Regardless of the exact values for the program weights, the overall generosity index (1) changes
over time only to the extent that one or more of the component programs had a change in
eligibility rules, benefit rules, or both.
This paper focuses on the group of household heads and spouses less than age 65, which
it divides into those unemployed, out of the labor force, under-employed (defined later), and the
remainder. Thus, each safety net program in principle has four weights – a weight used for
unemployed population calculations, a weight used for out of the labor force population
calculations, etc. – and my framework delivers four time series for overall safety net generosity.4
At the end of the paper, I combine the four time series into a single aggregate time series by
weighting each component according to the share of its population’s contribution to the
reduction in aggregate hours between 2007 and 2010.
Children and youth qualify for a number of programs on the basis of their parents’ or
guardians’ income or employment, not their own, which is why this paper examines safety net
expansions from the perspective of (non-elderly) household heads and spouses. 5 Table 1
displays some of their characteristics in 2007 and 2009.
Weekly employment fell two percent among married women, and about six percent for
the other three demographic categories.

Overall, employment fell, and non-employment

increased, about five million between 2007 and 2009. Among those employed, weekly work
hours fell about three percent.

Inflation-adjusted weekly earnings, measured at the mean,

median, and 1st quartile were pretty stable, reflecting the increase in earnings per hour.
Between 2007 and 2009, the number of household heads and spouses not working
increased 14 percent, which is one crude estimate of how much aggregate safety net spending
would have increased during that time if benefit rules had remained constant. This measure
potentially neglects weekly income losses among the employed that might also create more
4

In practice, the remainder group (employed but not underemployed) has a constant generosity index, so that the
unemployed, out of the labor force, and underemployed are all examined relative to the remainder group. The result
is then three time series for overall safety net generosity relative to generosity to the remainder group.
5
I omit the elderly because of their small share of the labor market and because of the large amount of government
spending on them that, contrary to the program spending examined in this paper, is not means-tested.

5

safety net expenditure. For this reason, I also measure employed persons’ contribution to
underemployment: according to the amount by which their weekly work hours fall short of
average weekly work hours among heads and spouses employed in 2007.

Thus, total

underemployment in 2009 is three percent of the number of people employed, plus the number of
persons not employed, which is a total of 41 million.6
This paper examines two categories of safety net programs: means-tested (or worktested) government subsidies and means-tested loan forgiveness. Regarding the first category,
Table 2 displays the various means-tested or work-tested subsidies that appear in the personal
income accounts as government social benefits. For each program, the table displays the 20062010 average fractions of program expenditures that go to the non-elderly, and indicates the
result in the “inclusion factor” column of the table.7 The Medicaid inclusion factor also contains
a 50 percent reduction for the possibility that Medicaid benefits are a poor substitute for cash
benefits. I then add up each program’s product of inclusion factor and 2009 expenditures, and
show the contribution of each program to the total in the last column of the Table. The three
largest programs for persons under age 65 in 2009 were Medicaid, Unemployment Insurance
(UI), and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance (SNAP). These are also the three government
programs featured in major federal legislation and with the largest spending changes since 2007;

6

Using the 2007 CPS merged outgoing rotation groups, I calculate average hours worked in the reference week
among employed heads and spouses less than age 65 (persons employed but not at work are not included in this
average), using the CPS weights adjusted so that each month gets equal total weight. For every month 2006-2010, I
then measure underemployment as the sum of persons not employed in the reference week plus the product of the
number employed and one minus the ratio of average hours among those at work to the 2007 average noted above,
using the same adjusted CPS weights. By construction, under-employment is equal to non-employment for 2007
and any other period in which the average hours worked among those at work was the same as in 2007. Otherwise,
employed persons also contribute fractionally to under-employment according to hours worked. Given that my
purpose is to decompose changes in safety net expenditures based on actual work hours (rather than intended work
hours), my underemployment measure is different from Bureau of Labor Statistics measures of labor
underutilization.
7
On average between 2006 and 2010, 3.3 percent of regular state UI beneficiaries were aged 65 and over (United
States Department of Labor, various issues). 6.6 percent of SNAP benefits were pro-rated to persons aged 60+
(Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011) (Leftin, Gothro and Eslami 2010) (Wolkwitz and Trippe 2009) (Wolkwitz and
Leftin 2008). 12.4 percent of SSI benefits were paid out under aged provisions (Social Security Administration
2011). 21 percent of Medicaid benefits (fiscal years 2009 and 2010 unavailable) were paid to the aged. I assume
that the elderly share of Family Assistance, General Assistance, Energy Assistance, and Other is the same as it is for
SNAP.

6

the remaining means-tested government programs are lumped into a single “other” category for
the purposes of applying the formula (1).8
The rest of this paper first derives statutory eligibility and benefit indices for the major
government programs. The paper then measures the amount of resources redistributed to persons
underemployed or not employed through mortgage and consumer debt forgiveness, and how the
availability of such resources changed over time.

Legislation Made the Safety Net Available to Millions More
The fraction of households receiving benefits from safety net programs increased
dramatically since 2007. Figure 1’s red series shows the average weekly number of persons aged
25-64 receiving unemployment benefits as a ratio to the average weekly number of persons aged
25-64 who are unemployed.9 Figure 1’s black series displays the average monthly number of
households receiving SNAP benefits as a ratio to total households with annual income below 125
percent of the poverty line (as defined by the Census Bureau on the basis of their money
income). Many more households have money income below the poverty line than in 2007, and
many more household heads and spouses find themselves unemployed, yet the two ratios shown
in Figure 1 rise because the number of safety net program participants increased even more. For
example, the number of families with income below 125 percent of the federal poverty guideline
increased about 16 percent from 2007 to 2010, yet the number of households receiving SNAP
benefits increased 58 percent over the same time frame. As a result, the SNAP recipiency ratio
shown in Figure 1 increased 37 percent.
Millions of households received safety net benefits in 2010 that would not have been
eligible for benefits in 2007 even if their circumstances had been the same in the two years,
because the rules for receiving safety net benefits had changed. Table 3 displays some of the
major government benefit rule changes that are quantified in this paper. The Table is organized

8

Social security, Medicare, education, veterans’ benefits, and various medical, retirement and pension transfers are
entirely excluded from Table 2.
9
The population of nonelderly heads and spouses has a lot of overlap with the population of persons aged 25-64 (a
population that can be isolated for the purpose of measuring unemployment insurance participation): only 5 percent
of nonelderly heads and spouses are less than age 25, and 85 percent of persons aged 25-64 are either head or
spouse.

7

in panels: the top panel lists unemployment insurance and associated initiatives, the middle panel
list SNAP changes, and the bottom panel lists Medicaid changes. The left column indicates rule
changes related to program eligibility, and the right column (discussed further below) indicates
rule changes related to the amounts received by eligible beneficiaries. All together, I quantify
the nine major eligibility expansions embodied in eight different pieces of legislation shown in
the left column of Table 3. For the most part, those expansions went into effect in 2009 or in the
second half of 2008. Most of the expansions are indefinite in that the initial legislation either
specified no termination date or, as with the unemployment insurance eligibility period additions,
had the original termination date repeatedly extended by subsequent legislation and thereby
continue in force as of the time of my writing.

Unemployment Insurance Eligibility: Benefit Duration and Alternative Base Periods
The unemployment insurance (UI) program is jointly administered and financed by
federal and state governments, offering weekly cash benefits to people who have lost their jobs
and have as yet been unable to find and start a new job. On average they receive about $300 a
week until they start working again, they stop looking for work or their benefits are exhausted.
Before the recession, an unemployed person in a typical state without high unemployment would
often have his benefits limited to a maximum of twenty-six weeks (United States Department of
Labor 2007). The federal law in place before the recession included some local labor market
“Extended Benefit” (EB) triggers that, based on the statewide unemployment rate, would
automatically lengthen the maximum benefit period. These automatic triggers began to extend
the duration of benefits around the nation in the middle of 2008 (United States Department of
Labor 2011), as indicated in Table 3’s first entry. At about the same time, the Supplemental
Appropriations Act of 2008 included new “Emergency Unemployment Compensation” (EUC)
legislation that extended maximum benefit periods for the entire nation.

The Worker,

Homeownership, and Business Assistance Act of 2009 further extended the EUC periods, so that
unemployment insurance benefits could be paid up to 99 weeks (United States Department of
Labor 2011). The maximum unemployment benefit duration was not changed by the February
2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, but the Act did expand eligibility by
encouraging states to “modernize” (and relax) their monetary eligibility requirements by
8

processing earnings histories through an “alternative base period” (National Employment Law
Project 2003), including persons who quit their job for compelling family reasons, adding 26
weeks of eligibility for persons enrolled in training programs, and/or paying benefits for persons
who search only for part-time work (United States Department of Labor 2009).
For each safety net program, I create a monthly statutory eligibility index.

Each

program’s index is normalized so that it averages one in fiscal year 2010, and changes only when
eligibility rules change. The amount of the change is calculated according to a time-invariant
measure of the fraction of program participants impacted by the eligibility rule change. The
index increases when eligibility rules are relaxed, and decreases when eligibility rules are
tightened. For example, if a program’s only eligibility rule change were January 1, 2009, that
rule change was permanent, and on average 80 persons would participate in the program under
the pre-2009 rules for every 100 persons participating under the post 2009 rules, then the
eligibility index’s value would be 0.8 for all months prior to January 2009, and 1.0 for all months
thereafter. By construction, the eligibility index does not change when eligibility rules remain
fixed, even though population characteristics may be changing (e.g., more people lose their jobs)
in a way that changes the fraction of the population that participates in the program.
Figure 2 displays the eligibility indices for unemployment insurance, SNAP (food
stamps), and Medicaid. The eligibility index for unemployment insurance (red series) changes
four times since January 2007, at the four initiation dates indicated in the first column of Table 3.
The largest index change occurs July 2008, when the maximum benefit period went from 26 to
52 weeks, because about half of people who are unemployed more than 26 weeks are still
unemployed less than 52 weeks. The smallest jump is for eligibility modernization.10
Overall, the eligibility index increases almost 50 percent from 2007 to 2010, which
suggests that a majority of the increase in the fraction of unemployed receiving benefits (see
Figure 1) was the result of the legislation changes shown in Table 3. Indeed, the average weekly
number of unemployed persons aged 25-64 not receiving unemployment insurance actually fell

10

Appendix 1 gives the index calculation details.

9

by 700,000 between 2007 and 2009, even though the number of unemployed people aged 25-64
had increased by more than 6 million.11

SNAP Eligibility: State-by-State Elimination of Asset and Work Status Tests
The Department of Agriculture’s food stamp program, now known as Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance (SNAP), provides funds to low income households for the purpose of
buying food (Social Security Administration 2008), often in conjunction with cash assistance
programs. SNAP benefits are potentially available to households earning less than 130 percent
of the poverty line, which is adjusted each fiscal year according to the rate of inflation. For
example, 130 percent of the poverty line was, on a monthly basis, $1430 for a household of two
in fiscal year 2007, and $1578 in fiscal year 2010.12 With an essential exception noted below, a
household with sufficiently few assets and satisfying other eligibility criteria has its monthly
benefit calculated as the program’s maximum benefit for its household size minus 30 percent of
its net income, where net income is money income minus deductions for shelter and other items.
For this reason, essentially every participating household’s benefit is linked to the program’s
maximum benefit.
An important legislative change since 2007 was the adoption by 28 states, plus the
District of Columbia, of “broad based categorical eligibility,” which means that states confer
automatic SNAP eligibility on all households receiving a specified social service informational
brochure.13 Households that participate in SNAP under this rule still have benefits determined

11

For the purposes of this calculation, I assume that, consistent with the law, nobody received unemployment
benefits for a week that he was employed.
12
Fiscal years begin October 1 in the prior year (e.g., fiscal year 2009 began October 1, 2008). The average
household size is 2.2 among SNAP households (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, Table A.27) and 2.6 for the entire
United States (United States Census Bureau 2010).
13
Technically, the brochure is called a “TANF/MOE-funded noncash benefit.” (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, 4)
For example, Connecticut distributes a two page “Help for People in Need” brochure with links to SNAP and
various state safety net programs (United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service 2011). The
categorically eligible households need not receive cash benefits from any other welfare program, and in some states
may have income up to double the federal poverty guideline (Leftin, Gothro and Eslami 2010, 56-57). Broad-based
categorical eligibility was made possible by a 2002 federal law, but had been adopted by only twelve states as of
January 2007.

10

by the same formula (of household size and net income) as the other SNAP beneficiaries.14 A
practical result of broad based categorical eligibility is therefore that households can receive
benefits based solely on their net income, and not based on the value of their assets.15 Even
SNAP households not participating through broad based categorical eligibility saw the asset test
relaxed by the 2008 Farm Bill, as the values of vehicles, retirement accounts, and education
savings accounts began to be excluded from the test (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, 6).
Between fiscal years 2007 and 2010, the number of SNAP households increased 37
percent more than did the number of households with incomes at or below 125 percent of the
poverty line, and the inflation-adjusted average income of participating households actually
increased (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, Table A.27). More than 100 percent of the increase
in participating households occurred among those qualifying under broad-based categorical
eligibility that, with the exception of the three states noted above, were not subject to asset
tests.16,17
Prior to the recession, able-bodied adults without dependents who were not working or
participating in a work program had their receipt of SNAP benefits limited to three months in a

14

As a result, more than 95 percent of participating households have monthly income less than or equal to 125
percent of the federal poverty guideline during the months that they are participating (Eslami, Filion and Strayer
2011, Table A.3).
15
As of October 2011, 38 states plus the District of Columbia had no asset test for determining broad-based
categorical eligibility (United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service 2011). Three states
(Michigan, Nebraska, and Texas) had asset tests that were more lax than SNAP’s. The remaining states did not yet
confer broad-based categorical eligibility.
Work requirements for SNAP beneficiaries were dropped between April 2009 and October 2010. The
requirements were also dropped for residents of at least 45 states and the District of Columbia through at least
September 30, 2012 (United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service 2011b). Another policy
change encouraging participation: potential program participants have increasingly been given the opportunity to
apply for benefits on the internet (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, 8).
16
Even without BBCE expansion, the SNAP participation probably would have grown faster than the number of
households in poverty because SNAP relaxed work requirements and asset tests, and allowed for more deductions
from income. Moreover, during the period 2007-2011 states created programs to help SNAP household maximize
their deductions, as with their dollar-a-year LIHEAP programs (Food Research and Action Center 2009, 10). New
York asserts that its LIHEAP program alone increased the state’s aggregate SNAP benefits by six percent (New
York Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, 2009 and United States Department of Agriculture, 2012b).
But my purpose here is to quantify SNAP participation changes attributable to all eligibility rule changes combined,
not to isolate the effect of a specific type of legislation such as BBCE.
17
The Department of Agriculture also found that the food stamp spending increase “…is likely attributable to the
deterioration of the economy, expansions in SNAP eligibility, and continued outreach efforts.” (Leftin, Gothro and
Eslami 2010, xiii).

11

three year period (United States Department of Agriculture, 2012a).18 Entire states could obtain
waivers from the work requirement whenever the Department of Labor indicated that their state
was eligible for extended unemployment benefits (United States Department of Agriculture
2009). The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act waived all states through October 2010.
Since then, almost all states have obtained waivers pursuant to the Department of Labor Triggers
(United States Department of Agriculture 2011b). All together, the state-wide waivers and
ARRA changed eligibility requirements in the direction of making eligibility more inclusive than
it would have been without the ARRA and the waivers.
Figure 2’s SNAP eligibility index reflects the combination of the relaxation of work
requirements and dynamics of the “broad based categorical eligibility” (BBCE) legislation.
Aside from a one-time jump of 2.3 percent in October 2008 associated with the relaxation of
work requirements, the index shows an increase if and only if BBCE went into effect in at least
one state on that date, and the size of the increase is proportional to the fraction of the U.S.
population (measured in 2010) living in states with the new legislation. For example, the largest
jump is in July 2009 when California and Connecticut began conferring broad-based categorical
eligibility. The index is normalized to average one in fiscal year 2010, and to have a three year
logarithmic change equal to 0.21, based on previous estimates of the effects of asset tests and
BBCE on program participation and my 2.3 percent estimate of the participation effect of work
requirements. 19

Medicaid: A Historic Expansion Planned for 2014
The state-administered Medicaid program pays health care providers on behalf of lowincome individuals and families (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 2011). It is the
largest single program shown in Table 2, spending about $8,000 per beneficiary per year.20 Due
18

States could exempt up to 15 percent of such persons from the work requirement, or request a waiver for people in
areas with an unemployment rate over ten percent.
19
That is, I assume that adoption of BBCE and other changes in SNAP eligibility rules are responsible for 66
percent of the growth of SNAP household participation in excess of family poverty growth between fiscal years
2007 and 2010. Appendix 1 and Appendix 2 have more details and sensitivity analysis.
20
To calculate spending per beneficiary, I divide calendar year Medicaid spending (as reported in the government
social benefits section of the personal income accounts) by the number of persons enrolled in Medicaid as of June of
that year (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2011). Sometimes annual spending per beneficiary is measured as the

12

to the high rates of spending on the elderly and disabled, spending per non-elderly, non-disabled
beneficiary is about half the average for the entire program (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
2011). An average family eligible for Medicaid would obtain over $10,000 in benefits per year,
even without any elderly or disabled members.21 As explained below, the sheer size of this
program is important for understanding the economic effects of expansions of the other safety
net programs.
Unlike the UI and SNAP programs, the Medicaid program has not yet significantly
expanded its eligibility or average benefit since 2007.22 Some states have restricted Medicaid
benefits in order to control costs. A number of states have expanded eligibility (Smith, et al.
2011), but those expansions were small enough that nationwide Medicaid enrollment and
inflation-adjusted Medicaid spending actually grew slightly less between 2007 and 2010 than did
the number of Americans in poverty. 23 To a first approximation, Medicaid spending and
enrollment have expanded since 2007 because of the number of families who have seen their
incomes decline (Smith, et al. 2011, 15), rather than relaxation of eligibility rules.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was passed in March 2010. As a result
of this legislation, Medicaid enrollment and spending are expected to increase significantly in
2014, when the program is made “available to able-bodied adults with incomes up to 133 percent
of the federal poverty level” (Sack 2010). The Medicaid eligibility index shown in Figure 2 is
therefore one prior to 2014, at which time it jumps up an amount reflecting estimates of the
number of newly eligible beneficiaries who will participate in the program (see Appendix 1).
Thus, while the safety net has already expanded due to recent changes in eligibility rules for the

ratio of spending to the number of persons enrolled at any time during the year (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
2011), in which case the ratio is about $5,000. With the exception of amounts for premiums and copayments (see
below), all of the Medicaid statistics reported in this paper include the Medicaid CHIP program.
21
For example, at $4,000 per beneficiary per year, families with three beneficiaries would receive benefits with an
average value (at program cost) of $12,000 per year. Note that private family health insurance, a substitute for
Medicaid enrollment, typically costs about $13,000 per year (Crimmel 2010).
22
A few states recently began to require participants to pay regular premiums, make co-payments upon visits to
healthcare providers, or both (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2011). The copayments are small: for example, in
2008 the Wisconsin Medicaid program began collecting co-payments ranging from zero to three dollars from
participants with incomes below 200 percent of the poverty level (Dague 2011). The premiums, if any, also increase
with beneficiary income (Dague 2011).
23
The poverty rate increased 18 percent between 2007 and 2010, when Medicaid enrollment and inflation-adjusted
spending per capita increased 16 percent.

13

UI and SNAP programs, Medicaid may be the main way that the safety net further expands in the
near future.

Legislation Increased the Amount of Benefits Received per Program
Participant

For each safety net program, I create a monthly statutory real benefit index. Each index
is normalized so that its fiscal year 2010 average is equal to the program’s average real monthly
benefit per participant in fiscal year 2010. A real benefit index changes only when benefit rules
change the amount that a program participant with a given set of characteristics would receive.
The results are displayed in Figure 3.
The major benefit rule changes are indicated in the right half of Table 3. The four
provisions shown in the top panel were put in place by the ARRA and serve to increase the
amounts received by persons laid off from their jobs. The first provision exempts the first
$2,400 of unemployment benefits received by an unemployed person from 2009 federal income
tax (United States Department of Labor 2011). Because the provision serves to reduce that
person’s personal income tax, I estimate it to be worth about $57 per month for each of the nine
months April 2009 through December 2009 (details in Appendix 1), which is why the red
unemployment insurance series in Figure 3 jumps down that amount in January 2010.
For laid off workers who wanted to remain on their former employer’s health plan, the
ARRA offered to pay 65 percent of the cost. For a $13,027 annual family health insurance
premium (Crimmel 2010), that subsidy is worth $706 per month. However, I estimate that the
number of people receiving the benefit when it was available was only one fifth of the number of
people receiving unemployment benefits, so the effect of the provision on the index is only $143
per month (see Appendices 1 and 2). The third provision is worth a bit more than $100 per
month.
SNAP had two major federal legislative changes in benefits since 2007: the 2008 Farm
Bill (effective October 2008) and the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (effective
April 2009). Both laws increased the per-household benefit amount across the board, far in
14

excess of the rate of inflation, which is why the real SNAP benefit index shown in Figure 3
jumps up at the two legislation dates. A smaller nominal benefit increase went into effect in
October 2007. The benefit formulas were unchanged in nominal terms in between these three
dates, which is why the SNAP real benefit index trends slightly down in between the jumps.24
At all three dates, benefit amounts were change by increasing the maximum benefit. The
maximum benefit increased about 8.5 percent on October 1, 2008 and another 13.6 percent on
April 1, 2009 (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, 22). The dollar amount of the maximum benefit
change depends on household size, and averaged $27 on October 1, 2008 and $47 on April 1,
2009.25 In addition, the 2008 Farm Bill revised the standard deduction and expanded the child
care deduction, and would thereby increase benefits by about $2 per household per month,
holding fixed the composition of SNAP households.

The net effect of legislation and

accumulated inflation was to increase the statutory real SNAP benefit index by $73 per month
from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2010, or about 30 percent.

Safety Net Rule Changes and Assistance for the Unemployed
The levels of each eligibility index shown in Figure 2 cannot be compared across
programs because each program’s index is set to one in FY 2010, even though the eligible
populations vary across programs. For the same reason, the benefit indices shown in Figure 3
cannot be compared across programs. However, they can be compared, and summed together,
when adjusted for a time-invariant measure of the likelihood of participation in each program.
Recall the formula (1) for overall statutory safety net generosity:

24

I assume that UI and Medicaid benefits are indexed to inflation: unemployment benefits depend on a person’s
earnings history, and Medicaid provides participants a fixed set of medical goods and services rather than a set
dollar amount.
25
Any SNAP household not receiving the minimum benefit has its benefit change dollar-for-dollar with the
maximum benefit for their household size, even if their benefit is less than the maximum benefit. About three
percent of SNAP households receive a minimum benefit, which was increased $4 per month by the 2008 Farm Bill
and another $2 by the ARRA. The average household monthly benefit increase from the maximum and minimum
benefit provisions of the 2008 Farm Bill and ARRA was therefore $26 and $45, respectively.

15

bt   j  j E jt B jt

(1)

where t indexes time and j indexes safety net programs. Ej is program j’s statutory eligibility
index and Bj is its statutory per-participant benefit index, measured in inflation-adjusted dollars
per month. The program aggregation weight j is the fraction of the population of interest that
typically participates in program j, holding eligibility constant.
Program Aggregation Weights
Ultimately I use the formula (1) to consider both government and private sector safety
net programs as they apply to various persons on the margin of working, but for the moment I
limit attention to the government safety net programs listed in Table 2 as they apply to household
heads or spouses who are unemployed. The first column of Table 5 indicates the program
weights for this purpose.
The first column weight on unemployment insurance could be one only if, under the
fiscal year 2010 eligibility rules, all unemployed heads and spouses would receive
unemployment benefits some time during their unemployment spell.

Historically, many

unemployed persons have not collected unemployment benefits due to ineligibility, lack of
awareness, or simply unwillingness to collect benefits (Anderson and Meyer 1997), so a proper
first entry in Table 5 is likely less than one. One way to estimate that entry is as the ratio of the
number of regular UI recipients aged 25-54 to the number of persons aged 25-64 who are
unemployed but not yet more than 26 weeks, times the fraction of unemployed with spells no
greater than 92 weeks (the 2010 eligibility rule) which is typically 0.63.26
At first glance, it would appear that most of the marginal workers would not be able to
participate in a program like SNAP that is targeted to the poorest segment of the population.
However, I explain further below how, with asset tests eliminated, the SNAP program is often
26

The ratio is 0.61 in 2007 and 0.72 in 2010. Adjusting the 2007 ratio for the alternative base period rule yields
0.64, and hence a 2007 and 2010 average of 0.68. Four (10.3) percent of unemployed persons age 25-64 had spells
already lasting were unemployed no more than 96 weeks in 2007 (2010), respectively, which is an average of 7.12
percent. Recall from above that the unemployment claims data do not indicate relationship to head, so I used age
25-64 as a proxy. Farber and Valletta (2011) calculate that the cross-state average maximum UI eligibility,
weighted by the number of persons unemployed, has been about 96 weeks since the end of 2009.

16

available during times of unemployment, even for a person who normally was at the median of
the earnings distribution and is receiving unemployment benefits that count as income for SNAP
purposes. Moreover, millions of unemployed people actually participated in the program: using
data from the Department of Agriculture, Eslami, Filion, Strayer (2011, Table A.25) report that
on average almost four million unemployed people were heads of SNAP households during
fiscal year 2010.
In order to measure the SNAP program weight j for the population of non-elderly heads
and spouses who are unemployed, I therefore take the ratio of the average number of non-elderly
SNAP household heads and spouses who were unemployed during fiscal year 2010 to the weekly
average nationwide total number of non-elderly unemployed household heads and spouses
(regardless of SNAP participation), which is 0.50. 27 It appears that, with fiscal year 2010
eligibility rules in place, about half of the unemployed would participate in SNAP.
In order to measure the participation fraction j for the Medicaid program, I take the ratio
of the change in non-elderly Medicaid enrollment (including children) from June 2007 – June
2010 to the 2007-2010 change in the average weekly number of non-elderly heads and spouses
who were not employed or underemployed, which is 0.94,28 and discount the result by 50 percent
to reflect the fact that Medicaid benefits are distributed in-kind, rather than in cash or cash
equivalents.29 I assume that eligibility and benefit indices for “all other safety net programs” are
constant over time, and assume that the non-elderly parts of those programs pay equal benefits to
all non-elderly heads and spouses who do not receive unemployment insurance in a given week.

27

In order to calculate the numerator, I used the fiscal year 2010 SNAP quality control micro data file prepared by
Mathematical Policy Research to identify sample members who were aged 18-64, household head or spouse, and
were either a SNAP participant or were a non-U.S. citizen who had a dependent in the household who was a SNAP
participant. The sample members were projected to the U.S. population using the file’s household weight variable
(hwgt). The ratio of the 2007-10 change in SNAP household heads who are unemployed to the nationwide change
is even greater than 0.50, but likely because of program eligibility rule changes rather than an especially high
propensity of unemployed to participate in the program.
28
This 0.96 does not imply that 96 percent of the unemployed are enrolled in Medicaid, but rather than on average
each head or spouse added to the unemployed adds 0.96 non-elderly persons (including children) to Medicaid
enrollment. For example 24 unemployed out of 100 could add a family of four to Medicaid, while the other 76
unemployed added none. The value of the Medicaid participation weight j does not affect any of my estimates of
safety net generosity changes prior to 2014, because Medicaid eligibility and benefit rules are assumed to be
constant prior to 2014 (see also Appendix 2).
29
Many people are eligible for Medicaid but do not participate (Aizer 2003), which suggests that the average
eligible person values the program’s benefits less than they cost.

17

The average inflation-adjusted monthly benefit is therefore $237, and the program weight for the
population of unemployed heads and spouses is the fraction of them not receiving UI, 0.37.
Note that all program weights {j} are based on actual program participation, and not the
participation that would theoretically be possible if all eligible persons participated. At the same
time, changes over time in the weighted sum (1) do not reflect changes in program participation
aside from those associated with changes in program eligibility rules because the program
weights do not change over time.

Results, and Multi-program Participation Examples
The red series in Figure 4 shows the results of aggregating, according to the formula (1),
the product of the statutory eligibility and benefit indices across programs using the weights
shown in Table 5. The red series can be interpreted as the combined monthly benefits received
from all government safety net programs by the average unemployed household head or spouse
as a function of when they were unemployed, holding constant the characteristics of the average
unemployed person. The average combined monthly benefit was about $850 in 2007 and the
first half of 2008. By the beginning of 2009, it had increased about $210 per month entirely as a
result of the eligibility and benefit rule changes cited above. The series peaks another $280
higher at the end of 2009. By 2011, the statutory benefit series was down to about $1,200, but
still about $300 greater than it was in 2007. Simply put, safety net program rules were the most
generous to the unemployed in the 12 months or so after the ARRA went into effect, and remain
significantly more generous than they were before the recession began.
As demonstrated below, aggregate quantitative estimates of changes in safety net
generosity, such as the series shown in Figure 4, are helpful for quantitative analysis of the major
macroeconomic variables. It is therefore helpful to examine a few hypothetical families, and
how their safety net benefits would have been different in, say, 2009-Q4 if the eligibility and
benefit rules from two years earlier had remained in place.
Consider a family of four, with the primary earner unemployed during 2009-Q4. The
primary earner is entitled to a $275 weekly UI benefit, plus the ARRA’s federal additional

18

compensation, but only until benefits expire.

The household can either purchase health

insurance through the former employer (at a cost of $13,027 per year) or participate in Medicaid
(if eligible on the basis of assets and income). Its monthly deductions for SNAP purposes are
$410 (the FY 2010 average for all SNAP households without earnings) plus 20 percent of
spousal earnings. 30 Its marginal federal income tax rate for the purposes of changes in the
amount of unemployment benefits is 21%.31
If the primary earner has so far been unemployed four months, as with the hypothetical
households A, C, and E shown in Table 6, it would be receiving unemployment benefits under
both 2007-Q4 and 2009-Q4 eligibility rules.

However, it receives the federal additional

compensation ($25 per week, which is $108 per month) only under the 2009-Q4 rules, so Table 6
shows a policy impact on UI of $108 for those three households. Any household receiving UI
receives a tax exemption of $2400 of UI income – $267 per month when amortized over the nine
months of 2009 when the ARRA was in effect. Assuming that the household will have more
than $2400 of UI income for the calendar year, its total monthly tax savings from the 2009-Q4
policies is $33 (21 percent of $267- $108).
If the primary earner has so far been unemployed more than six months, it qualifies for
unemployment benefits only under 2009-Q4 rules, and the entire $1300 monthly benefit is the
policy impact. It owes tax on this monthly benefit, so 2009-Q4 rules cost such a household $217
more per month in federal income tax: see Table 6’s hypothetical households B, D, and F.
If the primary earner has a spouse or other household member who earns much more than
$2,000 per month (such as the $2,500 per month shown in Table 6’s first two columns), the
hypothetical household will not qualify for SNAP benefits, even under broad-based categorical
eligibility. In this case, the policy change has no impact on the household’s SNAP benefits.
Without any spousal earnings, the household qualifies for $401 SNAP benefits under
2009-Q4 rules.32 If the household’s assets exceeded SNAP limits under 2007 rules, as with
30

Eslami, Filion and Strayer (2011, Table A.2).
The average marginal federal income tax rate in 2009 was 21 percent for wage income (National Bureau of
Economic Research 2010).
32
Each dollar of UI income can reduce SNAP benefits, but less than dollar-for-dollar (Hanson and Andrews March
2009). The ARRA required that the $25 increase in weekly UI benefits not count against the recipient’s Medicaid
eligibility (Ross and Parrott 2009).
31

19

hypothetical households E and F, the policy impact is the full $401. If the household would have
qualified for SNAP under 2007-Q4 rules, then the policy impact is the $108 difference between
$401 and its $293 benefit under inflation-adjusted 2007-Q4 rules: see Table 6’s hypothetical
households C and D.
Hypothetical households C and D have sufficiently little assets and spousal earnings to
qualify for Medicaid. For this reason, I assume that households C and D do not obtain health
insurance through the former employer and therefore do not benefit from the ARRA’s COBRA
subsidy. I assume that hypothetical households not qualifying for Medicaid (A and B fail to
qualify because of spousal income, E and F fail to qualify because of assets) opt to obtain health
insurance from the former employer through the COBRA provision. The 65 percent subsidy for
COBRA costs is available only under 2009-Q4 rules, so the policy impact on the COBRA
subsidy is $706 per month (706 = 0.65*13027/12).
Added together across all six safety net provisions, the policy impact on the disposable
income of the household with an unemployed primary earner and fixed characteristics ranges
from $227 and $2,190 per month among the six hypothetical households.33 These amounts are
policy impacts: the amounts that 2009-Q4 rules add to safety net benefits relative to the benefits
that would be paid under inflation-adjusted 2007-Q4 rules.

Five of the six hypothetical

households experience a policy impact of $824 per month or more. Half of the households
experience a policy impact of more than $1,000 per month even without the COBRA provision.
By comparison with the amounts shown in Table 6, the $450 increase in Figure 4’s red
series measuring statutory safety net generosity over time is not particularly large. As shown in
Appendix 2, the statutory safety net generosity increases shown in Figure 4 and elsewhere in this
paper are also congruent with changes over time in aggregate benefit payments per not employed
or underemployed household heads and spouses.

The safety net actually did become

significantly more generous, and the payments actually received by unemployed people and
other potential beneficiaries reflect this increased generosity.

33

Assuming two household members rather than four yields a range of $178 to $1,673, largely because “employee
plus one” health insurance costs $9,053 per year rather than $13,027 for an entire family (Crimmel 2010).

20

Means-tested Loan Forgiveness
Household debt had been increasing during the 1980s and 1990s, but the rate of increase
was extraordinary between 2000 and 2007. In 2000, household sector debt was less than 80
percent of annual personal income. By 2006, it had reached 114 percent of the nation’s personal
income (Dynan and Kohn 2007) – or about $13 trillion. The change was almost entirely due to
accumulation of home mortgage debt; non-mortgage debt remained about one quarter of personal
income throughout the period (Dynan and Kohn 2007). The mortgage debt had grown more or
less in proportion to the growth in residential real estate values (Dynan and Kohn 2007); by 2006
home mortgage debt was almost 90 percent of annual personal income.
Means-tested Home Mortgage Collection
The combination of housing market events and the profit motive for mortgage lenders
turned trillions of dollars of household debt into a kind of safety net, because one of the
consequences of unemployment would increasingly be a lender-provided discount on home
mortgage expenses. Normally, lenders do not offer discounts on home mortgage expenses
because the mortgages are fully secured by a residential property: when a homeowner fails to
make the scheduled payments in full and on time, the lender can seize the property and sell it to
obtain his principal, interest, and fees.34 When the lender has this valuable foreclosure option,
borrowers overwhelmingly either make their home mortgage payments, or sell their property in
an orderly fashion in order to obtain the funds to repay the mortgage lender. As long as a
property could be sold for enough to repay its mortgage, even homeowners who had become
unemployed could be expected to pay their mortgages in full.35 The vast majority of mortgages
were paid in full and on time, and homes were typically owned by occupants, not by banks.
When residential property values plummeted in 2008 and 2009, a number of residential
properties were suddenly “under water”: worth less than the mortgages that they secured. In
34

In exchange for funds to make a home purchase or improvement, a homeowner promises in the mortgage
agreement to either make his scheduled payments or, at the lender’s discretion, pay late fees or surrender ownership
of the home.
35
Foote et al (2009, footnote 3). Liebowitz (2009) finds that negative equity was a more important factor than
unemployment in causing the foreclosures that occurred in the second half of 2008. Geanakopolos and Koniak
(2009) find that foreclosures are “stunningly sensitive” to the amount of home equity. See also First American Core
Logic (2008, 2).

21

those cases, the lender’s foreclosure option was no longer valuable – selling the property would
likely yield too little funds to cover principal, let alone interest and fees. For the same reason, a
homeowner who suddenly owed more than his house was worth might minimize his losses by
stopping his mortgage payments.
A homeowner always has the option to stop paying his mortgage, even if he can afford
the payments. Although state laws are somewhat different, to a good approximation the worst
case scenario for a homeowner who stops paying is that he can no longer own or occupy the
house, may suffer a reduction in his credit rating that might raise his future borrowing costs, and
may personally suffer a loss in pride for his failure to pay as promised.36 But if the combined
value of the house and these costs were less than the present value of his promised mortgage
payments, then he could do better than paying in full. That’s probably an important reason why,
as of early 2009, more than five million homes were already either in foreclosure (lenders were
seizing the collateral as a consequence of lack of payment) or their owners were delinquent on
their mortgage payments.
In order to minimize lending losses, it helps to encourage at least some of the underwater
borrowers to make their scheduled mortgage payments, and thereby pay more than their homes
were worth. As explained above, insisting on full payment from everyone probably would not
minimize losses because lenders would find themselves owning millions of unoccupied homes.
Lenders could essentially eliminate foreclosures by reducing all mortgage amounts enough that
homeowners were no longer underwater, but that would eliminate their chances of collecting
from the subset of borrowers who would pay in full despite being underwater.
Lenders needed a way to estimate which borrowers would pay in full, and for other
borrowers try to work out a mortgage modification that would give them an incentive to pay at
least a bit more than their homes were worth. Naturally, a borrower’s income is a factor to be
considered – borrowers with high income can be expected to repay more than borrowers with
low income. Thus, a partial solution to the lenders’ collection problem is to insist that high
36

A number of states prohibit lenders from holding homeowners liable for the difference between the mortgage
amount and funds obtained from a foreclosure sale. Other states technically allow such liabilities, but homeowners
can often shield their assets from home loan deficiency judgments. In a few states, homeowners may expect to be
liable for the deficiency (Ghent and Kudlyak 2011), but in practice collection of such liabilities may, in effect,
involve some of the same means-tests noted below.

22

income borrowers pay more, and allow some low income borrowers to pay less. Lenders have
been doing exactly that.
Mulligan (2009) examines the microeconomics of mortgage modification in more detail,
and the role of public policy in determining mortgage modification formulas, but a couple of
examples begin to put mortgage modification in the context of the overall safety net. Table 7
shows some of the mortgage modification arithmetic based on the federal guidelines for a
hypothetical dual-earner household. When working, the both earners earn $727 per week, or
$3,148 per month (2010 dollars), which is the median among working heads of households and
spouses at work during the average week in 2007.

The household has monthly housing

expenses, inclusive of mortgage principal and interest payments, that are 31 percent of their
income when both earners are working.
If one of the earners were not working and eligible for unemployment insurance (Table
7’s first column), then unemployment benefits would replace half his salary, or $1,574 per
month. Otherwise unemployment benefits are zero. Either way, unemployment thereby reduces
household income and increases the household’s debt-to-income ratio, or DTI. According to
federal modification guidelines, home mortgage interest payment should be reduced so that the
household’s DTI returns to 31 percent. For the household shown in Table 7, the required
reduction is zero if both earners are working, and either $488 or $976 per month if one of the
earners is unemployed, depending on whether the unemployed earner is UI eligible.37 In this
regard, mortgage modification provides a $488 monthly unemployment benefit, in addition to the
$1,574 received from the unemployment insurance system (the Table’s first column), or a $976
monthly benefit by itself (second column).
The only remaining question is whether the lender could do better by foreclosing rather
than agreeing to reduce interest payments by $488 per month, or $976 per month for the UIineligible household, for five years.38 That depends on the value of the collateral: if the home’s
value is low enough that the loan to value ratio is no greater than 1.13 for the UI-eligible

37

Unemployment benefits count as income for the purpose of calculating DTI. See also Herkenhoff and Ohanian
(2011).
38
If not, the modification is said to fail the NPV test.

23

household, or 1.29 for the UI-ineligible household (see the last row of the table), then the
modification is more profitable than foreclosure.39
In order to put mortgage modification in the context of the overall safety net, I calculate
an eligibility index, a benefit index, and a program weight for mortgage modification so that it
can be added to the other safety net programs using the formula (1). The modification eligibility
index is not based on statutes, however, but rather the propensity of homeowners to have
negative equity in their home – because a homeowner with positive equity is not eligible for
modification if he is unemployed. Figure 5 displays a time series for the modification eligibility
index, which is calculated as the ratio of the fraction of owner-occupied homes with negative
equity to the average fraction in fiscal year 2010 (0.189). The eligibility index has more than
tripled since 2007 as residential property values collapsed and home equity was more often
negative than it was before the recession began. By the end of 2009, the average amount of
negative home equity was $70,700, and the aggregate amount was $801 billion (First American
Core Logic February 2010).

Home mortgage modification thereby had the potential of

redistributing as many resources as the expansions in unemployment insurance or food stamps.
I estimate that 37 percent of the 2007-2010 change in hours worked by household heads
and spouses is covered by unemployment insurance and the rest is not (often because the person
is underemployed, rather than unemployed). With these weights, I set the (time-invariant)
modification benefit index to the $797 weighted average of $488 and $976.
Mortgage modification provides no safety net to someone who does not have an
underwater home mortgage, which in fiscal year 2010 described about 87 percent of household
heads and their spouses because they did not own their home, or had nonnegative home equity.
Nor is modification a safety net for a household that has access to, and is satisfied with, a nonmeans tested resolution such as foreclosure without lender recourse.

A number of other

homeowners are technically eligible for modifications but do not pursue them, perhaps because
they are unaware of the possibility, or prefer to pay their mortgage as promised at origination.
39

A single-earner household in which that earner went from earning $3,148 to receiving $1,574 in UI would have
the same $488 modification amount, but the critical LTV would be 1.29. If an earner were unemployed only part of
the year that earnings were examined for the purposes of modification, then the monthly modification amount
would, as a ratio to time unemployed, be the same as shown in the table, but the critical LTV would be closer to one.
Part year unemployment is an important reason why the average actual modification amount is closer to $400 per
month (Office of Thrift Supervision various issues).

24

Others apply for a modification, but have their application lost or delayed by lenders and their
servicers. As for the other safety net programs, the proper program weight j reflects the actual
number of modifications rather than the number that would hypothetically occur if all eligible
homeowners received a modification, so I multiply the fraction of heads and spouses owning an
underwater home by the ratio of the actual number of home mortgage modifications under the
Obama administration’s Making Home Affordable Program through the end of 2011 (1.1
million) and the number that the program originally targeted (3.5 million). 40 As a result,
mortgage modification adds a $29 monthly benefit per month of nonemployment or
underemployment of the head or spouse to the income of the average household experiencing
that reduced employment. In fiscal year 2007, the monthly benefit was only $8 because negative
home equity was less common.

Means-Tested Collection of Unsecured Consumer Loans
Consumers also borrow with credit cards and other forms of consumer debt that is
unsecured in the sense that the loans are not collateralized by a specific asset such as a home or
automobile. Aside from paying back in full, consumers potentially have three ways to have
some of their unsecured consumer debt discharged: negotiating a settlement with creditors, filing
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy. In all three cases, more debt is
expected to be discharged the less that the debtor earns: in effect part of the debtor’s earnings
goes to the lender. Implicit wage taxation is obvious during the three to five year period
following Chapter 13 bankruptcy when creditors receive all of the income, beyond amounts set
aside for necessary expenses, of debtors who are not scheduled to pay in full (Li and Sarte 2006).
Wage taxation is also relevant during the settlement process not only because wage garnishment
(that is, having a specific percentage of the debtor’s paycheck withheld on behalf of creditors) is
one of the debt collection tools, but also because the debtor can eschew a settlement and opt for
Chapter 13 instead. The lower the debtor’s income, the more creditors are threatened by the
Chapter 13 possibility. The debtor’s income is not considered when discharging debts under

40

Trial modifications are given fractional weight 5/60, because a permanent modification reduces payments for 60
months and the average trial modification reduced them about five months (United States Department of Treasury
2012).

25

Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which is the majority of non-business bankruptcies. However, under
current law, Chapter 7 bankruptcy is not permitted for high income debtors.41
Ignoring bankruptcy law changes for the moment, means-tested consumer debt
discharges are nothing new. Moreover, contrary to the amount of mortgage debt, the amount of
unsecured consumer debt was not historically unusual in 2007 (Moore and Palumbo 2010). To a
first approximation, unsecured consumer debt discharge is a cushion for a debtor against declines
in his income, but the size of the cushion has been constant over time. This suggests treating
unsecured consumer debt discharges like Medicaid expenditures: a positive but time-invariant
component of safety net benefits. To estimate the size of this cushion, I average the fiscal year
2007 and 2010 ratios of inflation-adjusted consumer loan discharges by commercial banks to the
number of non-elderly heads and spouses not employed or under-employed, which is $100 at a
monthly rate.
In fact, a new federal bankruptcy law went into effect in October 2005. To the degree
that the new legislation achieved its goal of making it more difficult for high income debtors to
discharge debts under bankruptcy, the generosity of the consumer debt discharge component of
the safety net is not time-invariant, but rather has increased since the new law went into effect.
However, the legislation implemented its goal by means-testing eligibility for Chapter 7, yet the
ratio of Chapter 7 bankruptcies to Chapter 13 bankruptcies was not substantially different during
the 2008-9 recession than it was in the 2001 recession (Administrative Office of the United
States Courts 2011). In order to be slightly conservative as to the change in the generosity of the
overall safety net, I treat consumer loan discharges as a time-invariant benefit.

Conclusion: Replacement Rates for Aggregate Analysis
The amount of earnings replaced by the aggregate safety net – that is, the increase in
benefits from all programs that occurs for each dollar that income falls – varies across
households, and varies within household according to how their earnings are reduced (e.g.,
41

Specifically, anyone with income above his state’s median and with monthly income net of necessary expenses
more than about $200, is not permitted Chapter 7 (Administrative Office of the United States Courts 2011, 14).

26

employment versus hours, or primary earner versus secondary earner). A simple average across
households and circumstances is one way to simplify this complex reality, although many of
those households and circumstances are irrelevant for determining equilibrium employment and
hours. For example, a large fraction of elderly persons are not about to return to work, even if
there were a significant change in labor market circumstances. Many other persons obtain a
large surplus from working, and would not change their work hours in response to safety net
rules. For the purposes of understanding equilibrium employment and how it changed since
2007, two particularly important groups are: (a) persons working in 2007 but near the margin of
not working, and (b) persons not working in 2007 but near the margin of working. The safety
net rules affecting these two groups are the majority, if not all, of the safety net rules that affect
equilibrium employment.
Unfortunately, the usual data sets do not indicate exactly who is near the margin of
working, let alone their distance from that margin. I therefore take a couple of steps to attempt to
isolate marginal workers and the safety net benefits they would receive if not working. First, as
noted at the beginning of this paper, I exclude elderly people and safety net programs targeted
toward the elderly, at least for the moment. Second, I measure replacement rates separately for
unemployed people, people out of the labor force, and employed people with reduced hours.
Third, I consider the possible size of these three groups among the larger group of people who
would be working more hours if the labor market had remained like it was in 2007. An
appropriately weighted average of replacement rates for unemployed people, people out of the
labor force, and employed people with reduced hours is then the aggregate replacement rate
series that could be used for aggregate analysis. As with its component replacement rate series,
the aggregate series changes only when there are changes in the rules for eligibility or benefit
amounts of one or more of the safety net programs.
As noted above, the red series in Figure 4 measures overall government safety net
generosity for unemployed non-elderly heads and spouses by weighting the indices for the UI,
SNAP, Medicaid, and “all other” programs. The gray and black series are weighted sums of the
same component-program series, but with weights appropriate for the out of the labor force
(OLF) or underemployed group.

The UI program weight is zero for both the OLF and

underemployed groups (see also Table 5). Based on the approximation that the underemployed

27

have about the same income (inclusive of unemployment benefits) and assets as the unemployed,
I set all other program weights equal for the two groups. The SNAP weight for the OLF group is
the ratio of fiscal year 2010 non-elderly OLF SNAP household heads to the average monthly
number of non-elderly OLF household heads in the nation, which is 0.42. The Medicaid weight
for the OLF group affects only the level of the replacement rate, and not its changes prior to
2014, so I assume it is the same as for the other two groups. The “other program” weight for the
OLF group is calculated in the same way as for the unemployed group: one minus the UI
program weight.
The main difference between the OLF and under-employed series and the series for the
unemployed is that the latter exclude UI and related programs. As a result, the gray and black
series are less than the other two, and show no tendency to decline as the ARRA expires. Note
that the underemployed series is the average monthly benefit received by the underemployed per
month underemployed, holding constant the composition of the underemployed. The level of
this series is lower than the others because, on average, safety net programs spend less on the
underemployed per hour of underemployment: they typically do not qualify for unemployment
insurance and sometimes have too much income to qualify for other safety net programs.

Aggregate Replacement Rates
The bottom row of Table 5 shows the relative contribution to the 2007-10 reduction in
average hours worked among non-elderly heads and spouses of changes in their propensity to be
unemployed, OLF, or underemployed. The contributions in that row sum to one42 and I use them
as weights to average the overall government safety net series in Figure 4. The results are shown
in red in Figure 6.
Because the red series is a weighted average of weighted sums, it can itself be interpreted
as a weighted sum across programs of the form (1), using the single set of “average marginal
worker” program weights shown in the last column of Table 5.43 I henceforth refer to the series

42
43

The interaction term is negligible.
The last column is the weighted average of the previous three, using the last row as weights.

28

in Figure 6 as measures for the average marginal worker among non-elderly heads and spouses,
or simply for non-elderly heads and spouses.
The eligibility indices, benefit indices and program weights, constructed in the previous
section for means-tested mortgage modification and consumer debt discharges were themselves
calculated for non-elderly heads and spouses, so that their product can be added to the red series
in Figure 6. The results of their addition are shown in gray and black in Figure 6. The mortgage
modification addition is the smaller of the two because owning a home with negative equity is
still relatively rare, but it is the only addition of the two that varies over time because the
prevalence of negative equity changed over time.
The final addition is for taxes on earnings. For brevity, and probably without much loss
of accuracy, I consider only changes in payroll taxes, and treat personal income taxes as a
constant ten percent. With the exception of the former employer liability noted previously, the
payroll taxes do not apply to any of the safety net benefits and do not apply to income that a
person fails to earn because he is unemployed, out of the labor force, or underemployed.
However, they do apply to a person who is employed, which is the baseline to which I have been
comparing all of the other groups, so their amount is appropriately added to any and all of the
series in Figures 5 and 6. Prior to 2011, I calculate the payroll tax amount as 15.3 percent of the
median monthly earnings of heads and spouses, $3,148 (2010 prices), which is $482. The
amount is constant through December 2010. Beginning January 2011, it is reduced by $63 due
to the two percentage point FICA payroll tax cut that was part of the Tax Relief, Unemployment
Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010. The result is shown as the red series
in Figure 6.
The overall net monthly safety net benefit series averages $1,560 during fiscal year 2007,
and is about $300 per month greater during fiscal year 2010 and much of fiscal year 2009. The
net benefit averaged $1,745 during fiscal year 2011. Of course, increases in the amount of time
that people could receive unemployment benefits contribute to the increase in the overall net
monthly safety net benefit series since 2007, but Appendix 2 shows that the contribution of
benefit durations is well less than half of the overall change. In this regard, we cannot have an
accurate assessment of the role of fiscal policy changes in the labor market or in the distribution

29

of resources on the basis of means if we limit our attention to the duration of unemployment
benefits.
A key indicator of the employment incentive effects of means-tested subsidies is the
replacement rate: the fraction of productivity that the average non-employed person receives in
the form of means-tested benefits.44 Another indicator is the self-reliance rate – the fraction of
lost productivity not replaced by means-tested benefits – and is merely one minus the
replacement rate. The larger is the self-reliance rate, the more that a household has to rely on its
own earnings rather than subsidies in order to maintain its living standard. If none of the meanstested subsidies and discharges went to any household whose head (and, if present, spouse) was
continuously employed, then Figure 6 can be used to measure the replacement rate by dividing
the dollar amounts in the figure by the amount of production lost from the median head or spouse
missing work for a month. Under the assumption that productivity is lost at the rate of $3,885
per month, the right scale in Figure 6 shows the replacement rate.45 Before the recession began
Figure 6’s measure of the self-reliance rate was about 60 percent, but by the second half of 2009
it had fallen about 8 percentage points. By any standard, that’s a large and sudden change in the
aggregate self-reliance rate and thereby a large and sudden change in the incentives to work.
My findings of high replacement rates and low self-reliance rates during the recession are
not surprising when benefit expansions since 2007 are put in the context of some of the previous
literature on anti-poverty programs. Holt and Romich (2007) look at self-reliance rates from tax
and subsidy programs in the year 2000 and find them to be about 50 percent, and potentially
much smaller if program participation rates had been greater, as they were since 2007. It is wellknown that a large number of households saw their market-incomes fall below the poverty line
since 2007, but Sherman (2011, Figure 2) shows that only 0.6 percent of the population saw their
living standards fall below the poverty line between 2007 and 2010, thanks to expansions in
means-tested subsidy programs. For every 42 people whose market income declines would have
put them in poverty, government assistance pulled 36 back out. Roughly speaking, Sherman’s
44

Sometimes the replacement rate is defined with respect to lost earnings rather than lost productivity, with the
difference being the gap between earnings and productivity due to employer taxes and other employer-side labor
market distortions. I use productivity in order to be consistent with aggregate productivity calculations.
45
The median earnings of non-elderly heads and spouses was $727 per week, or $3,148 per month. $3,885 is the
result of scaling up monthly earnings by the national accounts ratio of aggregate employee compensation to wages
paid, in order to have an estimate of median labor productivity comparable to what would be used for aggregate
analysis.

30

results suggest that the government absorbed six-sevenths of market income declines, at least for
households with income in the neighborhood of the poverty line. That is a low self-reliance rate.
Once we recognize the amount of new safety net legislation that relaxed eligibility
requirements, increased benefits, or both, it is no surprise that replacement rates increased
significantly. The hypothetical households shown in Table 6 illustrate that a larger benefit
became available for a variety of household circumstances because of changes in program rules.
Just as important, the rule changes are obvious in safety net program spending, which has
increased at a faster rate than the population that was once considered eligible (see Table 4 for
UI and SNAP, and Appendix 2 for all safety net programs).
I have not quantified several other areas of expanding means-tested benefits such as
student loan discharges, forgiveness of income tax debts, and tax credits targeted to low income
households that presumably reduced self-reliance rates still further during the recession. 46
Moreover, some of the credit market discrimination may have served to reduce replacement rates
before the recession began – creditors rewarded high income prior to the recession by extending
more credit and rewarded low income during the recession by extending more forgiveness. The
fact that I omitted the former effect means I underestimated self-reliance rate declines. This
paper does not consider the safety net for businesses, especially financial businesses (Morgenson
2011).

Aggregate Replacement Rates and Aggregate Distortions
The decline in self-reliance rates is, by definition, a decline in the rewards to time and
effort that raise market incomes. In theory, at least some people respond by doing less toward
earning their own market income. As people work fewer hours, and fewer businesses attempt to
expand, output will be lower, and output per hour will be greater. In other words, as safety net
rules changed to reduce self-reliance rates, economic theory predicts that the gap between
productivity and consumers’ marginal rate of substitution (MRS) would widen, as would the gap

46

On targeted tax credits, see Sherman (2011). Melvin (2009) explains how “IRS agents were given more
flexibility in their collection actions, including the ability to reduce or suspend monthly payments on back taxes so
those hit hard by the financial downturn are not forced to default on their tax payments” (emphasis added).

31

between hourly employee compensation and the MRS. Moreover, the theory says that, holding
constant employer-side distortions, the magnitudes of the two changes (self-reliance rates and
gap) are identical. With Figure 4 measuring changes in the self-reliance rate, and Mulligan
(2011b) measuring the gap between productivity and MRS (conditional on a particular model of
the MRS function), we are now in a position to begin to evaluate the theory.
Figure 7 graphs the productivity-based distortion series from Mulligan (2011b) (black)
together with (minus one times) log changes in the self-reliance rate implied by safety net
statutes since 2007-Q4 (red). The red series tends to increase over time because safety net
benefit rules change in the direction of increasing replacement rates and reducing self-reliance
rates. Assuming that Mulligan (2011b) used the correct marginal rate of substitution function,
that employer-side distortions were constant, and all of the measurements were exactly correct,
the theory says that the red and black series should be identical. Note that the two series are
based on very different data sources – the former comes from data on aggregate consumption
and productivity while the latter comes largely from changes in government benefit rules –
which means the two series are not automatically equal. Nevertheless, the two series follow each
other closely. They both increase about 0.07 or 0.08 during the first five quarters of the
recession. The total increase through the end of 2009 was 0.14 for the log self-reliance rate and
0.17 for the productivity-based distortion. By the end of 2010, the gap between the red and black
is about 0.04.
Most of the taxes and safety net programs included in the red series create employee-side
distortions rather than employer-side distortions, and all of the measured program changes
change employee-side distortions. If all of the measurements were correct, and employer-side
distortions possibly changed over time, then the theory says that the red series would follow a
wage-based measure of the distortion at least as well as it follows the productivity-based measure
shown in black. A waged based measure is shown as a gray series in Figure 7. It follows the
self-reliance rate series closely through late 2010. By the end of 2010, the safety net series is
closer to the wage-based series than the productivity-based series.

32

Reasonable alternative measures of either distortions or safety net self-reliance rates
could introduce more gaps between the two types of measures than are shown in Figure 7.47 But
a couple of lessons derive from even a rough agreement between distortions and safety net selfreliance rates. First, the safety net expanded, and then stabilized at a more generous level, at
about exactly the times that employment rates dropped, and then stabilized at a lower level.
Second, the amount of the safety net expansion was large, and possibly large enough to cause a
significant part of the employment drop. Both of these lessons are consistent with the reasonable
ideas that the recession motivated at least some of the safety net expansions, and that the entire
recession cannot be attributed to expansions in the safety net.

47

So far I have omitted employer-side labor distortions that, as noted in Mulligan (2011b), probably changed since
2007. Changes in these distortions would tend to change Figure 5’s black series, without changing the red one.

33

Appendix 3.1: Calculation and Aggregation of Statutory Eligibility and
Benefit Indices

Statutory Eligibility Indices
The government safety net eligibility indices displayed in the main text represent five
federal changes in UI eligibility rules. In each case, the one-time change in the eligibility index
reflects the typical relative size of the population eligible under relaxed eligibility rules to the
size of the population eligible under the stricter rules.
The UI eligibility index changes three times since January 2007 due to changes in the
maximum allowable period of benefit collection. For an eligibility rule change that involves
extending the duration of benefits from A weeks to B weeks, the relative population size is
measured by the ratio of the fraction (measured for 2007 and 2010) of unemployed non-elderly
heads and spouses whose spell has not yet surpassed B weeks to the fraction of unemployed nonelderly heads and spouses whose spell has not yet surpassed A weeks.
The first instance was July 2008 when an additional 26 weeks of unemployment benefits
became possible with the combined startup of the extended benefits and tier I emergency benefits
programs.48 66 percent of unemployed non-elderly heads and spouses had a spell lasting so far
0-26 weeks (66 percent is an average of 80 percent for 2007 and 52 percent for 2010) and 83
percent have a spell lasting so far 0-52 weeks, so the statutory UI eligibility index jumps by a
factor of 1.3 (=83/66) in July 2008. In December 2008, the index jumps again by a factor of 1.09
when Tier II emergency benefits (lasting 13 weeks) begin and 7 weeks of eligibility are added to
Tier I. The 1.09 amount of the index’s jump is determined from the unemployment duration data
in the same way as for July 2008. The third jump associated with benefit duration is a factor of
1.03, occurring in December 2009 when Tier III and IV emergency benefits (13 and 6 week

48

As a UI beneficiary moves through his unemployment spell, his emergency benefits are first classified as Tier I,
then Tier II, etc. (National Employment Law Project 2011). Each tier lasts a number of weeks specified by
legislation, which has changed over time.

34

durations, respectively) begin, another week is added to Tier II, and Tier II is made available to
all states.49
The maximum unemployment benefit duration was not changed by the February 2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, but the Act did extend eligibility by encouraging
states to “modernize” (and relax) their monetary eligibility requirements by using processing
earnings histories through an “alternative base period,” including persons who quit their job for
compelling family reasons, adding 26 weeks of eligibility for persons enrolled in training
programs, and/or paying benefits for persons who search only for part-time work. I am not
aware of direct estimates of the number of people affected, so I assume that the index jumps by a
factor of 1.047 due to the alternative base period.50
In order to quantify participation effects of the relaxation of SNAP asset tests, it helps to
distinguish states conferring broad-based categorical eligibility (BBCE) from the rest of the
nation where the federal eligibility rules (that began exempting retirement and education savings
accounts from asset tests and expanded deductions thereby relaxing the net income test) would
still be relevant, and states were continuing to add vehicles exemptions (Dean, Pawling and
Rosenbaum 2008).

Previous research has found that vehicle exemptions are an important

determinant of participation, with one vehicle exemption increasing log participation by 0.08 to
0.16 (Ratcliffe, McKernan and Finegold 2007, 15).

Because estimates of the effects of

exempting retirement accounts vary so widely,51 I use the midpoint of the vehicle estimate range,
thereby assuming that eligibility changes from the 2008 Farm Bill and state-by-state changes in
49

A few states offer an additional 7 weeks of extended benefits (for a total of 99 weeks), but this change is not
included in my eligibility index.
50
The Act allocated $7 billion to states as bonuses for modernizing by the end of 2010-Q3. Assuming that states
would be willing to pay another $3 billion to make more of their citizens eligible for UI, the combined payment of
$10 billion is 4.7 percent of the total UI benefits ($211 billion) paid nationwide during that period. See also
National Employment Law Project (2003a) for estimates of the participation effects of alternative base periods, and
note that, contemporaneous with the adoption of alternative base periods, the fraction of persons unemployed 1-26
weeks who receive regular state UI benefits increased significantly.
51
According to Rosenbaum (2008), the Congressional Budget Office once estimated that less than 80,000 food
stamp participants (well less than one percent) would be affected by the 2008 Farm Bill’s provision to exclude
individual retirement accounts from the SNAP asset test (employer-sponsored accounts such as 401(k) accounts had
already been excluded by prior legislation). On the other hand, the Brookings Institution (2007) notes that many
people with 401(k) accounts would, under pre-2008-Farm-Bill rules, still find those assets counting against food
stamp asset limits when it came time to apply for food stamps because many job separations require that the 401(k)
funds be withdrawn or rolled into an individual retirement account. The latter study estimates that “over 7 million
Food Stamp households will be immediately affected by a federal exclusion [of retirement accounts],” which was
about one quarter of all food stamp households.

35

vehicle policies would increase log participation by 0.12 in the 14 states not conferring BBCE by
the end of 2010, as compared to the actual increase of 0.40. I assume the log participation
increases an additional 0.09 in the 36 BBCE states plus DC, which is the population-weighted
log participation change gap between the two types of states (see also Klerman and Danielson
(2011)). Nationwide, this means that, holding work requirements fixed, eligibility changes
would increase log participation 0.18 log points,52 which is 58 percent of the three year increase
in the log of ratio of participation to families with incomes below 125 percent of the poverty line.
I assume that, holding work requirements fixed, the nationwide dynamics of the eligibility rule
changes follow the time pattern of the population-weighted adoption of BBCE by the states,
although arguably part of the increase in the statutory SNAP eligibility index should occur
immediately upon the implementation of the 2008 Farm Bill.
Holding work requirements fixed, the SNAP eligibility index for month t is therefore
measured as a time-invariant linear function of the 2010 population of all states that were
conferring BBCE as of month t. The slope and intercept of this function are chosen so that: (a)
the index’s fiscal year 2010 average is one and (b) the index’s fiscal year 2007 average is e-0.18.
As a result, the SNAP eligibility index changes in each of the 17 months between January 2007
and December 2011 that at least one state (or District of Columbia) began conferring BBCE and
the size of the change is proportional to the 2010 population of the state or states beginning
BBCE at that time.
I am aware of only one study quantifying the participation effects of SNAP work
requirements. Ziliak, Gundersen, and Figlio (2003) use state-level panel data for the federal
fiscal years 1980-99 to relate per capita food stamp case loads to state economic and political
variables and state-specific characteristics of program administration. During this period of time,
states sometimes obtained waivers from the work requirements for able-bodied non-elderly
adults without dependents, and in many of those cases the waivers applied only to specific
geographic areas within the state. They find that a ten percentage point increase in the share of
52

An alternative approach could begin with Daponte, Sanders and Taylor (1999, Table 4) finding that, in 1994, 14
households are ineligible due to assets only for every 32 households eligible under both the income and asset tests
(Their sample is from 1994, so if nothing else their estimates are noisy for my purposes because more than ten years
had passed). Thus, if take-up rates were the same in the two groups, eliminating the asset test would increase log
enrollment by 0.36. At least 46 percent of the states (population weighted) eliminated asset tests between fiscal
years 2007 and 2010 as they began to confer BBCE, which by itself would be a 0.17 change in nationwide log
participation, plus the nationwide effects of relaxed asset tests in the other 54 percent of states.

36

the state’s population waived increased state-wide food stamp caseloads by 0.5 percent. A
waiver of the entire state might therefore be expected to increase caseloads by 5 percent.
However, the five percent estimate is an extrapolation outside most of their data, and the authors
caution that their estimate of the waiver effect may be exaggerated for failure to fully control for
state economic conditions.
Using the SNAP quality control micro data files prepared by Mathematical Policy
Research, I found that 1.4 million additional able-bodied non-elderly adults without children
participated in SNAP in fiscal year 2010 than would have if they had remained the forty percent
of able-bodied non-elderly adult SNAP participants with children as they were in 2007.
Assuming that half of these 1.4 million were the result of relaxed work requirements (they never
applied to adults with children), and weighting by pro-rated benefits, I conclude that relaxed
work requirements had the effect increasing total program participation by 2.3 percent,53 or about
half of Ziliak, Gundersen, and Figlio’s point estimate. In order to obtain an eligibility index that
reflects changes in work requirements, I therefore multiply the work-requirements-fixed SNAP
eligibility index cited above by 0.977 before October 2008, which began the first fiscal year
following the triggering of extended unemployment benefits that is a condition for statewide
work requirement waivers.54 As a result, less than 10 percent of the overall change 2007-2010 in
the SNAP eligibility index is associated with the work requirement waivers, as opposed to BBCE
and other changes in SNAP eligibility rules.
The statutory eligibility indices for consumer debt discharges “all other government
safety net,” and payroll taxes are set to one in all months. The statutory eligibility index for
Medicaid is also one, except after December 2013 when it is 1.274, based on estimates that
Medicaid enrollment would increase by 27.4 percent as a result of the relaxed eligibility criteria
going into effect January 2014 (Holahan and Headen May 2010).

53

Using the 2005-7 quality control files, I regressed the state-year ratio of able-bodied non-elderly adult participants
without children to able-bodied non-elderly adult participants with children on state fixed effects and the average
state unemployment rate for the year and the prior year, and found the unemployment rate coefficient to be zero or
negative. If instead the dependent variable were the log of the number of able-bodied non-elderly adult participants
with children, the unemployment rate coefficient is positive. Thus, I expect that unemployment would expand
SNAP participation over time, but would not have significantly increased the ratio of the two types of adult
participants between 2007 and 2010 if the work requirements had remained in place, and that much of the actual
increase must be attributed to relaxed work requirements.
54
I also multiply by 0.977 after September 2012, when the current waivers are scheduled to expire.

37

Statutory Benefit Indices
The contributions of federal additional compensation ($25 per week federal addition to
UI benefits) and the federal income tax exclusion for unemployment benefits (the value of which
is converted to fiscal year 2010 dollars) are explained in the main text. The monthly value of the
COBRA subsidy is $706 for someone who receives it (see the main text), but I assume that only
about one fifth of UI beneficiaries received it: the Treasury Department reported that two million
unemployed workers took advantage of the subsidy in 2009 (United States Department of
Treasury 2010a), as compared to about ten million people receiving UI benefits in the average
week during that time.55 A more aggressive estimate would allocate the $25 billion budgeted for
the subsidy by the ARRA (Hossain, et al. 2009) over the persons receiving UI during the
fourteen months that the COBRA subsidy is reflected in my statutory benefit index. However,
the COBRA provision’s expenditure could overstate the value it added to the safety net, because
Medicaid is sometimes available to unemployed persons who do not participate in their former
employer’s health plan.
In order to quantify statutory changes in the real benefit amount received by the average
SNAP participating household, I begin with the fiscal year 2010 average non-elderly family
benefit amount of $316 per month. That nominal benefit amount is assigned to all dates after
March 2009. The nominal benefit assigned to October 2008 – March 2009 is $45 less, and $28
less than that before October 2008, because $45 ($28) is the combined effect on monthly benefits
of the April 2009 (October 2008) changes in the maximum benefit, minimum benefit, and
allowable deductions, holding fixed the composition of SNAP households, respectively (see the
footnote in the main text). The same type of subtraction is made for fiscal years 2006 and 2007,
which each began with a small nominal maximum benefit increase due to changes in the cost of
living over the prior year, built into the prior law. The fixed SNAP household composition used
for all four calculations is quantified by the average frequencies by household size, and average
non-elderly frequencies by propensity to receive the minimum benefit, for fiscal years 2007 and
2010. The statutory SNAP real benefit index is the nominal series converted to fiscal year 2010
55

A less conservative approach would divide the two million COBRA beneficiaries by the number of heads and
spouses receiving unemployment benefits in 2009, which is less than eight million.

38

prices with the monthly seasonally adjusted chain type price index for personal consumption
expenditures.
The statutory Medicaid real benefit index is set at a constant $358 per month ($4,296 per
year) as an estimate of what Medicaid spends per non-elderly non-disabled enrollee (Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation 2011a). The statutory real benefit index for government safety net
programs aside from UI, SNAP, and Medicaid is set to monthly fiscal 2010 program benefits
times the elderly exclusion factor shown in Table 3.2 divided by the fiscal year 2010 difference
between the average monthly amount of non-employment and underemployment among nonelderly household heads and spouses (the calculation shown in Table 3.1, except for fiscal year
2010) and the average monthly number of persons aged 25-64 receiving UI.56

[Appendices 2 and 3 available on request]

56

Recall that the “other safety net” program weight is based on the propensity of non-employed people to be
ineligible for UI, so for consistency the benefit index should assign program spending only to persons not receiving
UI.

39

Table 1. Number and Characteristics of Household Heads, Spouses

Married male
Married female
Unmarried male
Unmarried female
Total

Employed
2007
2009
Millions
42.6
40.2
33.6
32.9
16.0
15.0
18.5
17.5
110.8 105.6

Among the Employed
Weekly hours, average
40.5
39.2
Weekly earnings, average, 2007$
846
853
Weekly earnings, median, 2007$
692
696
Weekly earnings, 1st quartile, 2007$
438
435
Under-employment rate
0 0.030

chg
-6%
-2%
-6%
-6%
-5%

Not Employed
2007
2009
Millions
6.3
8.1
16.4
16.8
4.1
5.6
6.7
7.7
33.5
38.2

chg
28%
3%
36%
15%
14%

-3%
1%
1%
-1%

Persons under age 65 only. Employment, hours, and earnings refer to the survey reference week. Hours are
measured only for persons at work.
Among the employed, the underemployment rate is one minus the ratio of average hours to average hours in 2007.
Because 2009 employment was 105.6 million, the absolute amount of underemployment was 3.2 million among the
employed.

Table 2. Means-tested Public Subsidies Found in the Personal Income Accounts, 2009
Inclusion Factor a

Program

Percentage of Totalb

Federal
Unemployment Insurance
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Supplemental Security Income
State and Local
Medicaid
Family Assistance
Supplemental Security Income
General Assistance
Energy Assistance
Otherc

0.97
0.93
0.88

30%
12%
9%

0.40
0.93
0.88
0.93
0.93
0.93

35%
5%
1%
3%
1%
4%

NOTES:
Inclusion factor is an estimate of the fraction of program spending on non-elderly persons. For Medicaid,
it is multiplied by an estimate of the relative value of in-kind versus cash subsidies (0.5).
b
Percentage of total is proportional to a program's transfer amount times its inclusion factor; percentages
sum to 100 across programs.
c
Other consists of expenditures for food under the supplemental program for women, infants, and children;
foster care; adoption assistance; and payments to nonprofit welfare institutions.
a

Table 3. Major Government Benefit Rule Changes Since 2007
Eligibility

Benefit Amounts
Unemployment Insurance and related
automatic extended benefit trigger
American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
add 13 weeks of eligibility
exempt $2400 UI from 2009 federal inc. tax
Jul 2008 - indefinite

Apr 2009 - Dec 2009

Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2008
add 13 weeks of eligibility

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
cover 65% of COBRA expense after layoff

Jul 2008 - indefinite

Apr 2009 - May 2010

Unemp. Comp. Extension Act of 2008
add 20 weeks of eligibility

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
$25 weekly bonus

Dec 2008 - Dec 2012

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
reward states for modernizing eligibility

Apr 2009 - Jun 2010

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
eliminate extended benefit experience rating

Apr 2009 - indefinite

Apr 2009 - indefinite

Worker, Homeownership, & Business
Assistance Act of 2009
add 20 weeks of eligibility
Dec 2009 - May 2012

SNAP
Farm Bill of 2002
begin diffusion of Broad-Based Categorical
Eligibility

Farm Bill of 2008
increase maximum benefit; exclude more income
from benefit formula

median implementation in October 2008

Farm Bill of 2008
relax asset and net income tests
Oct 2008 - indefinite

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
grant states relief from work requirement
Apr 2009 - Oct 2010

Medicaid
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of
2010
admit able-bodied adults up to 133% FPG
Jan 2014 - indefinite

Oct 2008 - indefinite

American Reinvestment & Recovery Act
increase max. benefit; more inc. excluded
Apr 2009 - Nov 2013

Table 4. UI and SNAP Spending Growth Attributable to Benefit Rule Changes
2007 $ per capita
2009
2010
2007
Unemployment Insurance
actual spending, all programs a
regular state programs only
regular state programs, adj. for ARRA eligibility b
regular state programs, adj. for ARRA eligibility
and $25 weekly benefit increase
Food Stamps/SNAP
actual spending a
under 2007 eligibility rules c
under 2007 eligibility rules, and constant
real benefits rules d
Addendum: per capita persons in poverty e
UI and SNAP combined
actual spending a
under 2007 eligibility and benefit rules

changes from 2007
2009
2010

109
109
109

411
251
242

427
180
172

279%
131%
123%

293%
66%
59%

109

227

163

109%

50%

102
102

173
151

205
164

68%
48%

100%
60%

102

120

127

17%

24%

0.173

0.189

0.201

9%

16%

211
211

584
347

632
290

177%
64%

199%
37%

NOTES:
a
Actual spending amounts from the personal income accounts, and thereby exclude program administrative costs.
b
Adjusts for changes in the "alternative benefit period" component of the statutory UI eligibility index.
c
Adjusts for changes in the statutory SNAP eligibility index.
d
Adjusts for changes in the product of the statutory SNAP eligibility index and real benefit index.
e
Fraction of persons below 125 percent of the poverty level from U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey.

Table 5. Government Safety Net Program Weights
for household heads and spouses
Labor Force Status

UI sometime during spell
SNAP
Medicaid
all other government safety net
Demographic weights

Unemployed
0.63
0.50
0.47
0.37

Out of the
Labor Force
0
0.42
0.47
1.00

Employed with
Reduced Hours
0
0.50
0.47
0.37

0.58

0.09

0.33

Average
Marginal Worker
0.37
0.49
0.47
0.43

Note: Demographic weights are used to define the average marginal worker. Program weights are used to aggregate programspecific statutory generosity measures. Medicaid weight reflects a 50 percent discount factor for in-kind benefits

Table 6. Changes in Safety Net Generosity for Hypothetical Households with Four Members
Household Characteristics
months of unemployment so far
real spousal income
passes 2007 SNAP asset test?

HH A
4
2,500
1

monthly amounts, levels
HH B
HH C
HH D
9
4
9
2,500
0
0
1
1
1

HH E
4
0
0

HH F
9
0
0

2009-Q4 Benefit Generosity Relative to inflation-adjusted 2007-Q4 Benefit Rules, when Primary Earner not Earning
monthly amounts, policy impact
Unemployment insurance
108
1,300
108
1,300
108
1,300
SNAP
0
0
108
108
401
401
Medicaid
0
0
0
0
0
0
COBRA subsidy
706
706
0
0
706
706
Payroll Tax savings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Federal Income Tax savings
33
-217
33
-217
33
-217
All provisions combined
824
1,789
227
1,191
1,225
2,190
Assumptions: Each hypothetical household participates in the above programs whenever eligible. Each has a 21% marginal
federal income tax rate. The primary earner's weekly UI benefit (before exhaustion) is $275, plus the ARRA's federal additional
compensation. Household does not use secondary earner's health insurance. Household lives in a state that began conferring
broad-based categorical eligibililty, without an asset test, sometime between 2007-Q4 and 2009-Q4. Health insurance costs
$13,027 per year. The Medicaid asset test is the same as the 2007-Q4 SNAP asset test. Monthly deductions for SNAP purposes
are $410 plus 20 percent of spousal earnings.

Table 7. Home Mortgage Interest Payment Forgiveness for a Hypothetical Dual-Earner Household
Household Characteristics
monthly earnings when working
monthly UI when not working
spousal earnings
DTI when working

UI Eligible UI Ineligible
3,148
3,148
1,574
0
3,148
3,148
31%
31%

Modification Characteristics if one earner was unemployed
DTI when not working, unmodified
Monthly modification that hits DTI = 31%
LTV needed to pass NPV test

41%
488
1.13

62%
976
1.29

Assumptions: Insurance and real estate taxes are 20 percent of overall (unmodified) housing
expenses. The annual interest rate is 7 percent. Unemployment occurs, if at all, for the full
year that income is examined for the purposes of modification.
DTI = debt-to-income ratio
LTV = loan-to-value ratio
NPV test = modification must be at least as profitable as foreclosure.

Table 8. Self-Reliance Rate Changes: Sensitivity Analysis

Benchmark
Replacement rate level
+ 5 pct points
- 5 pct points
COBRA incidence among the unemployeda
+ 5 pct points
- 5 pct points
Unemployment Insurance layoff tax
subtract half of the tax from UI benefits
subtract all of the tax from UI benefits
Debt forgiveness components
set both benefit indices to zero
double mortgage modification
SNAP
log BBCE factor set to 0.3
log BBCE factor set to 0.1
all rules frozen at FY2007 b
Labor force weights
move 10 pct points from UE to OLF
move 10 pct points from UE to underAdditional UI taxation
ignore PIT exclusion
5% discount to UI extensions and FAC
Unemployment Insurance duration alonec
actual duration schedule
duration limited to 52 weeks

Log Changes from 2007-Q4
2008-Q4 2009-Q4 2010-Q4
-0.05
-0.14
-0.12

-0.06
-0.05

-0.16
-0.13

-0.13
-0.11

-0.05
-0.05

-0.15
-0.14

-0.12
-0.11

-0.05
-0.05

-0.14
-0.13

-0.11
-0.11

-0.05
-0.06

-0.13
-0.15

-0.10
-0.13

-0.06
-0.05
-0.04

-0.15
-0.14
-0.12

-0.12
-0.11
-0.08

-0.05
-0.05

-0.12
-0.12

-0.10
-0.10

-0.05
-0.05

-0.13
-0.14

-0.12
-0.11

-0.04
-0.04

-0.05
-0.04

-0.06
-0.04

Notes
a
Benchmark incidence is 0.2.
b
The SNAP eligibility and real benefit indices are held constant at their 2007-Q4 values.
c
All other eligibility indices and real benefit indices, including those for COBRA and federal
additional compensation, are held constant at their 2007-Q4 values.

Table 9. Overall Safety Net Generosity, 2010 $ per Month,
Displayed with its UI and SNAP Components
Impact of Working on Net-of-tax Benefits, All Programs, Adjusted for Typical Take-up Rates
Overall
Overall
UI
SNAP
UI
SNAP
Month Elig. Benefit Elig. Benefit Safety Net
Month Elig. Benefit Elig. Benefit Safety Net
Jan-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
243
1,556
Jan-09 0.935 1,169 0.890
278
1,718
Feb-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
243
1,556
Feb-09 0.935 1,169 0.890
277
1,718
Mar-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
243
1,556
Mar-09 0.935 1,169 0.891
277
1,718
Apr-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
242
1,556
Apr-09 0.979 1,478 0.895
323
1,870
May-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
241
1,556
May-09 0.979 1,478 0.897
323
1,870
Jun-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
241
1,556
Jun-09 0.979 1,478 0.903
321
1,870
Jul-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
240
1,556
Jul-09 0.979 1,478 0.952
321
1,876
Aug-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
239
1,555
Aug-09 0.979 1,478 0.967
320
1,878
Sep-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
240
1,556
Sep-09 0.979 1,478 0.967
319
1,878
Oct-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
247
1,559
Oct-09 0.979 1,478 0.967
318
1,876
Nov-06 0.680 1,169 0.805
247
1,559
Nov-09 0.979 1,478 0.967
317
1,876
Dec-06 0.680 1,169 0.812
246
1,559
Dec-09 1.004 1,478 0.967
317
1,889
Jan-07 0.680 1,169 0.812
245
1,560
Jan-10 1.004 1,421 0.967
316
1,867
Feb-07 0.680 1,169 0.812
244
1,559
Feb-10 1.004 1,421 0.973
316
1,868
Mar-07 0.680 1,169 0.812
243
1,559
Mar-10 1.004 1,421 0.988
316
1,870
Apr-07 0.680 1,169 0.812
243
1,560
Apr-10 1.004 1,421 1.002
316
1,872
May-07 0.680 1,169 0.812
242
1,560
May-10 1.004 1,421 1.002
316
1,872
Jun-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
241
1,560
Jun-10 1.004 1,350 1.016
316
1,848
Jul-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
241
1,562
Jul-10 1.004 1,295 1.050
316
1,832
Aug-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
241
1,562
Aug-10 1.004 1,295 1.050
315
1,832
Sep-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
240
1,562
Sep-10 1.004 1,295 1.050
315
1,832
Oct-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
253
1,570
Oct-10 1.004 1,295 1.050
314
1,831
Nov-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
252
1,569
Nov-10 1.004 1,295 1.050
314
1,831
Dec-07 0.680 1,169 0.819
251
1,569
Dec-10 1.004 1,223 1.050
313
1,804
Jan-08 0.680 1,169 0.842
250
1,576
Jan-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
312
1,721
Feb-08 0.680 1,169 0.842
250
1,576
Feb-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
311
1,721
Mar-08 0.680 1,169 0.853
249
1,577
Mar-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
309
1,720
Apr-08 0.680 1,169 0.853
248
1,580
Apr-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
308
1,719
May-08 0.680 1,169 0.853
247
1,579
May-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
308
1,719
Jun-08 0.680 1,169 0.853
246
1,579
Jun-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
308
1,719
Jul-08 0.861 1,169 0.853
244
1,660
Jul-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
307
1,719
Aug-08 0.861 1,169 0.853
244
1,660
Aug-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
306
1,718
Sep-08 0.861 1,169 0.853
244
1,660
Sep-11 1.004 1,169 1.055
306
1,718
Oct-08 0.861 1,169 0.889
274
1,681
Oct-11 1.004 1,169 1.061
306
1,719
Nov-08 0.861 1,169 0.889
277
1,682
Nov-11 1.004 1,169 1.061
305
1,719
Dec-08 0.935 1,169 0.889
278
1,714
Dec-11 1.004 1,169 1.061
305
1,719

Figure 1. UI and SNAP Recipiency Rates since 2007
UI claimaints aged 25-64

0.85

fraction of unemployed persons aged 25-64

1.8

1.7

SNAP Households (right scale)

0.8

1.6

0.75

1.5

0.7

1.4

0.65

1.3

0.6

1.2

0.55

1.1

0.5

1
2007

2008

2009

2010

fraction of families below 125% FPG

0.9

Figure 2. Statutory Changes in Safety Net Eligibility
1.1

non-elderly household heads and spouses

Index, FY 2010=1

1

0.9

Medicaid

0.8

Unemployment Insurance
SNAP

0.7

0.6
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 3. Statutory Safety Net Benefits per Non-elderly Participant
360

1,600

340

1,500

1,400

300
1,300
280
1,200
260
1,100
240
1,000

Medicaid

220

SNAP (per household)
other means-tested programs combined

200

900

Unemployment Insurance (right scale)
180

800
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Inflation-adjusted $ per month

Inflation-adjusted $ per month

320

Figure 4. Statutory Government Safety Net Generosity

1500

for non-elderly household heads and spouses, by labor force status

Inflation-adjusted monthly benefit

1200

Unemployed
900

Out of the Labor Force
Under-employed

600

300

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

1.2

1

Index, FY2010=1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Figure 5. Eligibility Index for Mortgage Modifications

Figure 6. Statutory Safety Net Generosity
for non-elderly heads or spouses
1900

1650

0.42

entire safety net plus taxes foregone
1400

0.37

private & public safety net, including loan discharges
public + mortgage modifications
public safety net only

0.32

1150
0.27
900
0.22

650

0.17
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Replacement Rate at the Median

Inflation-adjusted monthly benefit

0.47

0.2

Figure 7. Labor Market Distortions Measured from Productivity,
Wages, and Safety Net Statutes

log change from 2007-Q4

0.16

0.12

0.08

productivity-based distortions
wage-based distortions

0.04

self-reliance rates from safety net statutes

0
2007-Q4

-0.04

2008-Q2

2008-Q4

2009-Q2

2009-Q4

2010-Q2

2010-Q4

2011-Q2

2011-Q4

FY2010 $ per under-employed, seasonally adj. monthly rates

Figure 8. Transfers and Loan Discharges for the Non-elderly
Unemployed and Financially Distressed
1,600

Consumer Loan Charge-offs
Home Retention Actions

1,400

Other Means-tested Transfers
SNAP

1,200

UI
Medicaid

1,000

comparable overall statutory series
800

600

400

200

0
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

References
AARP Illinois. The Social Security “Offset” Rule: What is it and how could it affect you? March
19, 2010. http://www.aarp.org/work/social-security/info-03-2010/the-social-securityoffset.html
(accessed November 5, 2011).
Administrative Office of the United States Courts. "Bankruptcy Basics." United States Courts.
November 2011.
http://www.uscourts.gov/Viewer.aspx?doc=/uscourts/FederalCourts/BankruptcyResources/bankb
asics2011.pdf (accessed January 9, 2012).
—. "Bankruptcy Statistics." United States Courts. November 2011.
http://www.uscourts.gov/Statistics/BankruptcyStatistics.aspx (accessed January 9, 2012).
Aizer, Anna. "Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and for Whom?" American
Economic Review 93, no. 2 (May 2003): 238-41.
Anderson, Patricia M., and Bruce D. Meyer. "Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates and the
After-tax Value of Benefits." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 3 (August 1997): 913-37.
Auerbach, Alan J., and James R., Jr. Hines. "Investment Tax Incentives and Frequent Tax
Reforms." American Economic Review 78, no. 2 (May 1988): 211-16.
Barro, Robert J., and Chaipat Sahasakul. "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate from the
Individual Income Tax." Journal of Business 56, no. 4 (October 1983): 419-52.
Bernet, Mary. Unemployment Insurance Recipiency. August 23, 2011.
http://www.qualityinfo.org/olmisj/ArticleReader?itemid=00007744 (accessed November 11,
2011).
Bishaw, Alemayehu. "Poverty: 2009 and 2010 American Community Surveys." American
Community Survey Briefs. October 2011. http://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acsbr10-01.pdf
(accessed January 7, 2011).
Bishaw, Alemayehu, and Suzanne Macartney. "Poverty: 2008 and 2009 American Community
Surveys." American Community Survey Briefs. September 2010.
http://www.census.gov/prod/2010pubs/acsbr09-1.pdf (accessed January 7, 2011).

40

Bishaw, Alemayehu, and Trudi J. Renwick. "Poverty: 2007 and 2008 American Community
Surveys." American Community Survey Reports. September 2009.
http://www.census.gov/prod/2009pubs/acsbr08-1.pdf (accessed January 7, 2011).
Braun, R. Anton. "Tax Disturbances and Real Economic Activity in the Postwar United States."
Journal of Monetary Economics 33, no. 3 (June 1994): 441-62.
Burtless, Gary. "Why is Insured Unemployment so Low?" Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1 (1983): 225-49.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Introduction to Unemployment Insurance. April 16,
2010. http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=1466 (accessed January 8, 2012).
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicaid Program - General Information. June 16,
2011. https://www.cms.gov/medicaidgeninfo/ (accessed November 14, 2011).
Connecticut Department of Social Services. "Help for People in Need." Hartford Public Library.
2009. http://www.hartfordinfo.org/issues/wsd/FamiliesandChildren/HelpforPeopleinNeed.pdf.
Council of Economic Advisers. The Economic Impact of Recent Temporary Unemployment
Insurance Extensions. Executive Office of the President, December 2010.
Crimmel, Beth Levin. "Employer-Sponsored Single, Employee-Plus-One, and Family Health."
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. July 2010.
http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_files/publications/st285/stat285.pdf (accessed
November 10, 2011).
Dague, Laura. "Effects of Medicaid Premiums and Copayments on Insurance Coverage,
Utilization, and Health: A Regression Discontinuity Approach." manuscript (University of
Wisconsin, Madison), October 2011.
Daponte, Beth Osborne, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. "Why Do Low-Income Households
not Use Food Stamps? Evidence from an Experiment." The Journal of Human Resources 34, no.
3 (Summer 1999): 612-28.
Dean, Stacy, Colleen Pawling, and Dottie Rosenbaum. "Implementing New Changes to the Food
Stamp Program: A Provision By Provision Analysis of The 2008 Farm Bill." Center for Budget
Policies and Policy Priorities. July 1, 2008. http://www.cbpp.org/files/7-1-08fa.pdf (accessed
January 10, 2012).
Dugas, Christine. "Graduates saddled with debt, student loans can't easily turn to bankruptcy."
USA Today, May 15, 2009.

41

Dynan, Karen E., and Donald L. Kohn. "The Rise in U.S. Household Indebtedness: Causes and
Consequences." Finance and Economics Discussion Series (Federal Reserve Board), no. 200737 (August 2007).
Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. "The Labor Market in the Great Recession."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 1-48.
Eslami, Esa, Kai Filion, and Mark Strayer. "Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Households: Fiscal Year 2010." Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
Studies. September 2011.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2010Characteristics.pdf
(accessed November 5, 2011).
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "Series ATAIEALLGCLCRACB." Federal Reserve
Economic Data. 2011. http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/ATAIEALLGCLCRACB
(accessed November 26, 2011).
First American Core Logic. "Core Mortgage Risk Monitor, Q42008." November 21, 2008.
http://www.facorelogic.com/uploadedFiles/Newsroom/Mortgage/CMRMQ4_final_112108(1).pdf (accessed 26 2011, November).
First American Core Logic. New Corelogic Data Reveals Q2 Negative Equity Declines in
Hardest Hit Markets and 8 Million Negative Equity Borrowers Have Above Market Rates. press
release, First American CoreLogic, September 2011.
First American Core Logic. Underwater Mortgages On the Rise According to First American
CoreLogic Q4 2009 Negative Equity Data. press release, First American CoreLogic, February
2010.
Food and Research Action Center. National and State Program Data. 2011.
http://frac.org/reports-and-resources/reports-2/ (accessed November 10, 2011).
Franco, Celinda. "Unemployment Benefits Reduced by Pensions and Social Security: A Fact
Sheet." Federal Publications 216 (January 2004).
Galewitz, Phil. "Federal COBRA Insurance Subsidies End For Laid-Off Workers." Kaiser
Health News. September 2, 2011.
http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org/Stories/2011/August/31/COBRA.aspx (accessed January 15,
2012).
Ghent, Andra C., and Marianna Kudlyak. "Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default:
Evidence from US States." Review of Financial Studies 24, no. 9 (September 2011): 3139-86.
Han, Song, and Wenli Li. "Fresh Start or Head Start? The Effects of Filing for Personal
Bankruptcy on Work Effort." Journal of Financial Services Research 31 (2007): 123-152.
42

Hanson, Kenneth, and Margaret Andrews. State Variations in the Food Stamp Benefit Reduction
Rate for Earnings. EIB-46, United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service, March 2009.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Medicaid Payments per Enrollee, FY 2008. 2011.
http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=183&cat=4 (accessed November 14,
2011).
—. Monthly Medicaid Enrollment. 2011.
http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=774&cat=4 (accessed November 14,
2011).
—. Premium and Copayment Requirements for Children, January 2011. 2011.
http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparereport.jsp?rep=85&cat=4 (accessed November 14,
2011).
Herkenhoff, Kyle F., and Lee E. Ohanian. "Labor Market Dysfunction During the Great
Recession." NBER working paper, no. 17313 (August 2011).
Holahan, John, and Irene Headen. Medicaid Coverage and Spending in Health Reform. Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation, May 2010.
Holt, Stephen D., and Jennifer L. Romich. "Marginal Tax Rates Facing Low - and Moderate Income Workers Who Participate in Means-tested Transfer Programs." National Tax Journal 60,
no. 2 (June 2007): 253-77.
HOPE NOW. "Industry Extrapolations and Metrics." www.homenow.com. September 2011.
http://www.hopenow.com/industrydata/HOPE%20NOW%20Data%20Report%20(September)%2011-10-2011.pdf (accessed
November 28, 2011).
Hossain, Farhana, Amanda Cox, John McGrath, and Stephan Weitberg. "The Stimulus Plan:
How to Spend $787 Billion." New York Times. March 2009.
http://projects.nytimes.com/44th_president/stimulus (accessed January 15, 2012).
Jermann, Urban J, and Vincenzo Quadrini. "Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks." NBER
working paper, no. 15338 (September 2009).
Kantrowitz, Mark. Total College Debt Now Exceeds Total Credit Card Debt. August 11, 2010.
http://www.fastweb.com/financial-aid/articles/2589-total-college-debt-now-exceeds-total-creditcard-debt (accessed November 21, 2011).
Katz, Lawrence F. "The Labor Market in the Great Recession: Comment." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 49-56.

43

Klerman, Jacob Alex, and Caroline Danielson. "The Transformation of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30, no. 4 (Fall
2011): 863-88.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and David Rapson. "Does it pay, at the margin, to work and save?" In Tax
Policy and the Economy, edited by James M. Poterba, 83-144. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2007.
Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott. "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations."
Econometrica 50, no. 6 (November 1982): 1345-70.
Landais, Camille, Michaillat Pascal, and Emmanuel Saez. "Optimal Unemployment Insurance
over the Business Cycle." NBER working paper, no. 16526 (November 2010).
Leftin, Joshua, Andew Gothro, and Esa Eslami. "Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Households: Fiscal Year 2009." Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) Studies. October 2010.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2009Characteristics.pdf
(accessed November 5, 2011).
Li, Wenli, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. "U.S. Consumer Bankruptcy Choice: The Importance of
General Equilibrium Effects." Journal of Monetary Economics 53, no. 3 (April 2006): 613-31.
Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michèle Tertilt. "Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start."
American Economic Review 97, no. 1 (March 2007): 402-18.
Ljungqvist, Lars. "How do Lay-off Costs Affect Employment?" Economic Journal 112, no. 482
(October 2002): 829-53.
Lower-Basch, Elizabeth. Hearing on TANF‟s Role in Providing Assistance to Struggling
Families. Testimony for the Record, Committee on Ways and Means, Subcommittee on Income
Security and Family Support, 2010.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 1, no. 1 (January 1976): 19-46.
McCarthy, Kevin E. "Unemployment Compensation Offsets." Office of Legislative Research Connecticut General Assembly. February 13, 2002. http://www.cga.ct.gov/2002/rpt/2002-R0188.htm (accessed November 5, 2011).
McGrattan, Ellen R. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Distortionary Taxation." Journal of
Monetary Economics 33, no. 3 (June 1994): 573-601.

44

Melvin, Jasmin. More Americans Wary of Tax Man this Year. April 14, 2009.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2009/04/14/us-usa-taxes-recession-idUSTRE53D01M20090414
(accessed November 25, 2011).
Moore, Kevin B., and Michael G. Palumbo. "The Finances of American Households in the Past
Three Recessions: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances." Federal Reserve Board
Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2010-06 (2010).
Morgenson, Gretchen. Reckless Endangerment: How Outsized Ambition, Greed, and Corruption
Led to Economic Armageddon. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2011.
Mulligan, Casey B. "A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment
Insurance." NBER working paper, no. 14514 (November 2008).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Means-tested Mortgage Modification: Homes Saved or Income Destroyed."
NBER working paper, no. 15821 (August 2009).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Means-tested Subsidies and Economic Performance since 2007." NBER
working paper, no. 17445 (September 2011).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Rising Labor Productivity during the 2008-9 Recession." NBER working
paper, no. 17584 (November 2011b).
National Bureau of Economic Research. Marginal Tax Rates, Federal Only. October 15, 2010.
http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/marginal-tax-rates/af.html (accessed February 8, 2012).
National Employment Law Project. Development of State Laws Regarding Social Security
Retirement. November 5, 2007. http://www.nelp.org/page//UI/Development_of_social_security_offsets_Nov_2007.pdf (accessed November 2011).
—. "Overview of Unemployment Insurance Federal Extensions." National Employment Law
Project. July 2011. http://www.nelp.org/page/-/UI/2011/current.extension.law.impact.pdf
(accessed January 16, 2012).
—. "Recovery Act’s Unemployment Insurance Modernization Incentives Produce Bipartisan
State Reforms in Eight States in 2010." National Employment Law Project. September 3, 2010.
http://nelp.3cdn.net/ebbff6219d7fb6acb4_ksm6bcaec.pdf (accessed November 14, 2011).
—. Unemployment Insurance and Social Security Retirement Offsets. December 2003.
http://nelp.3cdn.net/f96d84de63766102b2_8rm6b99ab.pdf (accessed November 5, 2011).
—. "What is An "Alternative Base Period" and Why Does My State Need One?" National
Employment Law Project. April 2003. http://www.nelp.org/page/-/UI/abpfactsheet041003.pdf
(accessed December 2011).

45

Office of Thrift Supervision. OCC and OTS Mortgage Metrics Report, various issues.
Ratcliffe, Caroline, Signe-Mary McKernan, and Kenneth Finegold. "The Effect of State Food
Stamp and TANF Policies on Food Stamp Program Participation." Urban Institute. March 2007.
http://www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=411438 (accessed January 10, 2012).
Rogerson, Richard, and Randall Wright. "Involuntary unemployment in economies with efficient
risk sharing." Journal of Monetary Economics 22, no. 3 (1988): 501-515 .
Rosen, Harvey S. Public Finance. 7th. McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 2005.
Ross, Donna Cohen, and Sharon Parrott. Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility Is Protected For Jobless
Families That Receive Boost in Unemployment Benefits . March 20, 2009.
http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=2723 (accessed November 16, 2011).
Rothstein, Jesse. "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession." NBER
working paper, no. 17534 (October 2011).
Sack, Kevin. "Recession Drove Many to Medicaid Last Year." New York Times, October 1,
2010: A16.
Sherman, Arloc. "Poverty and Financial Distress would have been Substantially Worse in 2010
without Government Action, New Census Data Show." Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
November 7, 2011. http://www.cbpp.org/files/11-7-11pov.pdf (accessed November 21, 2011).
Shimer, Robert. "The Labor Market in the Great Recession: Comment." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 57-65.
Smith, Charles Hugh. Real Estate: The Worrying Numbers Behind Underwater Homeowners.
August 10, 2010. http://www.dailyfinance.com/2010/08/07/real-estate-underwater-homeowners/
(accessed November 26, 2011).
Smith, Vernon K., Kathleen Gifford, Ellis Eileen, Robin Rudowitz, and Laura Snyder. "Moving
Ahead Amid Fiscal Challenges: A Look at Medicaid Spending, Coverage and Policy Trends."
Medicaid/CHIP. October 2011. http://www.kff.org/medicaid/8248.cfm (accessed November 11,
2011).
Social Security Administration. Food Stamp Facts. May 2008. http://ssa.gov/pubs/10101.html
(accessed November 12, 2011).
Social Security Administration. SSI Annual Statistical Report, 2010. Washington, DC: Office of
Research, Evaluation, and Statistics, 2011.

46

State of California, Employment Development Department. "California System of Experience
Rating." 2010 UI, ETT, and SDI Rates. June 2011.
http://www.edd.ca.gov/payroll_taxes/rates_and_withholding.htm (accessed November 3, 2011).
Texas Education Agency. Student Loan Forgiveness for Teachers. September 2011, 2011.
http://www.tea.state.tx.us/loan.aspx (accessed November 21, 2011).
Townsend, Robert M. "Microcredit and Mechanism Design." Journal of the European Economic
Association 1, no. 2/3 (April 2003): 468-77.
United State Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. "Broad-Based Categorical
Eligibility." Soft Eligibility Requirements States. October 4, 2011.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Memo/BBCE.pdf (accessed December 29, 2011).
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population
Survey. October 7, 2011. http://www.bls.gov/cps/ (accessed November 3, 2011).
—. "Wives who earn more than their husbands, 1987–2008." Women in the Labor Force: A
Databook (2010 Edition). March 16, 2011. http://www.bls.gov/cps/wlftable25-2010.htm
(accessed November 26, 2011).
United States Census Bureau. 2005-2009 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. 2010.
http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/ACSSAFFFacts?_event=&geo_id=01000US&_geoContext=
01000US&_street=&_county=&_cityTown=&_state=&_zip=&_lang=en&_sse=on&ActiveGeo
Div=&_useEV=&pctxt=fph&pgsl=010&_submenuId=factsheet_1&ds_name=DEC_2000_SAFF
&_ci_nbr=null&qr_ (accessed December 28, 2011).
—. 2006 American Community Survey Table B25096. 2007. factfinder.census.gov (accessed
November 26, 2011).
United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. Employment
Requirements. 2011. http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/applicant_recipients/employ_require.htm
(accessed November 12, 2011).
United States Department of Labor. Characteristics of the Insured Unemployed. 2011.
http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/chariu.asp (accessed November 2, 2011).
—. "Monetary Entitlements." Comparisons of State Unemployment Laws. 2007.
http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/uilawcompar/2007/comparison2007.asp (accessed
November 2, 2011).
—. "Nonmonetary Eligibility." Comparisons of State Unemployment Laws. 2009.
http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/uilawcompar/2009/nonmonetary.pdf (accessed
November 5, 2011).

47

—. "Persons Claiming UI Benefits in Federal Programs." Unemployment Insurance Program
Statistics. October 7, 2011. http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/docs/persons.xls (accessed
October 25, 2011).
—. "Unemployment Compensation: Federal-State Partnership." Unemployment Insurance Laws.
April 2011. http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/partnership.pdf (accessed October 28,
2011).
—. Unemployment Insurance Data Summary. September 6, 2011.
http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/content/data.asp (accessed November 3, 2011).
—. "Unemployment Insurance Program Letter No.14-09." Employment and Training
Administration. February 26, 2009. http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/corr_doc.cfm?DOCN=2715
(accessed January 18, 2012).
—. "Unemployment Laws and Insurance." Chronology of Federal Unemployment Compensation
Laws. May 3, 2011. http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/chronfedlaws.pdf
(accessed October 28, 2011).
United States Department of Treasury. "February 2011 Making Home Affordable Program
Report." United States Department of Treasury. April 1, 2011.
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/results/MHAReports/Documents/Feb%202011%20MHA%20Report%20FINAL_Revised.pdf (accessed
January 11, 2012).
—. "November 2011 Making Home Affordable Program Report." United States Department of
Treasury. January 9, 2012. http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/results/MHAReports/Documents/FINAL_Nov%202011%20MHA%20Report.pdf (accessed January 11,
2012).
Vaughn, Martin. "Payroll Tax Cut: A Short Primer." Wall Street Journal, December 7, 2010.
White House. Fact Sheet: The American Jobs Act. September 8, 2011.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/09/08/fact-sheet-american-jobs-act (accessed
November 28, 2011).
Wolkwitz, Kari, and Carole Trippe. "Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Households: Fiscal Year 2008." Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
Studies. September 2009.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2010Characteristics.pdf
(accessed November 5, 2011).
Wolkwitz, Kari, and Joshua Leftin. "Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Households: Fiscal Year 2007." Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

48

Studies. September 2008.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2010Characteristics.pdf
(accessed November 5, 2011).
Zedlewski, Sheila. "The Role of Welfare during a Recession." December 2008.
http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/411809_role_of_welfare.pdf (accessed November 13,
2011).
—. "What Role Is Welfare Playing in This Period of High Unemployment?" Unemployment and
Recovery Project. August 2011. http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/412378-Role-of-Welfarein-this-Period-of-High-Unemployment.pdf (accessed November 13, 2011).

49

