NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC SECTOR RECOGNITION STRIKES:
ILLEGAL AND ILL-FATED

Casey Ichniowski

Working Paper No. 1808

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper l808
January 1986

Public

Sector Recognition Strikes:

Illegal and Ill-Fated

ABSTRACT

This

study investigates the relationship between strike activity by

nonunion public employees and unionization. Examining the strike activity and unionization rates of some 600 nonunion municipal police departments from 1972 to 1978, this study finds that recognition strikes are
concentrated where bargaining laws provide little or no protection of

bargaining rights for municipal police. However, these strikes do not
increase the unionization propensities of these police departments.

Professor Casey Ichniowski
Uris Hall 713
Graduate School of
Business Administration

colthia University
New York, NY 10027

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recent studies on union growth in the public sector find that the
nature of the state bargaining statute regulating public sector bargain-

ing is the single most important determinant of unionization. Saltzman
documents this relationship for the occupation of teachers,1 while
Ichniowski reaches the same conclusion for police. 2

Research on public

sector strike activity during the 1970's finds that most public sector
work stoppages in this period of rapid growth in public unionization were
strikes by nonunion departments in states with little or no statutory

protection of public employee bargaining rights.3 Often these strikes by
nonunion departments were for union recognition. While the first set of
studies indicates that little unionization exists in states without
bargaining laws, the second set of studies suggests that the low levels
of unionization in these states may not correspond to similarly low

levels of demand for unionization by employees in these states. Specifically, employees in states without laws are more likely to strike even
though public employee work stoppages, particularly among public safety

employees, are almost always illegal.4 When the two sets of studies are
considered together, a natural question arises. Are public employees who
strike for recognition successful in their attempts to unionize? Or, do
adverse public sentiment and the attendant penalties and fines for
illegal work stoppages cause these efforts to fail?

The theoretical answer to this question is ambiguous. It has been
argued that public employees, especially police and firefighters, can
wield considerable economic power by striking since the essential nature
of their services may mean the labor demand curve is highly inelastic,

particularly in the short run.5 However, employers may be able to oppose

2

the unionization efforts by imposing penalties (or threatening to impose
penalties) against employees who are involved in illegal work stoppages.
By examining the rate of unionization among those nonunion police
departments that went on strike for recognition between 1972 and 1978 and
comparing it to the rate of unionization among other municipal police

departments, this study addresses this unanswered question. The analysis
reveals that nonunion police who specifically strike for recognition do

not increase the probability of unionization in their departments. In
fact, the rate of unionization among all nonunion departments that engage
in a work stoppage (that is, not just those work stoppages where the
principal reason was for recognition) is significantly lower than the
unionization rate of police departments that do not strike.

II. SAMPLE DESIGN, DATA, AND MODEL

To assess the impact of police recognition strikes on unionization
propensities appropriately, the research design should incorporate

several features. First, the study would be able to identify dates of
the strikes and dates of unionization to determine precisely whether

strikes preceded or post-dated unionization. Second, subsequent unionization of striking nonunion departments would be compared to the unionization rate among other police departments as the relevant control

group. Additionally, other municipal and state characteristics that
could affect unionization rates of police departments should be con-

trolled in multivariate probability equations. The sample, variables,
and model in this study incorporate these features.

3

Unionization Measures
Since actual dates of unionization among public sector employees is
required in this study, I use responses from a 1979 survey6 that
specifically asks the following two questions: "Does your city have a
written labor contract covering wages, hours, and conditions of employment for police personnel?" and "What year was the first written labor

contract signed?" According to these questions, formal recognition
exists (i.e., UNION = 1) once a written collective bargaining agreement

is negotiated. Other kinds of police associations that do not negotiate
written contracts will not be considered as unionized departments in this

study. It is assumed that cities that report having a contract have
continually been party to the agreement since the date given in response

to the second survey question. This survey covers nearly 1,000 municipalities with populations above 10,000 that reported municipal police

employment in the Municipal Yearbook in l978.
Work Stoppages
Data on work stoppages by municipal police departments were collect-

ed from two sources. When available, information was taken directly from
the reporting form filed with the Industrial Relations Unit of the U.S.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).8 Since the data on dates of police
unionization extend only through 1978, the forms reporting data on police

work stoppage were collected for years prior to 1978. They were available for 1972, 1973, 1976, 1977, and 1978. Similar work stoppage data
are reported in volumes of Labor-Management Relations in State and Local

Governments.9 Data tapes for these volumes were used to identify police
departments that went on strike between October 1974 and December 1975.

Records to identify those police departments that went on strike from

4

January 1974 to September 1974 were not available; however, the aggregate
number of police strikes in this period is available from the 1974

published volume. According to these different sources, there were a
total of 115 police strikes between 1972 and 1978. Excluding the fourteen police strikes during 1974 for which the exact municipalities
involved could not be identified, 52 of the remaining 101 police strikes

were identified as involving nonunion police departments. Of these 52
strikes, 22 reported that the principal issue involved was recognition or

the attempt to obtain a first contract. When recognition or a first
contract is reported to be the central issue, a dummy variable for the

presence of a recognition strike (RECOGA) equals one. Since the reporting forms are retrospective, and since managers or clerks completing this
form may underreport the existence of recognition strikes when such
strikes do not lead to unionization, a broader definition of a recogni-

tion strike (RECOGB) is also used. RECOGB equals one any time a nonunion
police department goes on strike. Here, the argument is that even though
the principal issue may not be recognition, recognition may be a minor

issue or become an issue as the strike progresses. The rate of unionization among departments for which RECOGA = 1 is expected to be greater
than the rate of unionization among the larger set of nonunion depart-

ments for which RECOGB = 1.
Since the strike data are collected back to 1972, the sample for

this study consists of municipal police departments that were nonunion at

the beginning of 1972. Specifically, if responses to the unionization
survey indicate that the first collective bargaining agreement was signed

before 1972, the municipality can not be included in the sample. The
number of municipalities which meet these criteria and which report all

5

additional control variables described below is 579. Between 1972 and
1978 then, there were 52 strikes among these 579 nonunion police
departments.

Bargaining Laws
Among other variables that influence the propensity of public
employees to unionize, the most significant according to previously cited

studies are the state bargaining laws. In developing these categories, I
focus on two related dimensions: the degree to which bargaining rights
are protected and the degree to which impasse procedures ensure closure
of the bargaining process.

The first category is "bargaining permitted" (BP). These legal
frameworks establish the legality of collective bargaining for covered

employees. However, under such frameworks employers are not obligated to
bargain with employees. These policies are often stated as giving
employees some weak form of rights "to meet and confer with" or "to
present proposals to" their employers.

The second law category is comprised of states which have a "duty-

to-bargain" provision (DTB). In moving from BP to DTB environments, the
choice to bargain or not shifts from the employer to the employees.

Employees may be more likely to try to organize where employers have an
affirmative obligation to bargain with representatives of the police than
where employers may still choose not to bargain.

Still, a DTB provision does not necessarily ensure closure to the

bargaining process. In the private sector, the strike threat forces
negotiators to evaluate impasses and ultimately moves the parties to some

resolution of differences in their positions. However, since police
strikes are illegal, one can imagine an employer in a DTB environment

6

"bargaining't but not conceding to any union demands since the threat of a

strike may be significantly dampened. By 1978, fourteen states had
enacted some form of compulsory interest arbitration statutes for police

negotiations. These environments form the fourth law category (ARB).
Under such a statute, police labor organizations need not rely on the
final consent of the public employer to determine the terms and conditions of their employment, but rather a neutral third party has power to

arbitrate contract terms. If employees perceive that this shift in final
decision making authority enhances the opportunity for securing greater
wage gains, employees would have an additional stimulus for forming an

employee organization. What limited empirical evidence there is on the
10

impact of arbitration on salaries provides some support for this claim.
In any case, as long as employees perceive the potential for such an
impact of arbitration, this could be enough to stimulate union growth.
These categories are not separated by well-defined boundaries.

Certain states, for example Maine, provide a degree of binding arbitration, but the arbitrator's decision is only advisory with respect to

salaries and wages.11 Since the hypothesized relationship between the
ARB variable and unionization is based on expectations about increased
salary growth under arbitration, statutes like Maine's are kept in the
DTB without arbitration category.

Furthermore, these categories do not capture differences in state

laws regarding strike penalties. The New York statute penalizes striking
public employees two-for-one in pay (the loss of a day's pay for not
working and an additional penalty of a day's pay for striking

illegally).12 Wisconsin, in contrast, fines an employee ten dollars per

day.13 Variables describing these statutory penalties would be important

7

controls in unionization equations if the penalties not only reduce the
likelihood of a strike, but also the impact of a strike on recognition

once it has begun. However, these strike penalties are not consistently
enforced and therefore inaccurate measures of the actual penalties. In
retrospective telephone Interviews with representatives from the 52
police departments that had recognition strikes (RECOGB =

1),

none

reported any monetary or jail-term penalties being levied against strik-

ing police. Still, if the threat of these penalties helps to end recognition strikes before recognition is obtained, these controls would be

important.

14

.

.

.

Still, the four categories of laws that will be included in

the unionization equations have been shown to be critical determinants of
police unionization, and are therefore important control variables in the
union probability equation.
Other Controls

Besides the categorical law variables, several additional control
variables are included in the unionization equation that might influence

police unionization. Here, state-level variables include four geographic
region dummy variables (Northeast, North Central, South, and West), the
percentage of a state's non-agricultural work force who are public
employees, and the percentage of a state's private sector nonagricultural

work force that is unionized. The region controls and the percent union
variable will indicate how favorable the climate is toward unionization.
If patterns in the locus of public sector unionization parallel those in
the private sector, one would expect lower rates of unionization among

southern municipalities. The percent union variable is expected to
increase unionization rates. High levels of private sector unionism
should correspond to higher area wages and may increase the expectations

8

about a reasonable wage increase. If police in environments with higher
levels of private sector unionism do have such expectations, they may be

more likely to unionize in an effort to obtain higher wages. The relationship of the percentage of the state workforce in public employment to

police unionization is less clear. Where a greater proportion of a
statets workforce is in public employment, a greater degree of acceptance

of unionism may have been fostered. Conversely, the taxpaying public may
find it more important to be represented by public managers who will
oppose unionism (and keep labor costs down) where there are relatively
more public employees.

Several municipal—level control variables are available for a large
proportion of the municipalities in the sample: population, per capita
income, per capita municipal revenue, central city dummy variable, and
three government-type dummy variables (Council-Nanager, Nayor-Council,
and Commission).15

The population variable acknowledges the importance of unit size in
the unionization process, as larger municipalities will have larger

departments. In studies using data on representation elections in the
private sector, the most common finding is that unit size is negatively

related to union support in certification elections.16 The sign of the
correlation in this public sector sample may be different. The private
sector samples are generally certification elections from the 1970s or
early 1980s more than thirty years after the enactment the the National

Labor Relations Act (NLRA). In the early years of the NLRA, the first
private sector bargaining units to organize may have been relatively

large. Here, with a sample of police departments during the period from

9

1972 to 1978, the study focuses on the process of unionization fairly
soon after any applicable state bargaining laws were enacted.

Ability-to-pay variables (revenue and income) might indicate an
increase in the public employerts ability to satisfy the employees in
different municipal departments, including the police department, vying

for a share of the municipal budget. In this way, managers in wealthier
cities and towns might be better able to avoid unionization. Conversely,
the incentive to unionize may be greater where municipal revenues are

larger. A priori, the direction of the correlation between these
ability-to-pay measures is ambiguous.

Central cities may be associated with relatively high area wages, a
greater degree of private sector unionization, and perhaps more hazardous

duties for its police. If these forces make police more likely to
consider unionization, this variable will cause an upward shift in the

union hazard function. Finally, the degree of bureaucratization of
different government structures might affect the responsiveness of an
employer to employee desires, so that certain government structures might
be more highly correlated with the probability of municipal unionism.

Estimating Equation
To isolate the impact of the RECOGA or RECOGB variables on unionization, a binary logistic equation is estimated:

1

Pr(UNION.it) =

1+e
where Pr(UNION.) is the probability that municipal department i
unionizes in period t and

represents a vector of control variables

that includes either RECOGA or RECOGB in addition to the other

10

state-level and municipal-level characteristics described above. This
specification is used to overcome the difficulty that ordinary least
squares regression has in modeling the binary unionization outcome, as
OLS produces inefficient estimates and predictions, possibly outside the
0-1 range by forcing a normal structure on the error term.

The success of recognition strikes in stimulating police unionization is judged in two different ways that lead to analysis of samples

with different constructions. First, if unionization occurs after the
strike but in the same calendar year as the strike, the recognition
strike almost certainly played a critical role in the process of union-

ization. To test for the relationship between recognition strikes and
unionization within the same year, a panel consisting of nonunion munici-

pal police departments is created for each year from 1972 to 1978. The
1972 panel consists of 579 nonunion police departments. The number of

nonunion police departments decreases each year. For 1978, the panel
consists of 369 nonunion departments. Across the seven years, the sample
for this pooled cross-section sample consists of 3,246 department-years.
It may be misleading to judge the success of the recognition strikes
in stimulating unionization by whether a nonunion police department

unionizes in the same calendar as its strike. A recognition strike may
not lead immediately to unionization, but contribute indirectly to

unionization in some later time period. Therefore, a single crosssection sample is also analyzed. In this complementary analysis, there
is only one observation for each of the 579 municipalities that enter

1972 with a nonunion police department. RECOGA and RECOGB equal one if
those variables equal one in any of the years in the pooled analysis.

11

The dependent UNION variable equals one if by 1978 the police had union-

ized. In this analysis, then, a strike will be considered to have played
a role in the unionization process, if the police organize in any year
after they went on strike.
III. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

Before presenting the parameters estimated in the logit equation,
several statistics are presented to indicate the frequency of recognition

strikes (according to the RECOGA and RECOGB definitions). The RECOGA
frequencies are given in Table 1A by year and by type of law. Since the
number of nonunion municipalities may vary across the different legal
environments, strikes as a percentage of all nonunion municipalities in

the given law category are also given in parentheses. The frequencies
for all strikes by nonunion police departments (i.e., RECOGB

1) are

presented in Table lB. Of the 52 strikes by nonunion police departments
in the six years for which complete data are available, 22 were reported

as primarily being for recognition. Only 1 of these occurred in an
environment with a duty-to-bargain provision. According to the percentages given in the last column, nonunion municipalities in BP or No Law
environments were somewhat more likely to experience a RECOGA or RECOGE

strike. (The denominator for these percentages in the last column is the
total number of nonunion municipalities in that law category in 1972).
In the analysis to follow, the unionization rate among these municipalities with police strikes is compared to the rate of unionization among
other municipal police departments in the sample.

When the logistic unionization equation is estimated for the pooled
1972-1978 sample,17 the parameters presented in columns (1) and (2) of

12

Table 1A: Recognition Strikes By Nonunion Police Departments (RECOGA), 1972-1978
(Strikes as Percentage of Nonunion Nunicipalities in Parentheses)

YEAR
Type of
Bargaining Law

1972

1973

1975

1976

1977

1978 All years

1.NoLaw

2
1
1
0
1
3
8
(.010) (.005) (.005) (.000) (.005) (.015) (.039)

2.BP

2
1
2
5
2
1
13
(.011) (.006) (.014) (.037) (.016) (.009) (.071)

3.DTB

0
1
0
0
0
0
1
(.000) (.012) (.000) (.000) (.000) (.000) (.010)

4.ARB

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(.000) (.000) (.000) (.000) (.000) (.000) (.000)

5.TOTAL

4
3
3
5
4
3
22
(.007) (.006) (.007) (.012) (.008) (.011) (.038)

13

Table 1B: All Strikes By Nonunion Police Departments (RECOGB), 1972-1978
(Strikes as Percentage of Nonunion Municipalities in Parentheses)

YEAR
Type of
Bargaining Law

1972

1973

1975

1976

1977

1978 All years

1.NoLaw

2
3
2
6
3
24
(.039) (.010) (.015) (.010) (.015) (.031) (.116)

2.BP

5
7
2
4
21
(.011) (.006) (.035) (.051) (.016) (.035) (.115)

3.DTB

0
1
1
1
4
(.000) (.012) (.000) (.020) (.024) (.024) (.041)

4.ARB

0
0
1
0
0
3
(.022) (.000) (.000) (.024) (.000) (.000) (.032)

5. TOTAL

4
8
6
11
11
52
(.021) (.007) (.018) (.026) (.015) (.030) (.090)

8

2

0

1

1

2

12

14

Table 2 are obtained. When the "cross-sectiontt sample with only one
observation per municipality is considered, the column (3) and (4)
parameters are estimated.

When RECOGA is used to define the presence of a recognition strike,
one observes that these strikes have no discernible impact on the process

of obtaining recognition. Interestingly, when any strike by a nonunion
police department is considered to be a recognition strike (i.e., RECOGB
1), one observes in columns (2) and (4) that these nonunion police

departments are less likely to obtain union recognition. Clearly, the
difference between the RECOGA and RECOGB coefficients may well be attrib-

utable to a selectivity bias. Specifically, the additional municipalities included as RECOGB strikes that are not a part of the RECOGA group
are police departments that struck but that did not report recognition to

be the principal issue. One would clearly expect that RECOGB strikes to
be less likely to have a positive correlation with subsequent unioniza-

tion than do RECOGA strikes. In light of the insignificant coefficients
on the RECOGA variable in columns (1) and (3), the negative coefficients
on RECOGB in columns (2) and (4) are not surprising.

While a more thorough investigation of the other correlates of
police union growth over a longer time period are reported elsewhere in a
related study,18 the results obtained from these logistic equations for
the 1972 to 1978 period corroborate results in the previous studies.
Specifically, the bargaining law variables have the largest impact on

police unionization. The logistic coefficients from the column (1)
specification on the ARB, DTB, and BP variables are respectively: 6.136;

4.052; and 2.678. All are different from zero at the .01 level of

15

Table 2: The Impact of Recognition Strikes on Police Unionization, 1972-1978
Estimates from Logistic Equations

observations

Independent Variables
1. Recognition Strike
a. RECOGA
b. RECOGB

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

3246

3246

579

579

.469
(.605)
--

-1.308*

.074
(.629)
--

(.600)

2. Other State and Municipal
Characteristics
-2 *

log-likelihood

_1.960*
(.632)

b

b

b

b

2235.5

2230.2

469.2

457.0

a. assymptotically normal standard errors in parentheses
b. other control variables are: three region dummy variables; the percentage of private sector workers in a state that are unionized; the
percentage of workers in a state in public employment; population;
per capita income and revenue; central city status; and two governmenttype dummy variables.

*significant at .01 level

16

significance. The difference between the ARB

and

DTB parameters is

judged to be significant. This finding is different from that obtained
in the study that investigates the impact of the laws on police union

growth over a longer time period. The difference in the results may be
attibutable to the larger sample and longer time period considered in the

previous study.19 Among other variables, one observes that Southern
municipalities are significantly less likely to unionize than those in
other regions, while Northeastern municipalities exhibit a significantly

higher rate of unionization than other municipalities. Additionally,
large, urban cities are much more likely to unionize during the 1972 to
1978 period as judged by the logit coefficients on the population and
central city control variables.

Recognition Strikes Within Different Law Categories
It may be possible that interactive effects between recognition

strikes and other variables exist. A likely candidate for such interactive effects with recognition strikes are the law variables. Specifical—
ly, when there are legal provisions guaranteeing police bargaining
rights, recognition strikes may be more likely to lead to unionization.

However, many cells in the expanded set of dummy variables have so few
observations that there is no variation along the dimension of the

dependent variable. For example, the only RECOGA strike in a DTB envirormient resulted in unionization. Therefore, maximum likelihood logistic

equations do not converge. Still, simple unionization rates for municipalities with and without police recognition strikes within each law
category can be compared to gain some insight into this hypothesis.

Table 3 presents the unionization rates among municipalities with
RECOGA strikes and the rates among those without such strikes within each

17

law category. For municipalities in states without laws, only one of the
eight recognition strikes eventually led to recognition by 1978. However, the overall rate of unionization among all other NO LAW municipalities is even lower (11/198 =

.056).

RECOGA strikes, as described in

Table 1B, are virtually nonexistent in either DTB or in ARB environments,
underscoring the results of previous research which suggest that laws
that contain a duty-to-bargain provision reduce strike propensities

dramatically. In the BP law category, the rate of unionization between
1972 and 1978 is slightly lower among municipalities with RECOGA strikes
(i.e., 4/13 = .308) than among those without recognition strikes (64/169
=

.379).

None of the differences in the percentages in any category of

law is significant according to a t-test. The similarity in the unionization rates for municipalities with and without strikes across all law
categories presented in line 5 of Table 3 again reflects the insignificant coefficient on the RECOGA variable in Table 2.
IV. CONCLUSION

This paper documents a greater propensity for municipalities without

bargaining laws (NO LAW = 1) and with weak bargaining laws (BP = 1) to
engage in recognition strikes than do cities in states with some duty-tobargain provision (DTB = 1 or ARB =

1).

Recognition strikes, resorted to

more often where bargaining laws are weak or nonexistent, do not increase
the probability that municipal police will obtain recognition from their
employers.

18

Table 3: Rates of Unionization for Municipalities With and Without
Recognition Strikes By Type of Law 1972-1978

Type of Law

Unionization Rates Among
Municipalities With Strikes

Unionization
Rate Among
Municipalities
Without Strikes

(--)

.822

(74/90)

1.000

(1/1)

.567

(55/97)

3. BP

.308

(4/13)

.379 (64/169)

4. NO LAW

.125

(1/8)

.056 (11/198)

5. TOTAL

.273

(6/22)

1. ARB
2. DTB

.368 (204/554)

19

Discussions with representatives from the fifty-two departments that
went on strike provide additional insights and suggestions for future

research. As mentioned in Section II, these discussions revealed that in
no case were fines or penalties levied against striking police. Furthermore, in only one case was there a report of police being replaced by

municipal managers. The legal sanctions against strikes and the ability
of managers to replace public employees who strike illegally represent
two key forces that influence the ability of public employees to achieve

their goals (here, to obtain recognition) by striking. Additional
research on the existence of different statutory penalties against
strikes, even if they are not used, would provide insights on whether the

threats of the penalties influence strike activity. In the context of
this study, if the threat of certain penalties reduces the duration of
strikes,20 the existence of penalties may make strikes less effective

weapons for employees. The replacement of public employees who go on
strike again raises the issue of how elastic the demand for labor is in

public sector occupations. While some estimates of the elasticity of
demand for public sector workers do exist,21 further research on the
ability of public sector managers to find alternative ways to provide
services in the short run would also yield greater understanding on the
potential consequence of public sector strikes.

20

FOOTNOTES

1. Saltzman, Gregory, "Bargaining Laws as a Cause and Consequence of
Teacher Unionism," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 38,
no. 3 (April, 1985), pp. 335-351.
2. Ichniowski, Casey, "Public Sector Union Growth and Bargaining Laws:
A Proportional Hazards Approach with Time-Varying Covariates," NBER
Working Paper, (January, 1986).
3. Ichniowski, Casey, "Arbitration and Police Bargaining: Prescriptions
for the Blue Flue," Industrial Relations, vol. 21, No. 2, (Spring,
1982), Pp. 158—159.

4. Only in rare circumstances are police strikes, which are the focus
of this study, not illegal. In Wisconsin, where an interest arbitration mechanism exists, police strikes would be legal if both
municipal management and police agreed not to submit their dispute
to arbitration. In occupations other than the protective services,
strikes are somewhat less likely to be illegal. For the legal
sanctions against teachers strikes, see Hirsch, Werner Z., "AntiStrike Laws and Their Effects on Work Stoppages by Public School
Teachers" (unpublished manuscript), (October, 1985).
5. Wellington, Harry and Ralph Winter, Unions and the Cities (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1971), p. 30.

6. Freeman, Richard B., Casey Ichniowski and Harrison Lauer, "Collec
tive Bargaining Laws and Threat Effects of Unionism in the Determination of Police Compensation," National Bureau of Economic Research
no. 1878 (March 1985), p. 6.
7. International City Management Association, Municipal Yearbook, 1978
(Washington, D.C.: ICMA, 1978).
8. This information is reported on BLS Form No. 6003.
9. Aggregate statistics on public sector strikes from this survey
appear in volumes from: U.S. Department of Commerce and U.S. Department of Labor,
Labor-Management Relations in State and Local Governments (U.S.
Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C.).
10. For cross-section estimates of the impact of arbitration statutes,
see Olson, Craig, "The Impact of Arbitration on the Wages of
Firefighters," Industrial Relations (Fall, 1980), vol. 19, no. 13,
pp. 325-339. For more qualified support of the positive effect of
arbitration on salaries, see Feuille, Peter and John Delaney,
"Collective Bargaining, Interest Arbitration, and Police Salaries,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review (forthcoming).

21

11. U.S. Department of Labor. Summary of Public Sector Labor
Relations, 1979. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1979.
12.

Ibid.

13. Wisconsin Statutes. Ch. 111, Sec. 11.70, sub 4, ch. 3 (1959: last
amendment effective June 7, 1978).
14. The recent results reported in Hirsch (see footnote #4, supra)
indicate that the existence of certain statutory penalties reduce
the duration of teacher strikes. The analysis here is currently
being extended to incorporate an additional set of variables on
penalties against police strikes to see if the existence of these
penalties influences the probability that a strike by nonunion
police will lead to recognition.

15. Municipal Control variables are available from International City
Managers Association, "Master Code" Data Tape (Washington, D.C.
I.C.M.A., 1978). Government type, municipal revenue, per capita
income, population and department size also appear in the published
volume I.C.N.A. Municipal Yearbook, 1978.
16. See for example Rose, Joseph, "What Factors Influence Union Representation Elections?" Monthly Labor Review, vol. 95 (October 1972),
pp. 49-51; Chaison, Gary, "Unit Size and Union Success in Representation Elections," Monthly Labor Review, vol. 96 (February, 1973),
pp. 51-52; or Cooke, William, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union
Certification Elections," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
vol. 36 (April 1983), pp. 402-414.

17. Even though only the October 1974 through December 1974 can be
identified with the exact municipality where the strike occurred, an
entire panel for 1974 is included in the pooled cross-section
sample, since aggregate data indicate that only three recognition
strikes occurred during 1974. It is therefore assumed that, even if
these three municipalities were in the data set, failure to identify
these few cases would not alter the results appreciably. In fact,
when the 1974 panel is deleted from the pooled cross-section analysis, estimated paramters are nearly identical to the ones obtained
in Table 2, columns (1) and (2). For aggregate data on police
strikes for 1974, see U.S. Department of Commerce and U.S. Department of Labor,
Labor-Management Relations in State and Local Governments, 1974,
(U.S.G.P.O.: Washington, D.C., 1976).
18. Ichniowski, Casey, "Public Sector Union Growth and Bargaining Laws:
A Proportional Hazard Approach with Time-Varying Treatments," NBER
Working Paper (January, 1986).

19. Ibid., pp. 21-22.
20. For research on this topic for the occupation of teachers, see
Hirsch (footnote #4, supra).

22

21. See Ashenfelter, Orley, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, "The Demand for
Labor in the Public Sector," in Labor in the Public and Nonprofit
Sectors, edited by Daniel S. Hamermesh (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1975); and Ehrenberg, Ronald G., "The Demand for
State and Local Government Employees," American Economic Review 63
(June, 1973), pp. 366-379.

