NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DID SO MANY PEOPLE MAKE SO MANY EX POST BAD DECISIONS?
THE CAUSES OF THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS
Christopher L. Foote
Kristopher S. Gerardi
Paul S. Willen
Working Paper 18082
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18082

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

This paper was prepared for the conference, “Rethinking Finance: New Perspectives on the Crisis,”
organized by Alan Blinder, Andy Lo and Robert Solow and sponsored by the Russell Sage and Century
Foundations. Thanks to Alberto Bisin, Ryan Bubb, Scott Frame, Jeff Fuhrer, Andreas Fuster, Anil
Kashyap, Andreas Lehnert, and Bob Triest for helpful discussions and comments. The opinions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not represent the official positions of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston or Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Christopher L. Foote, Kristopher S. Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Did So Many People Make So Many Ex Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure
Crisis
Christopher L. Foote, Kristopher S. Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 18082
May 2012
JEL No. D14,D18,D53,D82,G01,G02,G38
ABSTRACT
We present 12 facts about the mortgage crisis. We argue that the facts refute the popular story that
the crisis resulted from finance industry insiders deceiving uninformed mortgage borrowers and investors.
Instead, we argue that borrowers and investors made decisions that were rational and logical given
their ex post overly optimistic beliefs about house prices. We then show that neither institutional features
of the mortgage market nor financial innovations are any more likely to explain those distorted beliefs
than they are to explain the Dutch tulip bubble 400 years ago. Economists should acknowledge the
limits of our understanding of asset price bubbles and design policies accordingly.

Christopher L. Foote
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Research Department, T-8
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
chris.foote@bos.frb.org
Kristopher S. Gerardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
kristopher.gerardi@atl.frb.org

Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210-2204
and NBER
willen968@gmail.com

1

Introduction

More than four years after defaults and foreclosures began to rise, economists are still debating the ultimate origins of the U.S. mortgage crisis. Losses on residential real estate touched
off the largest financial crisis in decades. Why did so many people—including homebuyers
and the purchasers of mortgage-backed securities—make so many decisions that turned out
to be disastrous ex post?
The dominant explanation claims that well-informed mortgage insiders used the securitization process to take advantage of uninformed outsiders. The typical narrative follows a
loan from a mortgage broker through a series of Wall Street intermediaries to an ultimate
investor. According to this story, depicted graphically in the top panel of Figure 1, deceit
starts with a mortgage broker, who convinces a borrower to take out a mortgage that initally appears affordable. Unbeknownst to the borrower, the interest rate on the mortgage
will reset to a higher level after a few years, and the higher monthly payment will force the
borrower into default.
The broker knows that the mortgage is hard wired to explode but does not care, because
the securitization process means that he will be passing this mortgage on to someone else.
Specifically, an investment banker buys the loan for inclusion in a mortgage-backed security.
In constructing this instrument, the banker intentionally uses newfangled, excessively complex financial engineering so that the investor cannot figure out the problematic nature of
the loan. The investment banker knows that the investor is likely to lose money but he does
not care, because it is not his money. When the loan explodes, the borrower loses his home
and the investor loses his money. But the intermediaries who collected substantial fees to set
up the deal have no “skin in the game” and therefore suffer no losses.
This insider/outsider interpretation of the crisis motivated an Academy Award-winning
documentary, appropriately titled Inside Job. It has also motivated policies designed to
prevent a future crisis, including requirements that mortgage lenders retain some skin in the
game for certain mortgages in the future.
In this paper, we lay out 12 facts about the mortgage market during the boom years
and argue that they refute much of the insider/outsider explanation of the crisis. Borrowers
did get adjustable-rate mortgages but the resets of those mortgages did not cause the wave
of defaults that started the crisis in 2007. Indeed, to a first approximation, “exploding”
mortgages played no role in the crisis at all. Arguments that deceit by investment bankers
sparked the crisis are also hard to support. Compared to most investments, mortgagebacked securities were highly transparent and their issuers willingly provided a great deal of
information to potential purchasers. These purchasers could and did use this information to

1

measure the amount of risk in mortgage investments and their analysis was accurate, even
ex post. Mortgage intermediaries retained lots of skin in the game. In fact, it was the losses
of these intermediaries—not mortgage outsiders—that nearly brought down the financial
system in late 2008. The biggest winners of the crisis, including hedge fund managers John
Paulson and Michael Burry, had little or no previous experience with mortgage investments
until some strikingly good bets on the future of the U.S. housing market earned them billions
of dollars.
Why then did borrowers and investors make so many bad decisions? We argue that any
story consistent with the 12 facts must have overly optimistic beliefs about house prices
at its center. The lower panel of Figure 1 summarizes this view. Rather than drawing
a sharp demarcation between insiders and outsiders, it depicts a “bubble fever” infecting
both borrowers and lenders. If both groups believe that house prices would continue to rise
rapidly for the foreseeable future, then it is not surprising to find borrowers stretching to
buy the biggest houses they could and investors lining up to give them the money. Rising
house prices generate large capital gains for home purchasers. They also raise the value of
the collateral backing mortgages, and thus reduce or eliminate credit losses for lenders. In
short, higher house price expectations rationalize the decisions of borrowers, investors, and
intermediaries—their embrace of high leverage when purchasing homes or funding mortgage
investments, their failure to require rigorous documentation of income or assets before making loans, and their extension of credit to borrowers with histories of not repaying debt. If
this alternative theory is true, then securitization was not a cause of the crisis. Rather, securitization merely facilitated transactions that borrowers and investors wanted to undertake
anyway.
The bubble theory therefore explains the foreclosure crisis as a consequence of distorted
beliefs rather than distorted incentives. A growing literature in economics—inspired in part
by the recent financial crisis—is trying to learn precisely how financial market participants
form their beliefs and what can happen when these beliefs become distorted.1 The idea that
distorted beliefs are responsible for the crisis has also received some attention in the popular
press. In one analysis of the crisis, New York Times columnist Joe Nocera referenced the
famous Dutch tulip bubble of the 1630s to argue that a collective mania about house prices,
rather than individual malfeasance on the part of mortgage industry insiders, may be the
best explanation for why the foreclosure crisis occurred:
Had there been a Dutch Tulip Inquiry Commission nearly four centuries ago, it
1
Some examples of this work include Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010), Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011
[online proof]), Barberis (2011), Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2012), Simsek (2012), Fuster, Laibson,
and Mendel (2010), Geanakoplos (2009), and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011).

2

would no doubt have found tulip salesmen who fraudulently persuaded people to
borrow money they could never pay back to buy tulips. It would have criticized
the regulators who looked the other way at the sleazy practices of tulip growers.
It would have found speculators trying to corner the tulip market. But centuries
later, we all understand that the roots of tulipmania were less the actions of
particular Dutchmen than the fact that the entire society was suffering under the
delusion that tulip prices could only go up. That’s what bubbles are: they’re
examples of mass delusions.
Was it really any different this time? In truth, it wasn’t. To have so many people
acting so foolishly required the same kind of delusion, only this time around, it
was about housing prices (Nocera 2011).
In both popular accounts and some academic studies, the inside job explanation and the
bubble theory are often commingled. Analysts often write that misaligned incentives in the
mortgage industry (a key part of the inside job explanation) contributed to an expansion of
mortgage credit that sent house prices higher (a key part of the bubble explanation). We
believe that the two explanations are conceptually distinct, and that the bubble story is a
far better explanation of what actually happened. To put this another way, according to the
conventional narrative, the bubble was a by-product of misaligned incentives and financial
innovation. As we argue in Section 3, neither the facts nor economic theory draw an obvious
causal link from underwriting and financial innovation to bubbles.
No one doubts that the availability of mortgage credit expanded during the housing
boom. In particular, no one doubts that many borrowers received mortgages for which they
would have never qualified before. The only question is why the credit expansion took place.
Economists and policy analysts have blamed a number of potential culprits for the credit
expansion, but we will show that the facts exonerate the usual suspects. As noted above,
some analysts claim that the credit expansion occurred because of improper incentives inherent in the so-called originate-to-distribute model of mortgage lending. Yet mortgage market
participants had been buying and selling U.S. mortgages for more than a century without
much trouble. In a similar vein, some authors blame the credit expansion on the emergence
of nontraditional mortgages, like option ARMs and reduced documentation loans, but these
products had been around for many years before the housing boom occurred. Other writers
blame the credit expansion on the federal government, which allegedly pushed a too-lax lending model on the mortgage industry. But government involvement in mortgage lending had
been massive throughout the postwar era without significant problems. In contrast to these
these explanations for the credit expansion, the facts suggest that the expansion occurred
simply because people believed that housing prices would keep going up—the defining char3

acteristic of an asset bubble. Bubbles do not need securitization, government involvement, or
nontraditional lending products to get started. Bubbles in many other assets have occurred
without any of these things—not only tulips in seventeenth-century Holland, but also shares
of the South Sea Company in eighteenth-century England, U.S. equities and Florida land in
the 1920s, even Beanie Babies and technology stocks in the 1990s.2 As the housing bubble
inflated it encouraged lenders to extend credit to borrowers who had been constrained in the
past, since higher house prices would ensure repayment of the loans. Much of this credit was
channeled to subprime borrowers by securitized credit markets, but this does not mean that
securitization “caused” the crisis. Instead, expectations of higher house prices made investors
more willing to use both securitized markets and nontraditional mortgage products—because
those markets and products delivered the biggest profits to investors as housing prices rose.
Another reason to keep the two explanations distinct is that they suggest very different
agendas for real-world regulators and academic economists. If the inside job story is true,
then prevention of a future crisis requires regulations to ensure that intermediaries inform
borrowers and investors of relevant facts and that incentives in the securitization process
are properly aligned. But if the problem was some collective self-fulfilling mania, then such
regulations will not work. If house prices are widely expected to rise rapidly, then warning
borrowers that their future payments will rise will have no effect on their decisions. Similarly,
intermediaries will be only too willing to keep some skin in the game if they expect rising
prices to eliminate credit losses. For economists, the bubble theory implies that research
should focus on a more general attempt to understand how beliefs are formed about the
prices of long-lived assets. Gaining this understanding is an enormous challenge for the
economics profession. From tulips to tech stocks, outbreaks of optimism have appeared
repeatedly, but no robust theory has emerged to explain these episodes. As a telling example,
at the peak of the housing boom economic theory could not provide academic researchers
with clear predictions of where prices were going or if they were poised to fall. Scientific
ignorance about what causes asset bubbles implies that policymakers should focus on making
the housing finance system as robust as possible to significant price volatility, rather than
trying to correct potentially misaligned incentives.
The multitude of questions suggested by the financial crisis could never be answered by
one single theory—or in one single paper. For example, as we discuss below, the top-rated
tranches of Wall Street’s mortgage-backed securities performed much better than the toprated tranches of its collateralized debt obligations, another type of structured security. This
2

The classic reference on tulipmania is MacKay (2003 [1841]). A contrarian view on tulipmania is found
in Garber (2000), which reviews data on tulip prices and argues that they can be justified by fundamentals
during this period. The book takes a similar stance on other early bubbles, including the South Sea Bubble
(1720) and the Mississippi Bubble (1719-1720).

4

discrepancy occurred even though both types of securities were ultimately collateralized by
subprime mortgages, and even though both types of securities were constructed by the same
investment banks. We do not believe that securitization alone caused the crisis but, by
channeling money from investors to borrowers with ruthless efficiency, it may have allowed
speculation on a scale that would have been impossible to sustain with a less sophisticated
financial system. As economists, we believe that the ultimate answers to questions like these
will involve information and incentives. But we also believe that that an examination of the
facts that we present about the mortgage market do rule out the most common informationand-incentives story invoked to explain the crisis—that poor incentives caused mortgage
industry insiders to take advantage of misinformed outsiders.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the 12 facts about the U.S. mortgage
market that are critical in rationalizing borrower and lender decisions. Section 3 relates
these facts to various economic theories about the crisis, and Section 4 concludes with some
implications for policy makers.

2

Twelve Facts About the Mortgage Market

Fact 1: Resets of adjustable-rate mortgages did not cause the foreclosure crisis
One theory for why borrowers took out loans they could not repay is that their lenders
misled them by granting them loans that initially appeared affordable but became unaffordable later on. In particular, analysts have pointed to the large number of adjustable-rate
mortgages (ARMs) originated in the years immediately preceding the crisis, attributing the
rise in delinquencies and foreclosures to the “payment shocks” associated with ARM-rate
adjustments. Borrowers, they argued, had either not realized that their payments would
rise or had been assured that they could refinance to lower-rate mortgages when the resets
occurred.
The “exploding ARM” theory has played a central role in narratives about the crisis
since 2007, when problems with subprime mortgages first gained national attention. In April
2007, Sheila Bair, then the chair of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, testified to
Congress that “ ‘[m]any subprime borrowers could avoid foreclosure if they were offered more
traditional products such as 30-year fixed-rate mortgages’ ” (Bair 2007).
Yet the data are not kind to the exploding ARM theory. Figure 2 shows the path of
interest rates and defaults for three vintages of the most problematic type of ARM, socalled subprime 2/28s. These mortgages had fixed interest rates for the first two years, then

5

adjusted to “fully indexed” rates every six months for the loan’s 28 remaining years.3 The
figure shows that, at least for subprime 2/28s, payment shocks did not lead to defaults. The
top left panel depicts interest rates and cumulative defaults for subprime 2/28s originated in
January 2005. For these mortgages, the initial interest rate was 7.5 percent for the first two
years. Two years later, in January 2007, the interest rate rose to 11.4 percent, resulting in a
payment shock of 4 percentage points, or more than 50 percent in relative terms. However,
the lower part of the panel shows that delinquencies for the January 2005 loans did not tick
up when this reset occurred. In fact, the delinquency plot shows no significant problems for
the 2005 borrowers two years into their mortgages when their resets occurred. The top right
panel displays data for 2/28s originated in January 2006. These loans had initial rates of
8.5 percent that reset to 9.9 percent in January 2008. This increase of 1.4 percentage points
results in a relative increase of about 16 percent, one-third the size of the payment shock
for the previous vintage. Yet even though the payment shock for the January 2006 loans
was smaller than that for the 2005 loans, their delinquency rate was higher. Finally, the
worst-performing loans, those originated in January 2007, are depicted in the figure’s bottom
panel. When these loans reset in January 2009, their fully indexed rates were actually lower
than their initial rates. However, the contract on the typical 2/28 mortgage specified that
the interest rate could never go below the initial rate, so for all practical purposes subprime
2/28s from January 2007 were fixed-rate loans. But as the lower part of the panel indicates,
these “fixed-rate” loans had the highest delinquency rates of any vintage shown in the figure.
As many have pointed out, subprime 2/28s were not the only loans with payment shocks.
In 2004 and 2005, lenders originated many nontraditional, or “exotic,” mortgages, which often
had larger payment shocks and which we discuss in more detail below. Table 1 attempts to
quantify the impact of payment shocks across the entire mortgage market by looking at
all foreclosures from 2007 through 2010, regardless of the type of mortgage. The goal is
to determine whether the monthly payments faced by borrowers when they first became
delinquent were higher than the initial monthly payments on their loans. The top panel of
this table shows that this is true for only 12 percent of borrowers who eventually lost their
homes to foreclosure. The overwhelming majority of foreclosed borrowers—84 percent—were
making the same payment at the time they first defaulted as when they originated their
loans. A main reason for this high percentage is that fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) account
for 59 percent of the foreclosures between 2007 and 2010.
Table 1 puts an upper bound on the role that deceptively low mortgage payments may
have played in causing the crisis. Basically, it tells us that if we had replaced all of the complex
3
Typically, the fully indexed rate was a fixed amount over some short-term rate, for example 6 percentage
points above the six-month LIBOR.

6

mortgage products with fixed-rate mortgages, we would have prevented at most 12 percent
of the foreclosures during this time period. But even 12 percent is a substantial overestimate,
because the table shows that fixed-rate borrowers also lost their homes to foreclosure as well.
While FRMs accounted for most defaults, this does not mean that FRMs suffered higher
default rates. In fact, fixed-rate loans defaulted less often than adjustable-rate loans; the
predominance of fixed-rate loans among defaulted mortgages stems from the fact that FRMs
are more common than ARMs. Yet we should not overstate the better performance of fixedrate loans, particularly among subprime borrowers. The bottom panel of Table 1 shows
that 53 percent of subprime ARMs originated between 2005 and 2007 have experienced at
least one 90-day delinquency. The corresponding figure for FRMs is 48 percent, a difference
of only 5 percentage points.4 Even this small difference does not indicate that subprime
ARMs were worse products than FRMs. The lack of any relationship between the timing
of the initial delinquency and the timing of the reset has led most researchers to conclude
that ARMs performed worse than FRMs because they attracted less creditworthy borrowers,
not because of something inherent in the ARM contract itself. Even if we did believe that
the ARM-versus-FRM performance difference was a causal effect and not a selection effect,
almost half of borrowers with subprime FRMs became seriously delinquent. The terrible
performance of subprime FRMs contradicts the claim of Martin Eakes, the head of the
Center for Responsible Lending, that “exploding ARMs are the single most important factor
causing financial crisis for millions” (Eakes 2007).
Fact 2: No mortgage was “designed to fail”
Some critics of the lending process have argued that the very existence of some types of
mortgages is prima facie evidence that borrowers were misled. These critics maintain that
reduced-documentation loans, loans to borrowers with poor credit histories, loans with no
downpayments, and option ARMs were all “designed to fail,” so no reasonable borrower would
willingly enter into such transactions.5 In fact, the large majority of these loans succeeded
for both borrower and lender alike.
In Figure 3, we graph failure rates for four categories of securitized nonprime loans. Along
the horizontal axis are years of origination, and the figure defines failure as being at least
4

To some extent, this 5 percent difference understates the performance differential among subprime ARMs
and FRMs because originations of subprime FRMs were concentrated in the later vintages of loans which had
the highest default rates. We comment on this concentration below. Also, a performance gap between subprime FRMs and ARMs is robust to a more sophisticated analysis that controls for observable characteristics
(Foote et al. 2008).
5
The phrase “designed to fail” appears in speeches by presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, Senator
Charles Schumer of New York, and press releases from prominent attorneys general including Martha Coakley
of Massachusetts and Catherine Cortez Masto of Nevada.

7

60 days delinquent two years after the loan was originated.6 The figure shows that the vast
majority of loans originated from 2000 through 2005 were successful. For example, the lower
left panel shows that in 2007, after the housing market had begun to sour, only 10 percent of
the borrowers who took out low- or no-documentation mortgages in 2005 were having serious
problems. Additionally, loans requiring no downpayments (top right panel) and even “risklayered” loans (bottom right panel) originated before 2006 also display failure rates that are
well under 10 percent. Loans in the upper left panel were made to borrowers with credit
scores below 620, who typically had a history of serious debt repayment problems. Yet after
two years, more than 80 percent of low-scoring borrowers who originated loans before 2006
had either avoided seriously delinquency or had repaid their loans. Given their spotty credit
histories, the performance of these borrowers indicates remarkable success, not failure.
Some might argue that the loans in Figure 3 succeeded only because the borrowers were
able to refinance or sell. But it would be wrong to classify prepayments as failures. In many
cases, the simple fact of making 12 consecutive monthly payments allowed the borrower to
qualify for a lower-cost loan. In such cases, the refinance is a success for the borrower, who
gets a loan with better terms, as well as the lender, who is fully repaid.
In the end, the idea that subprime or Alt-A loans were designed to fail does not fit the
facts. This finding should not be surprising. Marketing products that do not work is usually a
bad business plan, even in the short run, whether one is producing mortgages or motorcycles.
The fact that failure rates for all the loans in Figure 3 rose at about the same time suggests
that these mortgages were not designed to fail. Instead, they were not designed to withstand
the stunning nationwide fall in house prices that began in 2006. We will return to this theme
later.
Fact 3: There was little innovation in mortgage markets in the 2000s
Another popular claim is that the housing boom saw intense innovation in mortgage
markets. According to the conventional wisdom, lenders began to offer types of mortgages
that they never had before, including loans with no downpayments, loans with balances that
increased over time,7 and loans that lacked rigorous documentation of borrower income and
assets. In more nuanced versions of the story, lenders did not innovate so much as expand
the market for nontraditional mortgages. As Allen Fishbein of the Consumer Federation of
America described these nontraditional mortgages in Congressional testimony:
Traditionally, these types of loans were niche products that were offered to upscale
6

Our choice of the two-year period does not influence our results. Figure 2 shows that default rates on
subprime loans did not spike after two years.
7
The balances of a traditional “amortizing” mortgage decreases over time, because the borrower pays both
interest and part of the outstanding principal each month.

8

borrowers with particular cash flow needs or to those expecting to remain in their
homes for a short time (Fishbein 2006).
Figure 3 shows that originations of riskier loans increased dramatically from 2002 to 2006
and commentators point to such data as evidence of large-scale innovation.
The historical record paints a different picture. It is approximately true to say that prior
to 1981, virtually all mortgages were either fixed-rate loans or something close to it.8 Yet
the emergence of nontraditional mortgages still predates the 2000s mortgage boom by many
years. Perhaps the most extreme form of nontraditional mortgage is the “payment-option
ARM,” which allows a borrower to pay less than the interest due on the loan in a given month.
The difference is made up by adding the arrears to the outstanding mortgage balance. This
type of loan was invented in 1980 and approved for widespread use by the Federal Home
Loan Bank Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in 1981 (Harrigan 1981;
Gerth 1981). Large California thrifts subsequently embraced the option ARM, which would
eventually play a central role in the Golden State’s housing market (Guttentag 1984). By
1996, one-third of all originations in California were option ARMs (Stahl 1996); we reproduce
a 1998 advertisement for this product in the left panel of Figure 4. The large volume of
option ARMs belies the claim that this instrument was a niche product. Indeed, the lender
most closely associated with option ARMs, Golden West, made a point of avoiding “upscale”
borrowers. Despite originating almost two-thirds of its loans in California, the typical Golden
West mortgage in 2005 was for less than $400,000 (Savastano 2005).
Some confusion about the growth of option ARMs results from the fact that they were
almost exclusively held in bank portfolios until 2004. The loan was an attractive portfolio
addition because it generated floating-rate interest income and thus eliminated the lender’s
interest-rate risk. At the same time, the option ARM’s flexible treatment of amortization
smoothed out payment fluctuations for the borrower. In any event, even though option ARMs
were available in the 1980s and 1990s, they do not show up in datasets of securitized loans
until 2004.9 Even then, the majority of securitized option ARMs were made in the markets
where they were already common as portfolio loans (Liu 2005).
Another type of nontraditional mortgage, the reduced-documentation loan, also began to
spread in the 1980s; the right panel of Figure 4 shows a 1989 ad for such a loan. By 1990,
Fannie Mae reported that between 30 and 35 percent of the loans it insured were low- and
no-doc loans (Sichelman 1990). Ironically, commentators raised virtually identical concerns
about low-doc lending in the early 1990s as they did in 2005. For example, Lew Sichelman, a
8
One author’s father took out an interest-only adjustable-rate, balloon payment mortgage in 1967 but
that was an exceptional situation.
9
See, for example, Table 4 of Dokko et al. (2009).

9

veteran mortgage industry journalist, wrote in 1990 that “in recent years, lenders, spurred by
competitive pressures and secure in the knowledge that they could peddle questionable loans
to unsuspecting investors on the secondary market, have been approving low- and no-doc
loans with as little as 10 percent down” (Sichelman 1990).
Fact 4: Government policy toward the mortgage market did not change much
from 1990 to 2005
While the conventional wisdom blames the foreclosure crisis on too little government
regulation of the mortgage market, an influential minority believes that government interventions went too far.10 According to this view, policymakers in the 1990s hoped to expand
homeownership, either for its own sake or as a way to combat the effects of rising income
inequality. Consequently, this narrative contends that policymakers allowed lenders to abandon traditional and prudent underwriting guidelines that had worked well for decades. In
reality, government officials talked at length about lending and homeownership in the 1990s
and early 2000s, but actual market interventions were modest. In fact, compared to the
massive federal interventions in the U.S. mortgage market during the immediate postwar
era, government interventions during the recent housing boom were virtually nonexistent.
For a concrete example, consider the size of required downpayments. Morgenson and Rosner (2011) write that because of the Clinton Administration’s emphasis on homeownership:
[I]n just a few short years, all of the venerable rules governing the relationship
between borrower and lender went out the window, starting with the elimination
of the requirements that a borrower put down a substantial amount of cash in a
property (Morgenson and Rosner 2011, p. 3).11
It is true that large downpayments were once required to purchase homes in the United
States. It is also true that the federal government was instrumental in reducing required
downpayments in an effort to expand homeownership. The problem for the bad government
theory is that the timing of government involvement is almost exactly 50 years off. The
key event was the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, better known as the GI Bill, in
which the federal government promised to take a first-loss position equal to 50 percent of
the mortgage balance, up to $2,000, on mortgages originated to returning veterans. The
limits on the Veteran’s Administration (VA) loans were subsequently and repeatedly raised,
while similar guarantees were later added to loans originated through the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA). The top panel of Figure 5 graphs average loan-to-value (LTV) ratios
10

See Morgenson and Rosner (2011) and Rajan (2010) for two leading examples of the genre.
This quotation goes on to claim that requirements to verify income and demonstrate repayment ability
were also reduced.
11

10

for various types of loans, including those with FHA and VA insurance. It shows that
borrowers took advantage of these government programs to buy houses with little or no
money down. By the late 1960s, the average downpayment on a VA loan was around 2
percent. A large fraction of borrowers put down nothing at all. Government involvement
in the early postwar mortgage market was broad; in no sense were FHA and VA mortgages
“niche products.” The bottom panel of Figure 5 shows that together, the FHA and the VA
accounted for almost half of originations in the 1950s before tailing off somewhat in the 1960s.
In contrast to the heavy government involvement in housing during the immediate postwar
era, recent data on LTV ratios suggests no major federal mortgage market interventions
in the 1990s and 2000s. Figure 6 shows combined LTV ratios for purchase mortgages in
Massachusetts from 1990 to 2010, the period when government intervention is supposed to
have caused so much trouble.12 To be sure, the boom years of 2002–2006 saw an increase in
zero-down financing. But the data also show that even before the boom, most borrowers got
loans without needing to post a 20 percent downpayment.13 In particular, Morgenson and
Rosner (2011) point to the Clinton administration’s National Partners in Homeownership
initiative in 1994 as the starting point for an ill-fated credit expansion that led to the crisis.
But inspection of Figure 6 does not support the assertion that underwriting behavior was
significantly changed by that program. The distribution of downpayments is remarkably
stable after 1994. The share of zero-down loans actually falls.14
All told, it is impossible to find any government housing market initiative in recent years
that is remotely comparable to the scope of the GI Bill and FHA’s subsequent expansion. It is
important to stress that the FHA and the VA were widely understood to encourage high-risk
lending to less-qualified borrowers. The delinquency rates on the loans they guaranteed were
several times higher than delinquency rates on conventional loans. But the two government
programs were also considered successful because they enabled lower-income Americans to
own their own homes.15
Fact 5: The originate-to-distribute model was not new
One of the most important motivating principles of the Dodd-Frank Act, passed in 2010
to reduce the chance of future financial crises, was that the originate-to-distribute (OTD)
model of lending shouldered much of the blame for the foreclosure crisis. Congressman Barney
12

Combined LTV ratios, sometimes denoted CLTV ratios, include all mortgages taken out by the homeowner at the time of purchase, including so-called piggyback mortgages.
13
Public records do not allow us to know whether a purchase corresponds to a first-time homebuyer. If it
were possible to focus on those purchases alone, the average downpayment would undoubtedly be even lower
than the average that includes all purchases.
14
Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010) look at data for a broader set of cities and finds similar results.
15
See Herzog and Earley (1970) for a contemporary analysis of default rates on FHA, VA, and conventional
mortgages.

11

Frank, then the chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, put it this way: “ ‘If
I can make a whole bunch of loans and sell the entire right to collect those to somebody
else, at that point I don’t care...whether or not they pay off. We have to prohibit that.’ ”16
The Dodd-Frank Act requires mortgage originators to retain a slice of the credit risk of the
mortgages they generate unless the credit quality of the mortgages is strong enough to earn
an exemption.
Yet the OTD model was central to the U.S. mortgage market for decades before the
financial crisis began. In the immediate postwar era, an important manifestation of the
OTD model was the mortgage company. These firms borrowed money from banks in order
to fund mortgages for sale to outside investors, who often held the mortgages as whole
loans. These lenders also “serviced” the loans on behalf of the investors and received a fixed
percentage of the loan balance every month as compensation. A 1959 National Bureau of
Economic Research study of mortgage companies lists the fundamental features of the OTD
model that would be familiar to modern originators as well:
The modern mortgage company is typically a closely held, private corporation
whose principal activity is originating and servicing residential mortgage loans
for institutional investors. It is subject to a minimum degree of federal or state
supervision, has a comparatively small capital investment relative to its volume
of business, and relies largely on commercial bank credit to finance its operations
and mortgage inventory. Such inventory is usually held only for a short interim
between closing mortgage loans and their delivery to ultimate investors (Klaman
1959, p. 239).
The importance of mortgage companies grew in the second half of the twentieth century. The
top left panel of Figure 7 shows that the market share of mortgage companies was around
20 percent in the 1970s and reached nearly 60 percent by 1995.
A focus on mortgage companies alone understates the role of the OTD model, however.
Starting in the 1970s, the OTD model was adopted by other financial institutions, most
importantly savings and loans (S&Ls), which financed the majority of U.S. residential lending
in the postwar period. S&L’s had historically followed an originate-and-hold model. By the
late 1970s, however, rising interest rates had generated a catastrophic mismatch between the
low interest rates that S&Ls received on their existing mortgages and their current costs of
funds. This mismatch, which would eventually render more than half of S&Ls insolvent,
encouraged thrifts either to turn to adjustable-rate mortgages or to sell the mortgages they
originated to the secondary market. The top right panel of Figure 7 shows that by the
16

Congressman Frank is quoted in Arnold (2009).

12

late 1980s, S&Ls sold almost as many loans as they originated. In other words, most had
adopted the OTD model and had become, for all practical purposes, mortgage companies.
The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows that the decline of the originate-to-hold model was well
underway 30 years before the boom of the 2000s.
Over time, the OTD model evolved. In the 1950s, mortgage companies typically sold
their loans to insurance companies, which kept them on portfolio as whole loans. Starting in
the 1970s, this framework gave way to mortgage-backed securities (MBS), which were largely
guaranteed by Ginnie Mae. The other government-sponsored housing agencies, Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, became dominant players in the early 1980s. This period also saw the
emergence of the private-label securities market, and in the 2000s, the private-label market
grew at the expense of the agency market. However, the institutional framework of the OTD
model remained more or less identical to what it was in the 1950s. Lenders originated loans
and sold them to other institutions. Typically the loans were then serviced by the originating
lender, but other servicing arrangements were also possible.17
Fact 6: MBSs, CDOs, and other “complex financial products” had been widely
used for decades
Another source of potential confusion lies in the distinction between the OTD model and
securitization. Securitization implies originate-to-distribute, but the OTD model existed for
decades before securitization emerged. As noted above, early manifestations of the OTD
model generally featured the sale of whole loans into investor portfolios. Only in the 1970s
and 1980s did Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac began to arrange and/or insure
pass-through securities, whereby investors could buy a pro-rated share of a pool of mortgages.
Private-label securities were also being developed at that time, but the emergence of these
securities proceeded in fits and starts. In 1977, Salomon Brothers arranged the first privatelabel MBS deal, which was considered something of a failure.18 Among other problems,
existing state laws prevented most of the relevant investors from buying the bonds. Issuing
securities through Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac allowed issuers to address these laws, and
the collateralized mortgage obligation (CMO) emerged in the early 1980s as a way to sell an
17
When recounting the history of the OTD model, it is important to distinguish between mortgage brokers
and mortgage bankers. Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil (2011) claim that brokers “issue[d] loans on the bank’s
behalf for commissions but do not bear the long-term consequences of low-quality loans,” but this statement
is incorrect. Brokers, who often have specific knowledge of a local market, can help match borrowers with
lenders, but they do not underwrite or fund mortgages. Rather, mortgage banks, which include mortgage
companies and S&L’s, underwrite and fund loans. These lenders can choose to place a brokered loan in a
security, sell it to another lender, or keep it on portfolio. In short, there is no necessary connection between
brokers and the OTD model; the decision to extend a loan rests entirely with the lender, because the lender
comes up with the money.
18
See Ranieri (1996) for a discussion.

13

array of complex securities with different repayment properties (principal-only, interest-only,
floating-rate notes, fixed-rate notes, and so on) secured by a pool of mortgages. Until the
1986 Tax Reform Act, it remained difficult to construct a complex mortgage deal without
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac’s involvement. But that Act created a financial structure called a
Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit (REMIC), which allowed issuers to create complex
MBSs without the assistance of one of the GSEs.
The emergence of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) was the next step in the securitization of debt. The CDO was invented in the early 1990s as a way for banks to sell the
risk on pools of commercial loans (Tett 2009). Over time, financial institutions realized that
the CDO structure could also be used for pools of risky tranches from securities, including
private-label securities backed by mortgages. In 2000, investment banks began to combine
the lower-rated tranches of mortgage securities, typically subprime asset-backed securities
(ABS), with other forms of securitized debt to create CDOs. The ABS CDO was born.19 As
Cordell, Huang, and Williams (2011) shows, the poor performance of ABS CDOs in the early
2000s was widely blamed on the presence of nonmortgage assets like tranches from car-loan
or credit-card deals, so the ABS CDO deals became dominated by tranches from subprime
ABS. Consequently, as the housing market boomed in the mid-2000s, ABS CDOs became
increasingly pure plays on the subprime mortgage market.
Looking back, a remarkable feature about the boom in securitized lending in the mid2000s is that the institutional and legal framework it required had been in place since at
least the early 1990s, and for some key components much earlier than that. In other words,
what is significant about the evolution of the mortgage market in the 2000s is how little
institutional change took place. As far as the mortgage and mortgage-securities markets
were concerned, there were few legal or institutional changes, and certainly no major ones
in the period immediately preceding the lending boom. It is true that there was dramatic
growth in the use of subprime ABS to fund loans, as well as the use of ABS CDOs to fund
the lower-rated tranches of subprime deals. But this growth did not occur because lenders
and investors had been unable to use those structures earlier. In short, the idea that the
boom in securitization was some exogenous event that sparked the housing boom receives no
support from the institutional history of the American mortgage market.
Fact 7: Mortgage investors had lots of information
One of the pillars of the inside job theory of the mortgage crisis is that mortgage industry
19

In the industry, bonds backed by subprime loans were considered asset-backed securities (ABS) rather
than MBS, because subprime lending began as an alternative to unsecured credit for troubled borrowers.
Thus, as an institutional matter, subprime lending was part of the consumer lending, or ABS market, not
the mortgage, or MBS market.

14

insiders were stingy with information about the securities they structured and sold. In fact,
issuers supplied a great deal of information to potential investors. Simply put, the market
for mortgage investments was awash in information.
To start with, prospectuses for pools of loans provided detailed information on the underlying loans at the time they were originated. This information included the distributions of
the key credit-quality variables, such LTV ratios, documentation status, and borrower credit
scores. More importantly, they provided conditional distributions showing, for example, the
share of borrowers with FICO scores between 600 and 619 or the share of borrowers with
LTV ratios between 95 and 99 percent. In many cases, issuers provided loan-level details in
what was known as a “free writing prospectus.”
To nonexperts, one of the most confusing things about the mortgage securities market
is that issuers were quite careful to document the extent to which they did not document a
borrower’s income and assets. Loans were typically given a four-letter code that informed
investors whether the information about income (I) and assets (A) were either verified (V),
stated (S), or not collected at all (N). For example, the code SIVA meant stated incomeverified assets.20 The crucial point here is that investors knowingly bought low-doc/no-doc
loans. In fact, we now know that lenders provided loans to borrowers with damaged credit
without documenting their incomes not because of any after-the-fact forensic investigation,
but rather because lenders broadcasted this information to prospective investors. The origination data in Figure 3, which show the dramatic growth of loans to borrowers with low
credit scores and less-than-full income and asset verification, come from data provided to
investors—data that were known about and widely commented upon in real time.
The information flow continued after the deals were sold to investors. All issuers provided
monthly loan-level information on the characteristics of every loan in the pool, including the
monthly payment, the interest rate, the remaining principal balance and the delinquency
status of each loan. Issuers also disclosed the disposition of terminated loans, including
the dollar amounts of losses that stemmed from short sales or foreclosures. Again, these
data were publicly available free of charge, but most investors used a loan-level dataset from
the LoanPerformance company, which was a cleaned and standardized version of raw data
gathered from many different issuers and lenders.
Investors had access not only to important data, but also to tools that allowed them to
use these data to price securities. The MBS and CDOs that contained the mortgages (or
the mortgage risk) appeared complex on the surface, but they were in fact straightforward
20

The NINA loan is the basis for the apocryphal “NINJA” loan that is often used as an example of excesses
in the boom-era mortgage market. NINJA supposedly stood for “no-income, no job, no assets,” but no such
loan ever existed. Also, the NINA code, which did exist, did not signify a loan to a borrower with no income.
Rather, the code signified that the lender had no information about the borrower’s income.

15

to model. Most investors used a program called Intex that coded all of the rules from a
prospectus for the allocation of cash flows to different tranches of a deal. To forecast the
performance of a deal, an investor would input into Intex a scenario for the performance of the
underlying loans. Intex would then deliver cash flows, taking into account all of the complex
features of the deal, including so-called overcollateralization accounts and the treatment of
interest income earned on loans that were paid off in the middle of a month. Cordell, Huang,
and Williams (2011) shows that using Intex, one could accurately measure the losses and
value of ABS CDOs in real time throughout the crisis.
To illustrate the information available to investors on a CDO transaction, Figure 8 shows
pages from the offer documents for the notorious Abacus AC-1 CDO.21 These documents
provide amounts and CUSIPs22 for every security in the deal. Armed with those CUSIPs, a
potential investor could use LoanPerformance data to obtain the origination information and
current delinquency status of every individual loan in each deal. Then, using Intex, the investor could forecast the cash flows for each reference security under different macroeconomic
scenarios.
Fact 8: Investors understood the risks
Using data supplied by issuers and lenders, as well as quantitative tools designed to exploit this information efficiently, investors were able to predict with a fair degree of accuracy
how mortgages and related securities would perform under various macroeconomic scenarios.23 Table 2, taken from a Lehman Brothers analyst report published in August 2005,
shows predicted losses for a pool of subprime loans originated in the second half of 2005
under different assumptions for U.S. house prices (Mago and Shu 2005). The top three house
price scenarios, which range from “base” to “aggressive,” predict losses of between 1 and 6
percent. Such losses had been typical of previous subprime deals and implied that investments even in lower-rated tranches of subprime deals would be profitable. The report also
considers two adverse scenarios for house prices, one labeled “pessimistic” and the other labeled “meltdown.” These two scenarios assume near-term annualized growth in house prices
of 0 and –5 percent, respectively. For those scenarios, losses are dramatically worse. The
pessimistic scenario generates an 11.1 percent loss while the meltdown scenario generates a
21

Abacus was a deal arranged by Goldman Sachs in 2007 that largely amounted to a bet on whether a
collection of BBB subprime securities would default. Hedge fund manager John Paulson took a short position
in the deal while IKB and ABN Amro took long positions. The SEC brought fraud charges against Goldman
Sachs, alleging that they did not properly disclose the fact that Paulson played a role in choosing the specific
securities that made up the deal.
22
A CUSIP is a 9-character code that identifies any North American security, and is used to facilitate the
clearing and settlement of financial trades.
23
The discussion of facts 8 and 9 is based on Gerardi et al. (2008). We direct interested readers to that
paper for a more complete discussion of the issues.

16

17.1 percent loss. The report goes on to point out that while the pessimistic scenario would
lead to write-offs of the lowest-rated tranches of subprime deals, the meltdown scenario would
lead to massive losses on all but the highest-rated tranches.
Lehman analysts were not alone in understanding the strong relationship between house
prices and losses on subprime loans. As Gerardi et al. (2008) show, analysts at other banks
reached similar conclusions and were similarly accurate in their forecasts conditional on house
price appreciation outcomes. JPMorgan analysts used MSA-level variation in losses on 2003
subprime originations to produce remarkably accurate predictions about losses (Flanagan
et al. 2006a). A UBS slide presentation about subprime securities given in fall 2005 was
subtitled, “Its (Almost) All About Home Prices” (Zimmerman 2005).
The Lehman analysis, and others like it, are crucial documents for anyone hoping to
understand why investors lined up to buy securities backed by subprime loans. First, the
analysis shows that investors knew about the significant risk inherent in subprime deals.
Expected losses on a typical prime deal were a fraction of 1 percent—even under the worst
scenarios prime losses might reach the low single digits.24 According to Table 2, losses on a
subprime deal could be many times higher. Given a 50 percent recovery rate in foreclosure,
the 17.1 percent loss implied in Lehman’s meltdown scenario assumes that lenders would
foreclose on one-third of the loans in the pool. The analysis underscores investors’ knowledge
about the sensitivity of subprime loans to adverse movements in housing prices, and it refutes
the idea that investors did not or could not determine how risky these loans were.
A second reason that Table 2 is important is that its forecasts proved to be accurate.
Despite its foreboding name, the “meltdown” scenario was actually optimistic with respect
to the observed fall in housing prices that began in 2006. The current forecast for losses on
deals in the ABX 2006-1 index, which largely contains loans originated in the second half of
2005, is about 22 percent (Jozoff et al. 2012). This is consistent with the relationship between
losses and house prices implied by the table. The bottom line is that analysts working in real
time had little trouble figuring out how much subprime investors would lose if house prices
fell.
The next logical question: given how badly these loans were expected to perform if prices
fell, why did investors buy them? We turn to this question next.
Fact 9: Investors were optimistic about house prices
The answer to why investors purchased subprime securities is contained in the third
column of the same Lehman analysis cited above, which lists the probabilities that were
24

The prime losses here refer to losses on nonagency (“jumbo”) deals, which included mortgages that were
too big to be securitized by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. For agency MBS consisting of so-called conforming
mortgages, credit risk was born not by investors but by the agencies themselves.

17

assigned to each of the various house price scenarios. It indicates that the adverse price
scenarios received very little weight. In particular, the meltdown scenario—the only scenario
generating losses that threatened repayment of any AAA-rated tranche—was assigned only
a 5 percent probability. The more benign pessimistic scenario received only a 15 percent
probability. By contrast, the top two price scenarios, each of which assumes at least 8
percent annual growth in house prices over the next several years, receive probabilities that
sum to 30 percent. In other words, the authors of the Lehman report were bullish about
subprime investments not because they believed that borrowers had some “moral obligation”
to repay mortgages, or because they didn’t realize that the lenders had not fully verified
borrower incomes. The authors were not concerned about losses because they thought that
house prices would continue to rise, and that steady increases in the value of the collateral
backing the loans would cover any losses generated by borrowers who would not or could not
repay.
Relative to historical experience, even the baseline forecast was optimistic, and the two
stronger scenarios were almost euphoric. A widely circulated calculation by Shiller (2005)
showed that real house price appreciation over the period from 1890 to 2004 was less than 1
percent per year. A cursory look at the FHFA national price index gives slightly higher real
house price appreciation—more than 1 percent—from 1975 to 2000, but still offers nothing
to justify 5 percent nominal annual price appreciation, let alone 8 or 11 percent. Further,
even sustained periods of elevated price appreciation are rare.25
The optimism was not unique to the Lehman report. Table 3, based on reports from
analysts at JPMorgan, shows that optimism reigned even in 2006, after house prices had
crested and begun to fall. Well into 2007, the analysts were convinced that the decline would
prove transitory and that prices would soon resume their upward march.
Industry analysts were not the only ones optimistic about the housing market. Gerardi,
Foote, and Willen (2011) show that there was considerable real-time debate among academic
economists on whether house prices in the early 2000s were justified by fundamentals or were
instead poised to fall. In any case, the contemporary evidence on what investors believed
about prices suggests that their widespread optimism encouraged them to purchase subprime
securities, despite the well-understood risks involved.
Fact 10: Mortgage market insiders were the biggest losers
Perhaps the most compelling evidence against the inside job theory of the crisis concerns
the distribution of gains and losses among market participants. If insiders took advantage
of outsiders, then those most closely associated with the origination and securitization of
25

Authors’ calculations using FHFA national price index deflated using deflator for core PCE.

18

mortgages should have pocketed the most money or at least incurred the smallest losses.
Conversely, investors with little connection to the industry should have suffered the most. In
fact, the opposite pattern emerges.
First consider the losers. Table 4 displays losses related to the subprime crisis compiled by
Bloomberg as of June 2008. Six of the top 10 institutions in this unhappy group (Citigroup,
Merrill Lynch, HSBC, Bank of America, Morgan Stanley, and JPMorgan) not only securitized
subprime mortgages, they actually owned companies that originated them. Ironically, the
list omits Bear Stearns, the one firm most closely associated with the subprime market.
Bear Stearns was heavily involved in every aspect of subprime lending, from origination
to securitization to servicing. Yet Bear Stearns does not appear on this table because in
March 2008 JPMorgan had acquired the firm in an assisted sale to prevent it from filing for
bankruptcy.
In fact, a closer look at Bear Stearns’ particular story provides compelling evidence against
the view that mortgage industry insiders profited at the expense of outsiders. The company
began experiencing problems in June 2007. Two hedge funds managed by the firm had
invested heavily in subprime-related securities and reported enormous losses, requiring Bear
Stearns to inject capital into the funds to protect investors. Remarkably, Bear Stearns
executives were major investors in these funds.26 In other words, the executives most likely
to understand the subprime-lending process had made personal investment decisions that
exposed them to subprime risk.27
Indeed, the large insider losses have led many researchers to question whether lenders
actually even used the OTD model. Table 5, reprinted from Acharya and Richardson (2009),
shows that issuing institutions retained enormous amounts of both the AAA-rated privatelabel MBS and the CDOs tied to their lower-rated tranches. This retention of subprimemortgage risk occurred “even though the ‘originate and distribute’ model of securitization
that many banks ostensibly followed was supposed to transfer risk to those institutions better
able to bear it, such as unleveraged pension funds” (Kashyap 2010, p. 1).28
Fact 11: Mortgage market outsiders were the biggest winners
When we turn to the winners the pattern is equally stark. The biggest beneficiary from
the crisis was hedge fund manager John Paulson, who bought billions of dollars of credit
26

See p. 244 of Muolo and Padilla (2010) for further details.
Along these lines, Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2012) show that managers involved in the securitization
process were no less likely to buy houses at the peak of the bubble than the population in general.
28
Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2011) take on the question of why banks held so many risky subprime securities
on their books and conclude that the best explanation is that they did so to signal the quality of the pools of
loans. In a sense, Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2011) is a perfect illustration of the arguments in Grossman and
Hart (1980). Rather than withhold private information, agents have an important incentive to fully disclose
information in order to obtain the best prices for their products.
27

19

protection on subprime deals in 2006 and 2007. When those deals defaulted en masse at the
end of 2007, Paulson made $15 billion in profits (Zuckerman 2010).
Paulson and his lieutenant, Paolo Pellegrini, were complete mortgage industry outsiders.
They had no investment experience in housing or mortgage markets and they had never
traded mortgages before. Zuckerman (2010) discusses investors’ lukewarm response to Paulson’s sales pitches, quoting one potential investor as saying:
‘Paulson was a merger-arb guy and suddenly he has strong views on housing and
subprime,’ [the potential investor] recalls. ‘The largest mortgage guys, including
[Michael] Vranos at Ellington, one of the gods of the market, were far more
positive on subprime’ (p. 126).
Furthermore, Paulson and Pellegrini explicitly attributed their success not to insights about
the underwriting process, but rather to a successful bet on house prices. According to
Zuckerman (2010), their conclusion that house prices were going to fall was based on a
simple analysis of the time-series of house prices in the United States:
Housing prices had climbed a puny 1.4 percent annually between 1975 and 2000,
after inflation was taken into consideration. But they had soared over 7 percent
in the following five years, until 2005. The upshot: U.S. home prices would have
to drop by almost 40 percent to return to their historic trend line (p. 107).
It was this simple insight about prices—not any fact about credit, the origination process,
or moral hazard—that led Paulson and Pellegrini to gamble on bearish bets on the subprime mortgage market. The chart showing that house prices would fall 40 percent was
Paulson’s “Rosetta stone, the key to making sense of the entire housing market” (Zuckerman
2010, p. 108). And even Zuckerman seems surprised by the failure of the insider/outsider
theory of mortgage markets, posing this question at the beginning of his book:
Why was it John Paulson, a relative amateur in real estate and not a celebrated
mortgage, bond, or housing specialist like Bill Gross or Mike Vranos who pulled
off the greatest trade in history? (p. 3)
Another winner, memorably described by Lewis (2010), was Michael Burry. His hedge
fund Scion Capital made almost $1 billion in profits using a similar strategy to Paulson,
although on a smaller scale. Lewis writes that Burry, a medical doctor by training, was
an outsider not only in the housing and mortgage industries but to society in general, as
he worked largely alone. Burry attributed his success to his willingness to read complex
prospectuses carefully:
20

Burry had devoted himself to finding exactly the right ones to bet against. He’d
read dozens of prospectuses and scoured hundreds more, looking for the dodgiest
pools of mortgages, and was still pretty certain even then (and dead certain later)
that he was the only human being on earth who read them, apart from the lawyers
who drafted them. In doing so, he likely also became the only investor to do the
sort of old-fashioned bank credit analysis on the home loans that should have
been done before they were made (Lewis, 2010, p. 50).
In other words, Burry’s bets were based on publicly available information.
Taking a broad view, the most useful demarcation to make when thinking about the
mortgage market is not between insiders and outsiders, the division made in the top panel of
Figure 1. Rather, it is between those people who thought house prices would continue to rise
and those who were willing to bet that they would fall. Sadly for the economy, the overly
optimistic group included not only the investors at the end of the securitization chain, but
lenders and securitizers who sold them the bonds, and whose losses precipitated the financial
crisis.
Fact 12: Top-rated bonds backed by mortgages did not turn out to be “toxic.”
Top-rated bonds in collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) did.
No discussion of the causes of the financial crisis would be complete without some discussion of the rating agencies. To some analysts, the simple fact that rating agencies gave
AAA ratings to subprime securities is patently absurd. An AAA rating is supposed to signal a near-complete absence of credit risk. Yet these bonds were often backed by reduced
documentation loans to borrowers with previous credit problems. Other critics are more
specific, noting that the issuers paid the rating agencies to evaluate their deals. The implication is that for the agencies these payments generated a conflict of interest that encouraged
them to bestow unjustifiably high ratings. At the very least, commentators often claim that
rating agencies abetted finance industry insiders by endorsing securities backed by problem
mortgages. Yet the facts paint a more nuanced picture.
To start with, the top-rated tranches of subprime securities fared better than many people
realize. The top panel of Figure 9 is generated from data on AAA-rated bonds created in
2006 from private-label securitization deals.29 Specifically, the panel shows the fraction of
these bonds on which investors suffered losses or, using industry jargon, the fraction that was
“impaired.” In some of these deals, 70 percent of the underlying subprime loans terminated
in foreclosure (Jozoff et al. 2012). Yet despite these massive losses, the figure shows that
investors lost money on less than 10 percent of private-label AAA-rated securities. How is
29

These deals included subprime mortgages, Alt-A mortgages, and jumbo mortgages.

21

that possible? As many have explained, the AAA-rated securities were protected by a series
of lower-rated securities which absorbed most of the losses. If a borrower defaulted and
the lender was unable to recover the principal, the resulting loss would be deducted from
the principal of the deal’s lower-rated tranches. For subprime deals, the degree of so-called
AAA credit protection—the principal balance of the non-AAA securities—was often more
than 20 percent. Given a 50 percent recovery rate on foreclosed loans, 20 percent credit
protection meant that 40 percent of the borrowers could suffer foreclosure before the AAArated investors suffered a single dollar of loss. For riskier deals, credit protection was higher,
often substantially so. The key takeaway is that for subprime securities, credit protection
largely worked, and investors in the AAA-rated securities were largely spared.
The relatively robust performance of private-label AAA-rated securities is explained
clearly in the final report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011), among other
sources. Yet it still surprises many people. If these AAA-rated securities didn’t suffer losses,
where were the famous “toxic mortgage-related securities” that caused the financial crisis?
The answer is that banks used lower-rated securities from private-label deals to construct
other securities, such as the CDOs discussed earlier. Recall that because these CDOs were
backed by tranches of subprime securities, which were technically labeled asset-backed securities (ABS), the resulting CDOs were called ABS CDOs. The main difference between the
original ABS and the ABS CDOs was that the CDOs were not backed by 2,000 or so subprime
loans, but rather a collection of 90–100 lower-rated tranches of subprime ABS deals, with
most of these tranches having BBB ratings. Yet the organizing principal of CDOs and the
original ABS securities was the same: senior AAA-rated tranches were protected from losses
by lower-rated tranches. For the original ABS, losses would occur if individual homeowners
defaulted. For the CDOs, losses would occur if the BBB-rated securities from the original
ABS deals defaulted.
The bottom panel of Figure 9 shows the share of 2006 ABS CDOs that were impaired. The
results are nearly the mirror image of the previous graph. Whereas investors suffered losses
on less than 10 percent of the AAA-rated tranches from the original subprime securities, they
suffered losses on all but 10 percent of AAA-rated ABS CDOs.30 To make matters worse, a
large portion of the ABS CDOs were known as “super-senior” securities because they were
senior even to the AAA-rated tranches of the CDO. Super-seniors were often retained by
the Wall Street firm that issued the CDO. But CDO losses were commonly large enough to
wipe out both the AAA tranches and super-senior ones, leaving the issuing institution with
large losses. In short, it was the ABS CDOs, not the original subprime ABS, that proved so
30
For a discussion of the link between CDOs and the underlying ABSs, see Ashcraft and Schuermann
(2008).

22

toxic to the financial system. And the main failure of the rating agencies was not a flawed
analysis of original subprime securities, but a flawed analysis of the CDOs composed of these
securities.
The disparate performance of top-rated tranches from ABS and CDOs is one of great
puzzles of the crisis. Because issuers were paid to rate both types of securities, it is hard
to blame the bad CDO ratings on the “issuer pays” model of rating-agency compensation.
But if a conflict of interest did not cause the bad ratings on the CDOs, what did? Some
institutional evidence provides a clue to the answer.
The key insight is that ABS and CDOs were evaluated by using very different methods.
This was true both at the investment banks that issued these two types of securities and the
agencies that rated them. When forecasting subprime ABS performance, analysts modeled
the default probabilities of the individual loans. Recall that the data for this type of analysis
was widely available, for example in the loan-level datasets collected and standardized by
LoanPerformance. To forecast the performance of a subprime pool, analysts could first
estimate an individual-level default model based on loan-level predictors like the credit score,
the debt-to-income ratio, the interest rate, and the current level of the borrower’s equity.
The current equity level could be inferred by the original downpayment on the loan, the
loan’s amortization schedule, and the subsequent behavior of housing prices. Armed with an
individual-level model of default, the analyst could then simulate what would happen to all
the mortgages in the pool if housing prices declined by (say) 5 or 10 percent.
Three comments on this ABS analysis are in order to set up the contrast with the method
used to evaluate CDOs. The first is that the ABS analysis was accurate. Recall the Lehman
Brothers analysis from Table 2, which gives a basically accurate prediction for how bad ABS
losses would be if housing prices declined. Second, in the jargon of economists, the analysis
was structural, in that it modeled how individual decisions are likely to change as economic
conditions evolve. Falling prices make it more likely that a homeowner will have negative
equity, and economic theory predicts that “underwater” owners will default more often.31
This prediction receives a great deal of support in empirical default models, so analysts knew
that defaults would rise if prices declined. Moreover, they knew that lower-rated tranches of
subprime ABS would be wiped out if the price decline was especially large. This knowledge
encouraged the issuers of subprime ABS to build a great deal of credit protection into their
deals at the outset, in order to ensure that their top-rated bonds would pay off no matter
what happened to the housing market.
31

Underwater owners who lose their jobs or suffer some other adverse life event are unable to sell their homes
for enough to pay off their loans. Foreclosure is often the only possible outcome in this case. Additionally, if
negative equity is large enough, an underwater owner may simply walk away from his mortgage in a so-called
ruthless or strategic default.

23

A third point about the analysis of private-label mortgage securities is that this analysis
could examine how correlation in individual mortgage defaults might arise.32 The basic
idea behind securitization is that individual loans might have high individual probabilities of
default, but these probabilities are not likely to be correlated with one other. This assumption
is violated, however, if there is some aggregate shock to all the mortgages in a pool, for
example if house prices declined on a nationwide basis. The loan-level models allowed analysts
to predict how such a shock could affect mortgage pools, even though no such shock had
occurred in recent history. The analysts simply noted how individual equity positions of
homeowners would change if prices declined by some assumed amount. They could then use
their models to generate expected default probabilities for individual loans, then add these
probabilities together. Not surprisingly, these exercise implied that a common negative price
shock would induce a large correlation in expected defaults. Mortgages across the country
would be much more likely to default at the same time if house prices fell everywhere.
Unfortunately, this type of structural analysis was not performed by Wall Street’s CDO
analysts, who were organizationally independent of the researchers analyzing mortgage pools.
The CDO analysts did not devise structural models for the individual BBB-rated tranches in
their CDOs. Instead, they essentially skipped ahead to the step of asking how correlated BBB
defaults were likely to be. To do this, the CDO analysts looked at past financial market data,
including the prices of default insurance on individual BBB tranches.33 As it happened, the
past data implied that default correlations among the BBB tranches were low. Tranches from
some deals might might have paid better or worse than tranches from other deals, but there
was never a time when large numbers of BBB tranches defaulted simultaneously. Crucially,
the CDO analysts’ backward-looking approach assumed that these low correlations would
continue into the future. There was no way to model the effect of a nationwide decline in
house prices because past data did not encompass such a decline. Of course, when national
house prices did fall, the CDO analysts learned that defaults among BBB tranches were far
more correlated than their methods had implied. As the mortgage analysts had predicted, the
nationwide house price decline generated a massive correlation in defaults among individual
mortgages, which wiped out the BBB tranches of the original subprime deals. Because these
losses occurred on virtually all private-label securities at the same time, BBB tranches from
32

A better label for this type of analysis might be “semi-structural,” because it does not attempt to uncover
deep parameters that are relevant to the default decision. For example, the analysis does not estimate the
rate of time preference of individual homeowners, or how homeowners would value an extra dollar of wealth.
33
In the past, if the price of default insurance for two BBB tranches went up at the same time, the CDO
analysts would infer that the default probabilities of the two tranches were positively correlated as well. Note
that this inference could be made even if neither of the two tranches had ever defaulted. See Salmon (2009)
for a discussion of a mathematical formula called the Gaussian copula that aided this calculation and Coval,
Jurek, and Stafford (2009) for a more general discussion.

24

many different securities went bust at the same time too. As a result, CDO losses extended far
into the AAA-rated and super-senior tranches, with disastrous implications for the financial
system.
At one level, the institutional facts resolve the puzzle over disparate ABS and CDO performance because they provide a simple explanation for why rating agencies and banks viewed
the two similar types of securities so differently. The different outlooks could have stemmed
from the backgrounds of the two groups of analysts. CDOs were originally constructed from
various corporate bonds, for which historical correlations have been excellent guides to future
performance, even during the recent crisis. CDO analysts probably assumed that the same
type of historical analysis would also work well for CDOs made up of subprime mortgage
bonds. By contrast, mortgage analysts were trained to model mortgages individually, and
they had the data and the tools to do so.
Yet the institutional facts deepen the puzzle as well. In hindsight, it is hard to see how
two groups of analysts could work in close proximity at the same financial institution and
not notice the colossal dissonance implied by their respective analyses. For example, during
the peak of the mortgage boom, mortgage analysts at UBS published reports showing that
even a small decline in house prices would lead to losses that would wipe out the BBB-rated
securities of subprime deals (Zimmerman 2005). At the same time, UBS was both an issuer of
and a major investor in ABS CDOs, which would be nearly worthless if this decline occurred.
Why didn’t the mortgage analysts tell their coworkers how sensitive the CDOs would be to
a price decline? This question goes to the heart of why the financial crisis occurred. The
answer may well involve the information and incentive structures present inside Wall Street
firms. Employees who could recognize the iceberg looming in front of the ship may not have
been listened to, or they may not have had the right incentives to speak up. If so, then the
information and incentive problems giving rise to the crisis would not have existed between
mortgage industry insiders and outsiders, as the inside job story suggests. Rather, these
problems would have existed between different floors of the same Wall Street firm.

3

Economic Theories and the Facts

Our 12 facts consistently point to higher price expectations as a fundamental explanation
for why credit expanded during the housing boom. In this section, we ask what could
have generated those higher expectations. Theories of asymmetric information argue that
mortgage originators failed to adequately screen loans and passed them on to unsuspecting
investors in mortgage-backed investments. The resulting expansion in credit then drove prices
higher. Some of our facts have argued directly against this line of reasoning; in this section,
25

we show that explanations based on asymmetric information fail on theoretical grounds as
well. A second group of explanations claims that mortgage market developments related
to financial innovation allowed credit to expand and prices to rise. We show that these
explanations also have theoretical and empirical problems. Finally, we discuss the only set of
theories left standing. These theories claim that the U.S. housing market was a classic asset
bubble, just like previous bubbles in tulips and tech stocks.

3.1

Explanations based on asymmetric information

Economists have long studied what happens when sellers knows more about the good being
traded than buyers do. A key insight from this research can be conveyed with a simple
example. Suppose you see an advertisement for a one-owner 1995 Oldsmobile Cutlass Ciera
on Craigslist with an asking price of $1,500. You reason that a lightly driven Ciera built in
1995 should have about 100,000 miles on it, making it worth about $1,500 to you. So you
call the seller and tell him you are interested, through you would like to know how many
miles are on the car. The seller responds that the odometer reads about 90,000 miles, but he
does not know the mileage for sure, because the odometer has stopped working. The owner
is pretty sure, however, that the odometer broke only last month, so the 90,000-mile figure
should be about right.
Given these facts, how much would you be willing to pay for the car? Certainly not
$1,500, and most likely much less. Even though the seller reports a mileage that is less than
100,000 miles, you cannot verify this information yourself because the odometer does not
work. Further, you realize that if the odometer had actually broken several years ago, the
seller would have no incentive to tell you the truth. Perhaps most importantly, you realize
that not all owners of 1995 Cieras are trying to sell them; many are happily driving them.34
The willingness of this particular owner to part with his Ciera indicates that he may know
something bad about it that you don’t—like its true mileage. Given all this, you are likely
to offer a very low price for the Ciera or refuse to buy it altogether.
In this example, you as the potential buyer are at an informational disadvantage. The
seller (the informed insider) has years of experience with the car while you (the uninformed
outsider) do not even know its true mileage. Even so, you recognize the seller’s incentives
and understand that some information about the car is unverifiable. Then, by using common
sense, you are able to form what is most likely an accurate view of the car’s value, some
amount less than $1,500. This simple example illustrates a bedrock result in the theory of
asymmetric information: uninformed parties who trade with informed parties do not usually
34

One of the authors of this paper provides an example.

26

get exploited. The uninformed parties not only realize they are uninformed, they also realize
that the informed party will try to use his superior information to exploit them.35
How does the used-car example relate to securitization and the mortgage market? In
the securitization process, lenders screen potential borrowers and originate mortgages, then
package the mortgages for sale to outside investors. Yet investors cannot verify how carefully
the screening is actually done. The problem is worse if the lender retains no skin in the
game, so that any credit losses on the mortgages are borne solely by the investor.36 Given
these informational problems, it is reasonable to think that investors would be concerned
about purchasing any mortgage-backed securities. This is the prediction of textbook theories
of asymmetric information, which imply that if such asymmetries had been a problem for
mortgage-backed securities, we would not have seen an explosion of securitized mortgage
credit driving housing prices higher while investors were cheated. Rather, the opposite would
have occurred. Mortgage credit would have dwindled as investors, like buyers looking over
used cars with broken odometers, walked away from the deals.
Yet even though buying and selling mortgages involves some degree of asymmetric information, securitized mortgage credit did explode and house prices did move higher. The best
explanation for this correlation places higher price expectations at the front of the causal
chain. If investors believed that housing prices would continue rising rapidly, then it didn’t
matter what a mortgage borrower’s income or credit score was. In the event that the borrower defaulted, then the higher price of the house serving as collateral would eliminate
any credit losses.37 In the words of Gorton (2010), higher housing prices cause securitized
mortgages to become less “information sensitive,” meaning that their profitability depends
less on potentially unverifiable characteristics like borrower credit scores and incomes. So
in the early 2000s, when price expectations rose, investors became eager to invest in securitized mortgages—even those that were clearly identified as “reduced documentation”’ or
“no documentation,” for which originators avowed that the loans had not been painstakingly
underwritten.
Some authors have tried to rescue the asymmetric-information theory of the crisis by
35

Akerlof (1970) shows what happens when this result is carried out to a logical conclusion. If sellers of
goods are unable to convey their quality to potential buyers, then the buyers assume that the quality of the
goods being offered is low. Consequently, the buyers bid only low prices. These low prices encourage the
sellers that really do have high-quality goods to pull them off the market, further depressing the average
quality of goods offered for sale. Buyers then further reduce their offers. In equilibrium, trade can break
down completely, so that welfare-improving exchanges between buyers and sellers do not occur.
36
In this case, the used-car analogy is especially appropriate, because the seller of the Ciera will not be
responsible for any repair bills after he transfers title to the car.
37
In reality, a financially stressed mortgage borrower who had built up substantial positive equity would
probably not default in the first place, because he could sell the house, pay off his mortgage, and still have
money left over.

27

arguing that investors didn’t know about the information problems involved, or that they
were too trusting of mortgage originators. The claim is that in the future, investors won’t
be fooled again, but in 2007–08, their naiveté caused massive losses. Perhaps the most
famous example of such a claim is Mian and Sufi (2009), which references an “undetected
moral hazard on behalf of originators selling [mortgages] for the purpose of securitization as
a potential cause for higher mortgage default rates” (p. 1482, emphasis and insertion added).
The naive investor theory can be thought of as an out-of-equilibrium behavior in a standard asymmetric information model. Equilibria in these models posit that buyers that do not
get cheated, but this result assumes that buyers recognize both their informational disadvantage and the willingness of sellers to exploit it. The problem with this theory is that the facts
do not support it. To make an obvious point, many Wall Street investors who lost money
were seasoned financial professionals, a group generally not known for being overly trusting of
those on the other side of high stakes deals. More importantly, facts 3 and 5 showed that the
institutional framework behind mortgage securitization was not new. Investors had ample
time to discern the relevant incentives and act accordingly. Public discussions of potential
moral hazard issues surrounding mortgage-backed securities had been common as well. Recall the quote from housing industry journalist Lew Sichelman, who noted with alarm that
lenders were originating low documentation loans for sale to investors—in 1990. Years later,
when the subprime market was peaking, the front page of the “Money and Investing” section
of the Wall Street Journal also highlighted the potential for moral hazard:
Lenders have long sold all or most of their standard mortgage loans to packagers
of securities backed by these assets. But when it comes to riskier loans, some
investors like to see lenders retain a large amount of exposure, so that both
lenders and investors have skin in the game (Simon and Hagerty 2005).
In short, the idea that the underwriting standards of lenders who sold loans might be different from the standards of portfolio lenders is not a sophisticated idea from a graduate
seminar in information economics. Rather, it is a simple concept that was understood by
virtually everyone. It does not imply that well-informed insiders were able to expand credit
by taking advantage of ill-informed or neophyte outsiders. Instead, it implies that higher
price expectations expanded credit by lessening the impact of any informational problems
inherent in the securitization process.
The strong growth in low-doc and no-doc lending during the housing boom provides the
clearest example of how informational problems were pushed to the background by higher
price expectations. As the lower left panel of Figure 3 shows, the use of such loans exploded
from 2002 to 2006. The growth of reduced-documentation lending is often presented as
28

Exhibit A in narratives of how the declining standards of mortgage lenders caused the housing
crisis. What this growth really shows is the declining standards of investors. These loans
were clearly marked as “stated income, stated assets” loans, so investors knew what they
were getting. In particular, investors knew that borrowers were likely to have inflated their
incomes and assets. Yet investors purchased the loans anyway because they expected these
loans to be profitable.38 For later commentators to complain that lenders did not bother to
verify income or employment is like complaining that McDonald’s sometimes sells hamburgers
without cheese on them. McDonald’s sells hamburgers because some people prefer them to
cheeseburgers. Low-doc and no-doc loans were sold because some investors preferred them
to loans for which incomes and assets had been rigorously verified. Investors were willing
to take their chances with the riskier loans because they thought that higher house prices
would make that risk worth taking, not because of misaligned incentives in the securitization
process.
It is important to reiterate that information economics implies that informed sellers generally prefer to trade with informed buyers, not uninformed buyers. The reason for this
seemingly counterintuitive result is that uninformed buyers are likely to be suspicious. Returning to our used car example, the broken odometer means that potential buyers will be
uninformed about the true mileage of the car and thus suspicious about the car’s true condition. Consequently, even if the Ciera is in exceptionally good condition, the seller will
never get a good price for it. In other words, the broken odometer confers an informational
advantage to the seller, but this is an “advantage” that the seller would very much like to
avoid. The implication for mortgage markets is that originators would prefer to trade in more
transparent markets. Some have suggested that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac did a better
job of aligning incentives than the issuers of private label securities. But if that were true,
then information economics would predict that sellers would have been reluctant to trade in
the private label market, where the informational asymmetries were more severe and prices
were likely to be lower.
Finally, while asymmetric information may not have driven a credit expansion during the
housing boom, this is not to say that asymmetric information played no role in the crisis.
However, the truly damaging asymmetric information problem was not between investors and
originators but between trading counterparties in the acute phase of the crisis. During this
phase, market participants knew that financial institutions were facing hundreds of billions of
dollars of losses, but it was unclear precisely where these losses would fall. In a sense, many
financial institutions were like cars with broken odometers and, as economic theory predicts,
38
Indeed, investors often preferred reduced-documentation loans because of their superior prepayment
properties. See Adelson (2003) for a more detailed discussion.

29

trading ceased. Whatever role that asymmetric information among potential counterparties
played in the crisis, it obviously cannot explain the decisions made by borrowers or investors
before the crisis, which is the focus of this paper. Asymmetric information probably also
figured in the decisions of lenders regarding mortgage modifications. Most borrowers who
default have negative equity, but most negative equity borrowers do not default. Because
lenders are unsure of the borrowers who really do need modifications to stay in their homes,
they are likely to deny modifications to everyone (Foote, Gerardi, and Willen 2008; Adelino,
Gerardi, and Willen 2009). Even though both borrowers and lenders are better off if modifications are given to the truly needy, asymmetric information prevents those Pareto-improving
trades from occurring.

3.2

Theories based on financial innovation

A second group of theories argue that the source of rising house prices was some fundamental
change in mortgage market institutions, though this change may not have resulted from
asymmetric information. One possible example is a decline in downpayments required of
potential home buyers. Researchers have constructed careful, fully optimizing models that
imply financial innovations will raise house prices, by essentially shifting out the effective
demand curve for owner-occupied homes. A key goal of these papers is to explain the run-up
in prices without having to resort to irrational asset price bubbles.
Four comments about financial-innovation theories are in order. First, it may seem intuitive that financial innovation causes higher asset prices but economic theory makes no such
prediction. In fact the one “folk theorem” from the literature is that a financial innovation,
by improving risk sharing, reduces the demand for precautionary saving and lowers asset
prices.39
A second and more fundamental point is that a model of a financial innovation that
generates an increase in asset prices typically cannot generate the subsequent fall in prices
necessary to trigger a crisis. As a general rule, price movements in fully optimizing models
are sustainable; to our knowledge, the phrase “unsustainable price increase” does not appear
in any standard asset-pricing textbook.40 Without an exogenous change in the innovation
that caused prices to go up in the first place, optimizing models simply cannot generate asset
price declines.
In a leading example of the financial innovation approach, Favilukis, Ludvigson, and
39

Elul (1997) shows that the folk theorem isn’t quite true. With sufficient market incompleteness, one
can always find an innovation that raises asset prices. Yet the folk theorem remains valid for virtually all
parameterized models in macroeconomics and finance.
40
Neither the word “unsustainable” nor any synonym appears in Cochrane (2005), for example.

30

Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) develop an elegant general equilibrium model and attempt to
replicate the path of U.S. house prices from 2002 to 2011. Specifically, they contend that
the observed movement in the price-rent ratio for houses can be explained in an optimizing
model by relaxed credit constraints (in the form of lower required downpayments) and lower
transactions costs (including lower closing costs).41 The analysis in the paper is correct but,
in our opinion, the authors come to the wrong conclusion. Rather than illustrating how
financial innovations caused the housing crisis, in our view the model perfectly illustrates
how financial innovation could not have caused it.
To see why we think Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) shows the
impossibility of the financial innovation story as an explanation of the crisis, note that there
is nothing “unsustainable” about the price increase that financial innovation is supposed to
have generated. As a result, to be consistent with the 2006–08 fall in housing prices, the
authors must presume that the economy underwent “a surprise reversal of the financial market
liberalization” in 2006. The liberalization does not end because it was unsustainable—that
is, because it was not justified by fundamentals. In particular, the liberalization does not
end because borrowers have trouble repaying their debts, as all borrowers repay in full by
assumption. Rather, the reversal occurs exogenously because it is the only way the model has
any chance to explain the data. In particular, to generate a substantial fall in house prices,
the authors must not only impose a massive reversal but also the ex ante belief among market
participants that such a reversal cannot happen. If homebuyers had suspected that future
borrowers would be unable to access the same financial innovation that they could access,
then these homebuyers would not have bid up house prices so much. Put simply, the more
likely the financial reversal, the smaller the initial increase in prices.
If Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) had been written before the housing market crash in 2006, housing optimists could have pointed to it as evidence that prices
were on a permanently high plateau. There would have been no need to worry that the U.S.
housing market was experiencing a bubble, as house prices could be shown to be consistent
with a forward-looking and fully optimizing model. Now that prices have fallen, the paper
implies that policymakers could revive the housing market easily by undoing whatever exogenous reversal caused it to contract. Of course, the inability of a rational model to explain
the evolution of house prices is not unique to Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh
41

The authors also show that a coincident inflow of foreign capital can keep interest rates low as this financial
liberalization raises the demand for loanable funds. “Without an infusion of foreign capital, any period of
looser collateral requirements and lower housing transactions costs (such as that which characterized the
period of rapid home price appreciation from 2000-2006) would be accompanied by an increase in equilibrium
interest rates, as households endogenously respond to the improved risk-sharing opportunities afforded by a
financial market liberalization by reducing precautionary saving” (p. 3). The inflow of foreign capital plays
only a small role in generating higher housing prices, however.

31

(2010). The Achilles heel of all rational financial innovation models is that if the innovation
is not expected to be permanent, then prices will not respond to it. So all credible financial
innovation models have to include exogenous and surprising reversals of the innovations to
be consistent with both the real-world collapse in prices and their own internal logic.
A third point about financial liberalization models is empirical. To generate the massive
increase in housing prices from 2002 to 2006, financial innovation models must assume that
the market innovations were profound. To return to Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010), the authors assume that in 2002, required downpayments collapsed, falling
from 25 percent to only 1 percent. To justify such a large change, the authors claim that,
prior to the housing boom that ended in 2006, the combined LTV for first and second conventional mortgages (mortgages without mortgage insurance) was rarely
if ever allowed to exceed 75 to 80 percent of the appraised value of the home
(p. 42).
Facts 4 and 6 show that this statement is not even approximately true: a combined LTV
of 100 percent was available in 1944 and the majority of borrowers borrowed more than 80
percent as far back as 1992. To make matters worse, Figure 6 shows that, at least as far
as downpayments were concerned, there is no evidence of the exogenous reversal in lending
standards needed to explain the house price decline. The share of borrowers putting less than
5 percent down in 2011 was higher than this share had been in any year prior to the crisis.
In short, the data provide no foundation to believe either that a dramatic policy change
occurred in 2002 or that any change was reversed in 2006, when house prices began to fall.
The fourth and final point about financial innovation is that financial market innovations
are exogenous changes. Such changes can occur as consequences of new laws. For example,
in the 1980s, the federal government passed passed laws intended to address rising interestrate risk among lenders. Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen (2010) point out that these laws had
the collateral effect of eliminating Depression-era limits on innovation in mortgage markets.
The Monetary Control Act of 1980 allowed regulated lenders to make true adjustable-rate
mortgages, including option ARMs. The Secondary Mortgage Market Enhancement Act of
1984 and the 1986 Tax Act paved the way for private-label securitization. No comparable
exogenous shocks occurred from 2002 to 2004. Ironically, as explained in Fact 3, it was the
1980s innovations that made the more intensive use of alternative mortgage products possible
in the 2000s. Researchers who argue that innovations occurred in the 2000s often point to
the origination data in Figure 3 which shows changes in the characteristics of underwritten
loans—smaller downpayments, more interest-only loans, less documentation—but these are
all endogenous variables. Only if the option ARM had been invented in 2002 could one
32

possibly argue that its growth was exogenous. But as we have seen, this loan had been
around and widely used for 20 years prior to the boom.
Ultimately, the lesson of financial innovation models is that it is impossible to explain
the dynamics of U.S. housing prices in the 2000s with a dynamic forward-looking general
equilibrium model. Researchers should turn their attention to less-conventional approaches,
such as those based on distorted beliefs.42 We discuss those models next.

3.3

Theories based on bubbles and distorted beliefs

Economists are fascinated by bubbles and have been for a long time. On a number of
occasions, speculative fervor has gripped some asset, leading to prices that outstrip any
realistic estimate of the future income that this asset could generate. When no more buyers for
this asset are forthcoming—when the music stops—the prices crashes. Bubbles and crashes
commonly arise in the laboratories of experimental economists, where volunteer test subjects
buy and sell simulated assets under controlled conditions.43 Unfortunately, a comprehensive
logical framework to analyze and explain bubbles continues to elude the economics profession.
Models have been developed to explain why bubbles can persist for a long time, but as
Brunnermeier (2008) notes, “[W]e do not have many convincing models that explain when
and why bubbles start.”
Certainly, there is no general theoretical result linking bubbles to financial innovation. In
fact, some theoretical results show just the opposite effect, as financial innovation brings the
asset price more in line with its fundamental value.44 A link between financial innovation and
bubbles is also unsupported by the historical record. In the 1930s, many blamed the U.S.
stock market bubble of the 1920s on financial innovations that allowed firms and individuals to
increase leveraged positions in stocks. Consequently, the regulatory framework that emerged
from the Great Depression placed severe limits on leverage in the equity market. But that
regulation did not prevent the technology bubble of the 1990s, although it may have prevented
the subsequent collapse in stock prices from causing a financial crisis.45
Yet if we are willing to accept that the U.S. housing market was in a bubble during the
early-to-mid 2000s, then the decisions of both borrowers and lenders are understandable.
To grasp the role of higher expected prices from an investor’s perspective, return to Table
42

For some examples of this type of research, see the citations in footnote 1.
For a classic early example of bubbles in a laboratory, see Smith, Suchanek, and Williams (1988). Looking
back at the large literature that this study initiated, Porter and Smith (2008, p. 247) note that bubbles and
crashes are “standard fare” in lab experiments with inexperienced test subjects. Prices adhere more closely
to fundamental values if subjects are allowed repeated opportunities to trade.
44
For an example, see Miao and Wang (2011).
45
We will have more to say about the relationship between financial crises and asset price collapses in our
concluding section.
43

33

2. First, high price expectations can explain why investors thought subprime mortgages
were such a good investment. The average coupon on subprime adjustable-rate mortgages
was several hundred basis points above the comparable prime loan. And yet, if investors
think that house prices can rise 11 percent per year, expected losses are minimal. This line
of thought also illustrates why the envelope of available mortgage credit expanded to such
a great extent. Zero-down loans, subprime mortgages, negative amortization, and reduced
documentation all make sense if prices are expected to grow rapidly, since it is the value of the
house—not the borrower’s income—that guarantees repayment of the loan. A bubble also
rationalizes the decisions of borrowers. All models of household portfolio choice generate
a close relationship between the level of expected returns on risky assets and household
leverage. If a risky asset (like a house) pays a return that exceeds the risk-free rate, then
borrowing a dollar and investing in the risky asset is a better-than-fair bet. The higher the
expected return, the more better-than-fair the bet is. In fact, standard models imply that
the demand for the risky asset is linear in the difference between the expected return on the
risky asset and the risk-free rate.46 That means that if the mortgage interest rate is (say) 5
percent and the expected return on housing increases from 6 percent to 7 percent, then the
demand for housing doubles.
Higher price expectations can also explain why so much mortgage credit was allocated to
low-wealth households and why this allocation occurred through securitization. Higher price
expectations encourage all households to increase their exposure to the housing market, but
households with significant wealth can finance this increase by reducing their investment in
bonds. Households with little or no wealth can finance an increase only through increased
borrowing. Consequently, even the most basic portfolio choice model implies both the increase
in mortgage debt and its distribution to low-wealth households.
The allocation of credit toward credit-constrained households also makes sense from the
investor’s point of view. High price expectations dramatically reduced the expected losses
on subprime loans, but had little effect on expected losses for prime loans, which were minimal to begin with due to their much higher credit quality. Consequently, the statement
that “mounting evidence that much of the boom and bust was concentrated in low-income
housing” in no way contradicts the validity of the bubble explanation.47 To our knowledge,
no one has disputed the fact that from 2002 to 2006, credit availability increased far more
for subprime borrowers than for prime borrowers—this growth was widely discussed as it
occurred.48 These differential patterns in the credit expansion simply reflect a basic fact:
46

For example, see equation (29) in Merton (1969).
The quoted statement comes from Rajan (2010, p. 130).
48
Additionally, the evidence that credit was expanding to low-income households was “mounting” as early
as 2005. Simon (2005) and National Mortgage News (2005) are two of literally thousands of articles about
47

34

relaxing a constraint only affects households who are constrained to begin with.
Finally, we have already seen that high prices can explain the growth of mortgage securitization. Because an individual borrower’s characteristics no longer affect loss estimates
as much when the underlying collateral is expected to rapidly appreciate, there is little incentive for the originator to gather information on these characteristics, or equivalently for
the investor to ask for it. As a result, the originator ends up with less private information
relative to an environment in which expected price growth is lower. As Dang, Gorton, and
Holmström (2010) point out, this “symmetric ignorance” actually facilitates trade.
It is important to stress that while we are deeply skeptical of the theory that securitization
caused the crisis by introducing information asymmetries, we are sympathetic to the idea that
securitization had some role in the financial crisis. Securitization cut out the middleman and
allowed a direct link between borrowers and investors. Rather than depositing money in
a financial institution which then had discretion over where to lend, securitization allowed
investors to target their money directly to a specific market—housing, in this case. Under
normal circumstances, this is a good thing. But in the housing mania of the mid-2000s,
securitization worked like Othello loved—not wisely, but too well. Indeed, the inefficiency of
a more traditional financial system might have proved a blessing during this time, as it could
have prevented overly optimistic borrowers and investors from finding each other.
Of course, it is deeply unsatisfying to explain the bad decisions of both borrowers and
lenders by citing a bubble without explaining how the bubble arose. One speculative story
begins with the idea that some fundamental determinants of housing prices caused them
to move higher early in the boom. Perhaps the accommodative monetary policy used to
fight the 2001 recession, or higher savings rates among developing countries, pushed U.S.
interest rates lower and thereby pushed U.S. housing prices higher. Additionally, after the
steep stock market decline of the early 2000s, U.S. investors may have been attracted to
real estate because it appeared to offer less risk. The decisions of Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac may have also played a role in supporting higher prices. Without speculating about the
reasons for their investment decisions, it is beyond dispute that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
were major players in the lending boom of the 2000s, even if much of this lending occurred
outside of their traditional guarantee business. Specifically, both Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac indirectly invested heavily in risky mortgages by buying AAA tranches of subprime and
Alt-A mortgage-backed securities and holding these securities in their retained portfolios.
Figure 10 shows the aggregate amount of subprime and Alt-A MBS that the GSEs purchased
for their retained portfolios between 2000 and 2007. The GSEs absorbed between 30 and
40 percent of subprime MBS and between 10 and 20 percent of Alt-A MBS over the boom
the growth of subprime credit in 2005.

35

years, except for 2007, when the collapse of the market meant that the GSEs took almost
all the subprime issuance. The GSEs were limited to the AAA-rated portions of the deals.
For subprime deals, AAA typically accounted for about 80 percent of the security issuance
by dollar value. This high percentage meant that in many of the boom years, the GSEs
accounted for half of the subprime AAA-rated securities.49
What we do not know is how any modest increases in house prices brought about by
developments like these morphed into a full-blown housing bubble, in which prices continued
to rise under their own momentum to levels that far exceeded their fundamental values.
Perhaps people simply noticed the original price increases and expected them to continue
indefinitely. These optimistic price expectations encouraged buyers to offer high prices for
houses, making the optimistic price expectations self-fulfilling—the hallmark of an asset
bubble. Of course, the unanswered question is why this bubble occurred in the 2000s and
not some other time. Unfortunately, the study of bubbles is too young to provide much
guidance on this point. For now, we have no choice but to plead ignorance, and we believe
that all honest economists should do the same. But acknowledging what we don’t know
should not blind us to what we do know: the bursting of a massive and unsustainable price
bubble in the U.S. housing market caused the financial crisis.

4

Policy Implications

Determining the origin of the financial crisis is not merely an idle academic pastime, because
alternative explanations imply different policy responses. To illustrate the issues involved,
consider the optimal policies related to two types of noneconomic catastrophes: a malaria
epidemic and an earthquake.
During the past 120 years, scientists have learned a lot about malaria. They know that
malaria is caused by microscopic parasites—not “bad air,” as originally thought—and they
know that it is transmitted by mosquitos. Armed with their empirically validated theories,
public health officials can take steps to prevent the disease from spreading, for example
by eliminating pools of standing water where mosquitos breed.50 Earthquakes are another
49

One popular perspective is that the purchases were driven primarily by the Congressionally mandated
affordable housing goals in the so-called GSE Act of 1992. This Act, formally titled the Federal Housing
Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act, mandated that a proportion of each GSE’s annual mortgage
purchases come from low-income households and low-income and minority neighborhoods. However, an
emerging empirical literature has attempted to directly measure the impact of the GSE affordable housing
goals on the volume of mortgage originations. For the most part, this literature has found negligible effects
(Bhutta 2010; Moulten 2010; Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo, and Owyang 2012).
50
See the description of how U.S. Army doctors attacked yellow fever and malaria during construction of
the Panama Canal in McCullough (1977).

36

matter. Science has a theory of why earthquakes occur, but quakes strike without warning
and there is nothing we can do to prevent them. Even so, policymakers can mitigate their
consequences. The Loma Prieta earthquake that hit San Francisco in 1989 and the Port-auPrince quake of 2010 were of roughly the same magnitude. But while 200,000 people died
in Haiti, only 60 died in San Francisco. The difference was that in San Francisco, officials
created and enforced rigorous building codes. As geologists say, “Earthquakes don’t kill
people—buildings do.”51
For policymakers, the important question is whether the economic events of 2002 to 2008
were more like malaria or more like an earthquake. Was the crisis a “preventable disaster,”
resembling a disease whose pathology is well-understood and for which we can administer an
effective treatment?52 Or, to draw on the Nocera quotation from the introduction, was the
crisis instead caused by a poorly understood “mass delusion” that we can neither predict nor
prevent? Proponents of the conventional wisdom on the crisis clearly view it like malaria.
A great deal of policy since the crisis has focused on improving disclosure and changing
incentives for financial intermediaries. But we are skeptical that this approach will work.
Consider the Dodd-Frank requirement that loan originators retain 5 percent of the credit
risk of certain mortgages. During the housing boom, would this requirement have stopped
lenders from making bad loans? In 2006 and 2007, lenders originated $791 billion subprime
loans.53 Had Dodd-Frank existed, lenders would have retained 5 percent of that amount or
$40 billion of subprime credit. Overall loss rates of 35 percent would have saddled them with
$14 billion in losses.54 Inspection of Table 4 shows that mortgage-related losses exceeded
that amount for no fewer than eight firms individually. In other words, if every one of those
firms had followed the Dodd-Frank requirement and originated the entire subprime mortgage
market, they would have suffered smaller losses than they actually did.
In addition, many analysts have argued that if the managers of financial institutions had
had their own money at stake, they would have been more careful (Rajan 2010, p. 164–165).
But the losses suffered by Jimmy Cayne and Richard Fuld, the CEOs of Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers, dwarf by an order of magnitude any clawback provision contemplated
so far. And further down the organization chart, Lehman staff owned nearly a third of
the company, so many managers obviously had significant skin in the game as well (Sorkin
2010, p. 294).55
51

See Hough and Jones (2002).
The quotation comes from Warren (2010).
53
See the 2011 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual (Inside Mortgage Finance Publications 2011).
54
The 35 percent figure is calculated using actual originations from the 2008 Mortgage Market Statistical
Annual, Table II.A.1 (Inside Mortgage Finance Publications 2008) and cumulative losses for the relevant
vintages using Jozoff et al. (2012).
55
See also the discussion in Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011). Bebchuk, Cohen, and Spamann (2010) argues
52

37

Provisions to help borrowers understand their mortgages are also likely to be ineffective.
The vast majority of borrowers who defaulted on their loans did so facing a payment amount
that was the same or lower as when they first got their mortgage, so how could clearer terms
have helped? Moreover, the idea that borrowers are the victims of confusing transactions is
not remotely new, indeed it was the premise behind the 1968 Truth in Lending Act as well as
the 1974 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act. Real estate regulators have been working
on a “simple form that conveys all the relevant information” for more than 40 years. Further,
policymakers recognized the benefits of condensing all the costs of a financial product into
a single number long before the emergence of behavioral economics, which is why the the
inscrutable annual percentage rate (APR) is now enshrined in law. Many people ridicule the
APR—until they try to come up with something better.
If borrowers and investors made bad decisions due to a collective belief that housing
prices would rise rapidly and could never fall, then better disclosures, simpler products, and
improved incentives for intermediaries would have made little difference. But that does not
mean that policy is always ineffective. Even though scientists cannot predict or prevent
earthquakes, robust building codes still prevent millions of deaths. How can we create a
bubble-resistant financial system? Many new regulations, including some in Dodd-Frank,
are designed to make the financial system more robust. We suggest two questions that can
be asked in evaluating future policy designs.
First, can financial institutions withstand a serious house price shock? It is not unreasonable to ask if a financial institution could withstand a 20 percent decline in house prices
without any liquidity problems. It is important to consider such scenarios even when they
appear remote. For example, just because house prices have already fallen 20 percent does
not mean they cannot fall another 20 percent. As Table 3 illustrates, some analysts were
convinced that a bottom had been reached for house prices in 2006. And after long periods
of stability, even sophisticated analysts are tempted to declare that economic fluctuations
are a thing of the past. Recall that in the mid-2000s, economists were puzzling about what
appeared to be a permanent reduction in macroeconomic volatility.
Second, can borrowers withstand a substantial fall in house prices? Warren and Tyagi
(2004) argue that families could practice a “financial fire drill,” which would ask how they
would get by if one income-earner lost a job. A fire drill could also include a scenario in
which falling house prices prevent the family from the selling their house for more than they
owe on their mortgage. Effectively, such a fire drill would be similar to so-called stress tests
that regulators conduct at financial institutions.
that managers did make large profits earlier but does not dispute that they had large amounts of their own
money at stake when the firms collapsed.

38

Finally, everyone—from first-time homebuyers to Wall Street CEOs—needs to recognize
that asset prices move in ways that we do not yet understand. Unfortunately, none of the new
mortgage disclosure forms proposed by regulators includes the critical piece of information
that borrowers need to know: there is a chance that the house they are buying will soon be
worth substantially less than the outstanding balance on the mortgage. If this happens and
the borrower does not have sufficient precautionary savings, then that borrower is one job
loss or serious illness away from default.
Critics might contend that treating bubbles like earthquakes is reminiscent of a doctrine
often associated with Alan Greenspan: policymakers should not try to stop bubbles, which
are not easily identified, but should instead clean up the damage left behind when they
burst. To some extent, we concur with this doctrine, because we believe that policymakers
and regulators have little ability to identify or to burst bubbles in real time.56 Yet this
strategy works only when the financial system is robust to adverse shocks.
As we mentioned earlier, the reforms of the 1930s failed to prevent a bubble from forming
in the stock market in the late 1990s. But the early 2000s stock market collapse did not
lead to an economic crisis or to widespread financial problems among households. Why not?
One possible explanation is that the reforms of the 1930s made the financial system “bubble
resistant,” at least for equities. Our hope is that we can achieve something similar with
housing in the future. But for that to happen, housing policy must be based on the facts.

56

We know of no central bank that has successfully managed a bubble. In the early 1990s, the Japanese
central bank was credited with engineering an end to the bubble in Japan, but few central bankers would
use that as a model for policy today.

39

References
Acharya, Viral V., and Matthew Richardson, eds. 2009. Restoring Financial Stability: How
to Repair a Failed System. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2009. “Why Don’t Lenders Renegotiate More Home Mortgages? Redefaults, Self-Cures and Securitization.” Working Paper
No. 15159. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Adelson, Mark. 2003. “A Journey to the Alt-A Zone: A Brief Primer on Alt-A Mortgage
Loans.” Nomura Fixed Income Research, June 3, 2003.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3): 488–500.
Arnold, Chris. 2009. “Forcing Banks To Put More ‘Skin In The Game’.” National Public
Radio, June 18, 2009. Available at http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?
storyId=105558991.
Ashcraft, Adam B., and Til Schuermann. 2008. “Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 318. Available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr318.pdf.
Bair, Sheila C. 2007. “Statement on Possible Responses to Rising Mortgage Foreclosures.”
Testimony before the House Financial Services Committee, April 17, 2007. Available
at http://www.fdic.gov/news/news/speeches/archives/2007/chairman/spapr1707.
html.
Barberis, Nicholas. 2011. “Psychology and the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008.” Yale University
Working Paper. Available at http://faculty.som.yale.edu/nicholasbarberis/cp10.
pdf.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Holger Spamann. 2010. “The Wages of Failure: Executive Compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000–2008.” Yale Journal on Regulation
27(2): 257–282.
Bhutta, Neil. 2010. “GSE Activity and Mortgage Supply in Lower-Income and Minority
Neighborhoods: The Effect of the Affordable Housing Goals.” Journal of Real Estate
Finance and Economics (Online First).

40

Brunnermeier, Markus K. 2008.

“Bubbles.”

In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Eco-

nomics, eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, second edition. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan. Available at http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?
id=pde2008_S000278.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong. 2012. “A Welfare Criterion for Models
with Distorted Beliefs.” Working Paper. Available at http://www.economics.harvard.
edu/faculty/simsek/files/welfare8_a.pdf.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “Understanding Booms and
Busts in Housing Markets.” Working Paper No. 16734. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Carter, Susan B., Scott S. Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch,
and Gavin Wright. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Wall Street and the Housing Bubble:
Bad Incentives, Bad Models, or Bad Luck?” Princeton University Working Paper.
Cochrane, John H. 2005. Asset Pricing, revised edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Cordell, Larry, Yilin Huang, and Meredith Williams. 2011. “Collateral Damage: Sizing and Assessing the Subprime CDO Crisis.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Working Paper. Available at http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/
publications/working-papers/2011/wp11-30.pdf.
Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Stafford. 2009. “The Economics of Structured
Finance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 3–25.
Dang, Tri V., Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2010. “Financial Crises and the Optimality of Debt for Liquidity Provision.” Yale School of Management Working Paper.
Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van den Heuvel. 2009. “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Papers,
No. 2009-49. Washington, DC.
Eakes, Martin. 2007. “Evolution of an Economic Crisis? The Subprime Lending Disaster and the Threat to the Broader Economy.” Testimony before Joint Economic
41

Committee, September 19, 2007. Available at http://www.responsiblelending.org/
mortgage-lending/policy-legislation/congress/senate-sept-07-final.pdf.
Elul, Ronel. 1997. “Financial Innovation, Precautionary Saving and the Risk-Free Rate.”
Journal of Mathematical Economics 27(1): 113–131.
Erel, Isil, Taylor D. Nadauld, and René M. Stulz. 2011. “Why Did U.S. Banks Invest in
Highly-Rated Securitization Tranches?” Working Paper No. 17269. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fahlenbrach, Rudiger, and Rene M. Stulz. 2011. “Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit
Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 99(1): 11–26.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium.” Working Paper No. 15988. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. 2010. “Credit Ratings And the Financial Crisis.” Preliminary Staff Report, June 2, 2010. Available at http://fcic-static.law.stanford.
edu/cdn_media/fcic-reports/2010-0602-Credit-Ratings.pdf.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. 2011. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final
Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis
in the United States. New York: Public Affairs.
Fishbein, Allen J. 2006.
“Calculated Risk: Assessing Non-Traditional Mortgage
Products.”
Testimony before the Subcommittee on Housing & Transportation and the Subcommittee on Economic Policy; Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs; September 20, 2006. Available at http://
banking.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?Fuseaction=Hearings.Hearing&Hearing_
ID=f70279b0-1372-4075-a740-9a1aeb7bdc3e.
Flanagan, Christopher, Ting Ko, Seva Levitski, Chris Muth, and Amy Sze. 2006a. “February
2006 House Price Appreciation Update.” J.P. Morgan Global Credit Research, April 11,
2006.
Flanagan, Christopher, Ting Ko, Seva Levitski, Chris Muth, and Amy Sze. 2006b. “House
Price Appreciation Update.” JP Morgan Global Credit Research, various dates.

42

Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul S. Willen. 2008. “Just
the Facts: An Initial Analysis of Subprime’s Role in the Housing Crisis.” Journal of
Housing Economics 17(4): 291–305.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2008. “Negative Equity and
Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence.” The Journal of Urban Economics 64(2): 234–245.
Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel. 2010. “Natural Expectations and
Macroeconomic Fluctuations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(4): 67–84.
Garber, Peter M. 2000. Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Geanakoplos, John. 2009. “The Leverage Cycle.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
eds. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, 1–65. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “What Comes to Mind.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(4): 1399–1433.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2011 [online proof]. “Neglected Risks,
Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul S. Willen. 2008. “Making Sense of the Subprime Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 69–145.
Gerardi, Kristopher S., Christopher L. Foote, and Paul S. Willen. 2011. “Reasonable People
Did Disagree: Optimism and Pessimism about the U.S. Housing Market Before the Crash.”
In Reinventing the American Mortgage System: Rethink, Recover, Rebuild., eds. Marvin
Smith and Susan M. Wachter, 36–78. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Gerardi, Kristopher S., Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. “The Impact of Deregulation and Financial Innovation on Consumers: The Case of the Mortgage Market.” Journal
of Finance 65(1): 333–360.
Gerth, Jeff. 1981. “Savings Regulators End Mortgage Curb.” The New York Times, April
24.
Ghent, Andrea, Ruben Hernandez-Murillo, and Michael T. Owyang. 2012. “Did Affordable
Housing Legislation Contribute to the Subprime Securities Boom?” Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Working Paper 2012-005A. Available at http://research.stlouisfed.org/
wp/2012/2012-005.pdf.
43

Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. 2010. “Can Cheap Credit
Explain the Housing Boom?” Working Paper No. 16230. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Gorton, Gary. 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1980. “Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids.”
Journal of Finance 35(2): 323–334.
Guttentag, Jack. 1984. “Recent Changes in the Primary Home Mortgage Market.” Housing
Finance Review 3: 221–254.
Harrigan, Susan. 1981. “Wachovia Has Other Bankers Taking Notice.” Wall Street Journal,
April 27.
Herzog, John P., and James S. Earley. 1970. “Home Mortgage Delinquency and Foreclosure.”
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at http://www.nber.
org/chapters/c3293.pdf.
Hough, Susan, and Lucile Jones. 2002. “Earthquakes Don’t Kill People, Buildings
Do.” San Francisco Chronicle Op-Ed Commentary, December 4, 2002. Available at
http://pasadena.wr.usgs.gov/office/hough/oped-sf.html.
Inside Mortgage Finance Publications. 2008. 2008 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual.
Bethesda, MD.
Inside Mortgage Finance Publications. 2011. 2011 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual.
Bethesda, MD.
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil. 2011. “Liar’s Loan? Effects of Origination
Channel and Information Falsification on Mortgage Delinquency.” Columbia University
Graduate School of Business Working Paper. Available at http://www.columbia.edu/
~wj2006/liars_loan.pdf.
Jozoff, Matthew, John Sim, Abhishek Mistry, Asif Sheikh, Robert Saltarelli, and Kaustub
Samant. 2012. “MBS Credit Monthly, February.” JP Morgan SPG Research, February 10,
2012.
Kashyap, Anil K. 2010. “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Risk Management.” Paper Prepared for the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Feburary 27, 2010. Available
44

at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/anil.kashyap/research/papers/lesson_for_
fcic.pdf.
Khandani, Amir E., Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton. 2009. “Systemic Risk and the
Refinancing Ratchet Effect.” Working Paper No. 15362. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Klaman, Saul B. 1959. “The Postwar Rise of Mortgage Companies.” Bureau of Economic
Research Occasional Paper No. 60. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Liu, David. 2005. “Credit Performance of Option ARMs.” U.S. Securitized Products Strategy
Group Slide Deck, August 15, 2005.
MacKay, Charles. 2003 [1841]. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds.
Hampshire, England: Harriman House.
Mago, Akhil, and Sihan Shu. 2005. “HEL Bond Profile Across HPA Scenarios.” U.S. ABS
Weekly Outlook, Lehman Brothers Fixed-Income Research, August 15, 2005.
McCullough, David. 1977. The Path Between the Seas: The Creation of the Panama Canal,
1870-1914. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Merton, Robert C. 1969. “Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The ContinuousTime Case.” Review of Economics and Statistics 51(3): 247–257.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4):
1449–1496.
Miao, Jianjun, and Pengfei Wang. 2011. “Bubbles and Credit Constraints.” Boston University
Working Paper. Available at http://people.bu.edu/miaoj/Bubble.pdf.
Morgenson, Gretchen, and Joshua Rosner. 2011. Reckless Endangerment: How Outsized
Ambition, Greed, and Corruption Led to Economic Armageddon. New York: Times Books.
Moulten, Shawn. 2010. “The 1992 GSE Act and Loan Application Outcomes.” University
of Notre Dame Working Paper.
Muolo, Paul, and Mathew Padilla. 2010. Chain of Blame: How Wall Street Caused the
Mortgage and Credit Crisis. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
45

National Mortgage News. 2005. “Subprime Growth Fueled $750 Billion in 3rd-Quarter Originations.” October 24, 2005.
Nocera, Joe. 2011. “Inquiry is Missing Bottom Line.” New York Times, page B1. January 29,
2011. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/29/business/29nocera.html.
Porter, David, and Vernon L. Smith. 2008. “Price Bubbles.” In Handbook of Experimental
Economics Results, eds. Charles R. Plott and Vernon L. Smith, vol. 1, 247–255. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World
Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ranieri, Lewis S. 1996. “The Origins of Securitization, Sources of its Growth, and its Future
Potential.” In A Primer on Securitization, ed. Leon T. Kendall and Michael J. Fishman,
31–44. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Salmon, Felix. 2009. “Recipe for Disaster: The Formula that Killed Wall Street.”
Wired Magazine Available at http://www.wired.com/techbiz/it/magazine/17-03/wp_
quant?currentPage=all.
Savastano, Albert. 2005. “Basic Report: Golden West Financial.” Janney Montgomery Scott,
January 13, 2005.
Shiller, Robert J. 2005. Irrational Exuberance, second edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Sichelman, Lew. 1990. “Fannie Mae Sets 30 Percent Down on Low-Doc Loan.” Chicago Tribune, July 14, 1990. Available at http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1990-07-14/
news/9002270602_1_low-doc-loan-no-doc-loans-maximum-fha-loan.
Simon, Ruth. 2005. “Mortgage Lenders Loosen Standards—Despite Growing Concerns,
Banks Keep Relaxing Credit-Score, Income and Debt-Loan Rules.” Wall Street Journal,
page D1. July 26, 2005.
Simon, Ruth, and James R. Hagerty. 2005. “How American Lenders Shelter Themselves.”
Wall Street Journal, page C1. September 22, 2005.
Simsek, Alp. 2012. “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints.” Harvard University
Working Paper. Available at http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/simsek/
files/simsekBeliefDisagreementsCollateralConstraints7_EMArevision.pdf.
46

Smith, Vernon L., Gerry L. Suchanek, and Arlington W. Williams. 1988. “Bubbles, Crashes,
and Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets.” Econometrica 56(5):
1119–1151.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2010. Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall Street and
Washington Fought to Save the Financial System–and Themselves. New York: Penguin.
Stahl, David. 1996. “A COFI break.” Mortgage Banking November 1.
Tett, Gillian. 2009. Fool’s Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, Shattered
Global Markets and Unleashed a Catastrophe. New York: Little, Brown.
Thomas, Jason, and Robert Van Order. 2011. “A Closer Look at Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac: What We Know, What We Think We Know and What We Don’t Know.” George
Washington University Department of Finance Draft Paper (March).
Warren, Elizabeth. 2010. “Priorities for the New Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.”
Speech before the Consumer Federation of America Financial Services Conference, December 2, 2010. Available at http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/tg987.aspx.
Warren, Elizabeth, and Amelia W. Tyagi. 2004. The Two Income Trap: Why Middle-Class
Parents Are Going Broke. New York: Basic Books.
Zimmerman, Thomas. 2005. “Subprime Home Equities: Its (Almost) All About Home
Prices.” UBS U.S. Securitized Products Strategy Group, Conference Call Slide Presentation, September 26, 2005.
Zuckerman, Gregory. 2010. The Greatest Trade Ever: The Behind-the-Scenes Story of How
John Paulson Defied Wall Street and Made Financial History. New York: Crown Business.

47

Conventional Wisdom

Insiders
Borrowers

Mortgage
Brokers

Investment
Bankers

Lenders/
Investors

Bubble Theory

Bubble Fever
Borrowers

Mortgage
Brokers

Investment
Bankers

Lenders/
Investors

Figure 1. Alternative Theories of the Foreclosure Crisis. The top panel illustrates the conventional wisdom about the financial crisis: mortgage industry insiders (mortgage brokers and investment
bankers) took advantage of outsiders (borrowers and investors). Brokers cheated borrowers by extending
them “exploding” mortgages, which become unaffordable when their interest rates reset. Investment bankers
took advantage of investors by packaging mortgages in complex securities, leaving investors unable to discern the “toxic” nature of the mortgages involved. The lower panel presents the bubble view of the crisis:
both borrowers and lenders believed that house prices would continue rising. Borrowers were eager to purchase homes and investors wanted more exposure to the housing market. The securitization process merely
facilitated these transactions.

48

January 2005 Vintage
11
10
9
8
7
6

Interest rate

←“Reset”

30
-Cumulative defaults
2005

2006

2007

49
Interest rate

“Reset”→

45

2008
11
10
9
8
7
6

Default fraction

Default fraction

Interest rate%

Interest rate%

45
Cumulative defaults&

30

15

15

0

0

2009
2005
January 2007 Vintage

2006

2007

2008

2009

Interest rate%
“Reset”→
45
Cumulative defaults&

30
15
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

Default fraction

Interest rate

11
10
9
8
7
6

January 2006 Vintage

2009

Figure 2. Interest Rates and Cumulative Defaults for Three Vintages of Subprime 2/28 Mortgages. These graphs illustrate that
defaults on subprime 2/28 mortgages did not generally spike after two years when their interest rates reset. In fact, the worst-performing vintage in
the chart, the January 2007 loans, did not experience an interest rate reset, because interest rates had fallen significantly by January 2009.
Source: authors’ calculations using data from Lender Processing Services, Inc.

FICO < 620

LTV= 100

80
60
40
20

Failure rate&

0

1.5
1

Originations&
0.5

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

60
40
20

Failure rate&

0

1.5
1
0.5

Originations&

0

00

50

Low-doc/No-doc

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

0

Negativ-Amort+LTV> 90+Low-Doc/No-Doc
100

80
60
40
20

Failure rate&
1.5
1

Originations&

0.5

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

0

60
40
20

Failure rate&

0

1.5

Orig. in millions

0

80

1
0.5

Originations&
00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Orig. in millions

Failure rate in %

100

Failure rate in %

80

Orig. in millions

Failure rate in %

100

Orig. in millions

Failure rate in %

100

0

Figure 3. Failure rates and Originations for Selected Nonprime Mortgages. Failure rates are graphed by year of origination, and
correspond to the fraction of mortgages that are at least 60-days delinquent two years after origination. The dashed line denotes years after 2005.
Source: authors’ calculations using data from CoreLogic, Inc. (originally LoanPerformance). The sample includes all subprime and Alt-A loans in the
CoreLogic database.

51
Figure 4. Evidence of Option ARMs and Low Documentation Loans Before the Housing Boom. The ad on the left, from The New York
Times on July 26, 1998, is for a payment-option ARM. The ad on the right, from The New York Times on June 25, 1989, is for a low-documentation
loan (“no income verification”). These ads illustrate that many of the mortgages used extensively during the boom had been available many years
previously.
Source: New York Times.

Average LTV

Loan-to-Value in %

100

VA&

95
90
85

-FHA

80
75

-S&L loans

70
65

44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64

67

FHA and VA Market Share

Market Share in %

45
40
35

-FHA+VA

30
25
20
15
10
5

-VA

0
44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64

67

Figure 5. FHA and VA Loan Programs in the Immediate Postwar Era. In response to changes
in government policies, mortgages with no downpayments were prevalent in the 1950s and 1960s, decades
before the mortgage crisis began.
Source: LTVs from Herzog and Earley (1970) and Market shares from series Dc948 (FHA), DC949 (VA) and
Dc934 (Total) from Carter et al. (2006).

52

70
60

-LTV>80
LTV>90&

% of Purchases

50
40
30

LTV≥95&

20
10

-LTV≥100
0
90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

06

08

10

Figure 6. Distribution of Combined Loan-to-Value (LTV) Ratios on Home Purchases in
Massachusetts: 1990-2011. The top line shows that a majority of home buyers in Massachusetts put
down less than 20 percent in most years after 1990. These statistics include all mortgages taken out at the
time of purchase and encompass cash buyers.
Source: Warren Group collection of data from Massachusetts deed registries and authors’ calculations.

53

The Growing Role of Mortgage Companies
60

200

Percent

40

in Billions of Dollars

Market share of
mortgage
&
companies

50

150

30

100

20
Mortgage Company
Net acquisitions/
Total market&

10

1975

1980

1985

1990

S&L
Originations&
← S&L Sales

50
S&L Purchase%

0
1970

Evolution of S&Ls

1995

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Decline of the “Originate-to-Hold” Model

80
in Percent

54

100

60
40

Share of Net
Acquisitions by →
Originators

20
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 7. Mortgage Statistics for Mortgage Companies and Savings and Loans: 1970-1997. The upper left panel shows that the market
share of mortgage companies, a type of mortgage bank that originates mortgages for sale to outside investors, began to grow rapidly in the late 1970s.
The upper right panel shows that after 1980, S&Ls sold most of the mortgages they originated, becoming much like mortgage companies. The bottom
panel shows that the decline of the “originate-to-hold” model started long before the recent housing boom.
Source: Carter et al. (2006).

Reference Portfolio
Security
ABFC 2006-OPT1 M8
ABFC 2006-OPT2 M8
ABSHE 2006-HE3 M7
ABSHE 2006-HE4 M7
ACE 2006-FM2 M8
ACE 2006-OP2 M9
ARSI 2006-W1 M8
CARR 2006-FRE1 M9
CARR 2006-FRE2 M8
CARR 2006-NC1 M8
CARR 2006-NC2 M8
CARR 2006-NC3 M9
CARR 2006-OPT1 M8
CMLTI 2006-AMC1 M8
CMLTI 2006-NC1 M8
CMLTI 2006-WFH2 M9
CMLTI 2006-WMC1 M8
CMLTI 2007-WFH1 M9
CWL 2006-24 M8
FFML 2006-FF11 M8
FFML 2006-FF12 M8
FFML 2006-FF14 M8
FFML 2006-FF15 M8
FFML 2006-FF16 M8
FFML 2006-FF17 M8
FFML 2006-FF7 M8
FFML 2006-FF9 M8
FHLT 2006-A M7
FHLT 2006-B M8
FMIC 2006-2 M8
FMIC 2006-3 M8
GSAMP 2006-FM2 M8
HEAT 2006-3 M8
HEAT 2006-5 M8
HEAT 2006-6 M8
HEAT 2006-7 M8
HEAT 2006-8 M8
IXIS 2006-HE3 B2
JPMAC 2006-CW2 MV8
JPMAC 2006-FRE1 M8
JPMAC 2006-WMC3 M8
LBMLT 2006-11 M8
LBMLT 2006-4 M8
LBMLT 2006-6 M8
LBMLT 2006-7 M8

Type
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime

Notional
Amount
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222

CUSIP
00075QAM4
00075XAP2
04541GXK3
04544GAP4
00442CAN9
00441YAP7
040104RQ6
144538AN5
14454AAN9
144531FF2
14453FAM1
144528AN6
144531FV7
17309PAL0
172983AN8
17309MAN3
17307G2F4
17311CAM3
23243HAN1
32028PAP0
32027GAN6
32027LAP0
32028GAP0
320275AN0
32028KAP1
320277AP1
320276AP3
35729RAN6
35729QAN8
31659EAM0
316599AN9
36245DAN0
437084UZ7
437096AQ3
437097AP3
43709NAP8
43709QAP1
46602UAM0
46629BBA6
46626LFV7
46629KAP4
542512AN8
54251MAN4
54251RAN3
54251TAN9

Fitch
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB

BBB+
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBBBBB+

A-

BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+

BBB+
BBB+
ABBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB

BBB+
BBB+

Moody's
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2

S&P
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBBBBB+
A
BBB+
BBB+
BBB
BBBABBB
BBB
BBBBBB+
BBBBBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
ABBB+
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
ABBB+
A-

Base WAL (yrs)
3.9
4.1
3.8
3.8
4.5
4.3
3.8
3.8
4.2
3.6
3.8
4.0
3.6
4.1
3.8
4.0
3.7
4.5
4.9
3.9
4.2
4.2
4.3
4.3
4.4
3.6
3.7
3.9
4.4
4.1
4.4
4.0
3.5
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.8
4.3
3.6
4.3
4.7
3.9
4.2
4.2

Dated Date
8/10/2006
10/12/2006
4/17/2006
4/28/2006
10/30/2006
10/30/2006
2/7/2006
6/28/2006
10/18/2006
2/8/2006
6/21/2006
8/10/2006
3/14/2006
9/28/2006
6/29/2006
8/30/2006
1/31/2006
2/9/2007
12/29/2006
9/6/2006
8/25/2006
9/25/2006
10/25/2006
11/30/2006
11/25/2006
5/31/2006
7/7/2006
5/10/2006
8/3/2006
7/6/2006
10/27/2006
9/29/2006
3/30/2006
6/25/2006
8/1/2006
10/3/2006
12/1/2006
9/29/2006
8/8/2006
1/27/2006
9/14/2006
12/14/2006
5/9/2006
7/26/2006
8/30/2006

Legal Final
9/25/2036
10/25/2036
3/25/2036
5/25/2036
8/25/2036
8/25/2036
3/25/2036
7/25/2036
10/25/2036
1/25/2036
6/25/2036
8/25/2036
2/25/2036
9/25/2036
8/25/2036
8/25/2036
12/25/2035
1/25/2037
5/25/2037
8/25/2036
9/25/2036
10/25/2036
11/25/2036
12/25/2036
12/25/2036
5/25/2036
6/25/2036
5/25/2036
8/25/2036
7/25/2036
11/25/2036
9/25/2036
7/25/2036
10/25/2036
11/25/2036
1/25/2037
3/25/2037
1/25/2037
8/25/2036
5/25/2035
8/25/2036
12/25/2036
5/25/2036
7/25/2036
8/25/2036

Servicer
OOMC
OOMC
OOMC
SPS
WFB
WFB
AQMC
FREM
FREM
NCMC
CARR
NCMC
OOMC
AQMC
WFB
WFB
WFB
WFB
CHLS
WFB
ALS
AURA
AURA
NCHL
ALS
WFB
WFB
WFB
WFB
WFB
WFB
WFB
SPS
WFB
SPS
SPS
SPS
WFB
CWHL
JPM
JPM
WMB
WMB
WMB
WMB

As of February 26, 2007. Goldman Sachs neither represents nor provides any assurances that the actual Reference Portfolio on the Closing Date or any future date will
have the same characteristics as represented above. See the final Offering Circular for the Initial Reference Portfolio.
Reference Obligations are designated as “Midprime” herein if the weighted average FICO score of the underlying collateral that secures such Reference Obligation is greater than
625. All other Reference Obligations are designated as “Subprime” herein.

55

Reference Portfolio
Security
LBMLT 2006-WL1 M8
MABS 2006-HE5 M9
MABS 2006-NC2 M9
MABS 2006-WMC4 M8
MLMI 2006-WMC1 B2A
MSAC 2006-HE7 B2
MSAC 2006-HE8 B2
MSAC 2006-NC4 B2
MSAC 2006-NC5 B3
MSAC 2006-WMC1 B2
MSAC 2006-WMC2 B2
MSAC 2007-NC1 B2
MSC 2006-HE2 B2
MSIX 2006-2 B2
NHEL 2006-5 M8
NHELI 2006-FM1 M8
NHELI 2006-FM2 M8
NHELI 2006-HE3 M8
OOMLT 2007-1 M8
SABR 2006-FR1 B2
SABR 2006-FR3 B2
SABR 2006-HE2 B2
SAIL 2006-4 M7
SASC 2006-EQ1A M8
SASC 2006-OPT1 M7
SURF 2007-BC1 B2
SVHE 2006-EQ2 M8
SVHE 2006-OPT1 M7
SVHE 2006-OPT2 M7
SVHE 2006-OPT3 M7
SVHE 2006-OPT5 M8
ABSHE 2006-HE7 M9
BSABS 2006-HE9 M9
CMLTI 2007-AMC1 M8
FFML 2007-FF1 B2
HASC 2006-HE2 M8
HEAT 2007-1 M8
LBMLT 2006-8 M8
LBMLT 2006-9 M8
MLMI 2006-HE6 B3
MLMI 2006-OPT1 B2
MSAC 2007-HE1 B2
OOMLT 2006-3 M9
SASC 2006-WF3 M9
SVHE 2006-OPT4 M7

Type
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Midprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime
Subprime

Notional
Amount
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222
22,222,222

CUSIP
542514RD8
576455AN9
55275BAP2
57645MAP7
59020U4H5
61750MAP0
61750SAP7
61748LAN2
61749BAQ6
61744CXV3
61749KAP8
617505AN2
617451FD6
617463AM6
66988YAN2
65536HCF3
65537FAN1
65536QAN8
68400DAP9
81375WJY3
813765AH7
81377AAM4
86360WAM4
86360RAN3
86359UAN9
84752BAQ2
83611XAM6
83611MMF2
83611MMT2
83611MPR3
83612CAN9
04544QAP2
07389MAP2
17311BAL7
32028TAN7
44328BAP3
43710LAN4
54251UAN6
54251WAN2
59023XAN6
59022VAN1
617526AP3
68389BAM5
86361EAP6
83611YAM4

Fitch

BBB

BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB

BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB+

BBB-

BBB+
BBB

BBB-

Moody's
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2

S&P
BBB
BBBBBBBBB+
BBB+
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBBABBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
BBB+
BBB
ABBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBB
ABBB
BBB
BBBBBBBBB
BBB
BBB+
BBB+
ABBB+
BBBBBB
BBB
BBBBBBBBB+

Base WAL (yrs)
3.1
4.5
4.2
4.6
3.6
4.9
5.1
4.5
5.3
4.2
4.7
5.3
4.5
5.0
4.0
3.3
4.1
4.0
4.3
4.6
5.0
4.1
4.1
5.2
3.7
4.9
4.6
3.6
3.6
3.7
4.2
4.4
4.4
4.6
4.8
4.3
4.5
4.4
4.4
4.6
3.9
5.2
4.0
4.3
3.6

Dated Date
2/8/2006
12/28/2006
9/28/2006
11/30/2006
2/14/2006
10/31/2006
11/29/2006
6/23/2006
11/28/2006
1/26/2006
6/28/2006
1/26/2007
4/28/2006
11/28/2006
9/28/2006
1/30/2006
10/31/2006
8/31/2006
1/24/2007
2/23/2006
8/3/2006
9/28/2006
6/25/2006
7/17/2006
4/25/2006
1/24/2007
12/28/2006
3/10/2006
4/7/2006
5/12/2006
6/19/2006
11/30/2006
11/30/2006
3/9/2007
1/26/2007
12/5/2006
2/1/2007
9/21/2006
10/12/2006
12/28/2006
9/26/2006
1/26/2007
10/27/2006
9/25/2006
5/26/2006

Legal Final
1/25/2036
11/25/2036
8/25/2036
10/25/2036
1/25/2037
9/25/2036
10/25/2036
6/25/2036
10/25/2036
12/25/2035
7/25/2036
11/25/2036
3/25/2036
11/25/2036
11/25/2036
11/25/2035
7/25/2036
7/25/2036
1/25/2037
11/25/2035
5/25/2036
7/25/2036
7/25/2036
7/25/2036
4/25/2036
1/25/2038
1/25/2037
3/25/2036
5/25/2036
6/25/2036
7/25/2036
11/25/2036
11/25/2036
12/25/2036
1/25/2038
12/25/2036
5/25/2037
9/25/2036
10/25/2036
11/25/2037
8/25/2037
11/25/2036
2/25/2037
9/25/2036
6/25/2036

Servicer
LBMC
WFB
WFB
WFB
WCC
CWHL
WFB
WFB
CWHL
JPM
WFB
CWHL
WFB
SAX
NOVA
WFB
WFB
WFB
OOMC
HSC
HSC
HSC
ALS
AURA
AURA
WCC
OLS
OOMC
OOMC
OOMC
OOMC
SPS
EMC
CWHL
HLS
CMB
SPS
WMB
WMB
WCC
OOMC
SM
OOMC
ALS
OOMC

As of February 26, 2007. Goldman Sachs neither represents nor provides any assurances that the actual Reference Portfolio on the Closing Date or any future date will
have the same characteristics as represented above. See the final Offering Circular for the Initial Reference Portfolio.
Reference Obligations are designated as “Midprime” herein if the weighted average FICO score of the underlying collateral that secures such Reference Obligation is greater than
625. All other Reference Obligations are designated as “Subprime” herein.

56

Figure 8. The Reference Portfolio of the Abacus Deal. These two tables present the bonds
included in the Goldman Sachs Abacus deal. They illustrate that potential investors in this deal had all the
information they needed to model the underlying cash flows on the mortgages involved.

55

Figure 12: Moody’s downgrades and impairments of 2006 vintage RMBS.

2006 Vintage MBSs

Figure 13: Moody’s downgrades and impairments of 2006 vintage cash flow and hybrid ABS CDOs.

2007 Vintage MBSs

Figure 13: Moody’s downgrades and impairments of 2006 vintage cash flow and hybrid ABS CDOs.

Figure 12: Moody’s downgrades and impairments of 2006 vintage RMBS.

2006 Vintage CDOs

2007 Vintage CDOs

56
Figure 9. Downgrades and Impairments Among Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) and Collateralized Debt Obligations
(CDOs). The two panels on the left show that among private-label MBS, lower-rated tranches suffered massive losses. However, while a large
fraction of AAA-rated tranches were downgraded, the vast majority of these tranches paid off, as few of them suffered actual impairments. The two
panels on the right show that the same is not true for CDOs. Because these bonds tended to be backed by the lower-rated tranches of private-label
MBS, both the AAA-rated and the lower-rated tranches of CDOs suffered significant impairments.
Source: Tables 12, 13, 17 and 18 in Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2010).

PSfrag

Market Share in %

80

Subprime&

40
30
20

-Alt-A

10
0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Figure 10. GSE Investments in Subprime and Alt-A Residential MBS: 2000-2007. This graph
shows that the government-sponsored housing enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, were significant
purchasers of highly rated tranches of subprime and Alt-A securities during the housing boom. As a share of
the overall subprime market, GSE purchases rose sharply in 2007 (note the change in vertical scale between 40
and 80 percent). This increase in share came about even though the absolute amount of subprime securities
purchased by the GSEs declined in 2007; the overall subprime market contracted much more in percentage
terms than GSE purchases did.
Source: Thomas and Van Order (2011).

57

Payment changes and default
2007 2008 2009 2010 All
FRM share
38% 48% 62% 74% 59%
Prior to delinquency spell that led to foreclosure...
Reset
18% 20% 18% 11% 17%
% of loans Payment increase
12% 17% 11% 9%
12%
with...
4%
Payment reduction
0%
0%
4%
8%
No change since orig. 88% 82% 85% 83% 84%
Private Label
68% 54% 37% 23% 41%
# obs in thous.
374 641 874 756 2,646
Relative Performance of Subprime ARMs and FRMs
All Subprime
# of orig.
P (default)
in thou.

Subprime FRMs
# of orig. Share
P (default)
in thou.
in %

Subprime 2/28s
# of orig. Share
P (default)
in thou.
in %

2005
2006
2007

529
504
246

41.9
55.9
55.9

198
258
208

37.3
51.2
84.5

37.1
50.7
53.8

332
246
38

62.7
48.8
15.5

44.8
61.4
66.8

Total

1278

50.1

663

51.9

47.6

615

48.1

52.8

Table 1. Payment Changes and Defaults among Various Mortgage Types. The top table shows
that a small minority of borrowers who eventually lost their homes to foreclosure experienced a payment
increase before they first became delinquent. Payment increases preceded initial delinquency for only 12
percent of borrowers. Eighty-four percent of borrowers who eventually lost their homes were making the
same payment at the time of initial delinquency as when they first took out their loans. The bottom table
shows that 52.8 percent of subprime borrowers with adjustable-rate 2/28 mortgages originated from 2005 to
2007 defaulted. The comparable percentage for fixed-rate mortgages is 47.6 percent—only a few percentage
points lower.
Source: authors’ calculations using data from Lender Processing Services, Inc.

58

Name
(1) Aggressive
(2)
(3) Base
(4) Pessimistic
(5) Meltdown

Scenario
11% HPA over the life of the pool
8% HPA for life
HPA slows to 5% by end-2005
0% HPA for the next 3 years 5% thereafter
-5% for the next 3 years, 5% thereafter

Probability
15%
15%
50%
15%
5%

Cum Loss
1.4%
3.2%
5.6%
11.1%
17.1%

Table 2. Conditional Forecasts of Losses on Subprime Investments from Lehman Brothers.
This table shows that investors knew that subprime investments would turn sour if housing prices fell. The
“meltdown” scenario for housing prices above implies cumulative losses of 17.1 percent on subprime-backed
bonds; such losses would be large enough to wipe out all but the highest-rated tranches of most subprime
deals. The table also shows that investors placed small probabilities on these adverse price scenarios, a fact
that explains why they were so willing to buy these bonds.
Source: “HEL Bond Profile Across HPA Scenarios” from Lehman Brothers: “U.S. ABS Weekly Outlook,”
August 15, 2005.

Date of Data from
12/8/06
10/06
1/10/07
11/06
2/6/07
12/06
3/12/07
1/07
9/20/07
7/07
11/2/07
9/07

Title
“More widespread declines with early stabilization signs”
“Continuing declines with stronger stabilization signs”
“Tentative stabilization in HPA”
“Continued stabilization in HPA”
“Near bottom on HPA”
“UGLY! Double digit declines in August and September”

Table 3. Views on House Price Appreciation from JPMorgan Analysts. Even as housing prices
began to fall from their elevated levels, many analysts believed that prices would soon stabilize. The table
provides further evidence that investors were optimistic about house prices during the boom.
Source: Flanagan et al. (2006b).

59

Institution
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Citigroup
UBS
Merrill Lynch
HSBC
IKB Deutsche
Royal Bank of Scotland
Bank of America
Morgan Stanley
JPMorgan Chase
Credit Suisse

Loss
($ billions)
42.9
38.2
37.1
19.5
15.9
15.2
15.1
14.1
9.8
9.6

Institution
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Washington Mutual
Credit Agricole
Lehman Brothers
Deutsche Bank
Wachovia
HBOS
Bayerische Landesbank
Fortis
Canadian Imperial (CIBC)
Barclays

Loss
($ billions)
9.1
8.3
8.2
7.6
7.0
7.0
6.7
6.6
6.5
6.3

Table 4. Mortgage-Related Losses to Financial Institutions from the Subprime Crisis, as
of June 18, 2008. The date is chosen prior to the Lehman bankrupcty to avoid contamination from wider
financial crisis. This table shows that mortgage industry insiders were the biggest losers from the housing
crash, despite the claims of the inside job theory of the crisis.
Source: Bloomberg (http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a5GaivCMZu_M).

60

Entity

61

Loans HELOC Agency
+2nds
MBS
US banks/Thrifts
2,020
869
852
GSEs/FHLB
444
0
741
Broker/Dealers
0
0
49
REITs
0
0
82
Hedge Funds
0
0
50
Money Managers
0
0
494
Insurance Cos.
0
0
856
Overseas
0
0
689
Financial Guarantors
0
62
0
Others
461
185
550
Total
2,925
1,116
4,362

Non-Agency
AAAs
383
308
100
10
51
225
125
413
0
21
1,636

CDOs
(resi. subs)
90
0
130
0
0
0
65
45
100
45
476

Residential
subs
0
0
24
0
24
24
24
24
0
0
121

Total
Exposure
4,212
1,493
303
92
126
743
1,070
1,172
162
1,262
10,680

Table 5. Exposure of Financial Institutions to Housing Risk on the Eve of the Crisis. This table shows that despite their ostensible use
of the originate-to-distribute model, investment banks retained large amounts of subprime risk on their balance sheets. In particular, broker/dealers
held $130 billion in collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) that were ultimately backed by residential mortgages. These investments would suffer
massive losses when the subprime bonds backing them defaulted en masse during the financial crisis.
Source: Figure 4 from “Residential Credit Losses—Going into Extra Innings?” Lehman Brothers U.S. Securitized Products, April 11, 2008 and
reprinted in Acharya and Richardson (2009).

