                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   NETWORKED FDI: SALES AND SOURCING PATTERNS OF JAPANESE FOREIGN
                             AFFILIATES

                                         Richard Baldwin
                                         Toshihiro Okubo

                                       Working Paper 18083
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18083


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




Toshihiro Okubo received support for this research from REITI, a research institute associated with
the Ministery of Economy, Trade and Industry. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Richard Baldwin and Toshihiro Okubo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Networked FDI: Sales and Sourcing Patterns of Japanese Foreign Affiliates
Richard Baldwin and Toshihiro Okubo
NBER Working Paper No. 18083
May 2012, Revised June, 2012, Revised July 2013
JEL No. F21,F23

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper applies a novel empirical approach to characterising the horizontal-ness and vertical-ness
of affiliates based on Yeaple’s complex FDI concept. In its simplest form, horizontal-ness is measured
as affiliates' local sales share while their vertical-ness is measures as their share of non-local sourcing
of intermediates. Japanese affiliates in most sectors and nations are partly vertical and partly horizontal
but those in North American are far more ‘horizontal’ than those in the EU and Asia. Affiliates became
more vertical between 1996 and 2005. A four-way sales and sourcing split (host, home, regional and
RoW) suggests that affiliates act as nodes in regional production networks – especially in Asia. We
posit several hypotheses that could be tested with our empirical approach.


Richard Baldwin
Cigale 2
1010 Lausanne
SWITZERLAND
and CEPR
and also NBER
rbaldwin@cepr.org

Toshihiro Okubo
Keio University
2-15-45 Mita Minato-ku
Tokyo Japan
okubo@econ.keio.ac.jp
okubo@econ.keio.ac.jp
        Networked FDI: Sales and sourcing patterns of
                Japanese foreign affiliates
                              Richard Baldwin1 and Toshihiro Okubo2
            Graduate Institute, Geneva and University of Oxford; Keio University
                         This version: May 2013; first draft: January 2012
                                                Abstract
This paper applies a novel empirical approach to characterising the horizontal-ness and
vertical-ness of affiliates based on Yeaple’s complex FDI concept. In its simplest form,
horizontal-ness is measured as affiliates’ local sales share while their vertical-ness is
measures as their share of non-local sourcing of intermediates. Japanese affiliates in most
sectors and nations are partly vertical and partly horizontal but those in North American are
far more ‘horizontal’ than those in the EU and Asia. Affiliates became more vertical between
1996 and 2005. A four-way sales and sourcing split (host, home, regional and RoW) suggests
that affiliates act as nodes in regional production networks – especially in Asia. We posit
several hypotheses that could be tested with our empirical approach.
Keywords: Vertical and horizontal FDI, complex FDI, Networked FDI, sourcing, sales,
Japanese foreign affiliates, Multinationals
JEL classification: F21, F23

1. Introduction
The theory of multinational corporations answers two questions: Why is production
multinational, and why is it owned by one corporation? Canonical foreign direct investment
(FDI) theory concentrates on the first question and proposes two answers that define two
types of FDI: horizontal (Markusen, 1984) and vertical (Helpman, 1984). The former has
production being multinational to avoid trade costs (‘market seeking’); the latter has
production stages dispersed to exploit cost differences (‘efficiency seeking’). See Antras and
Yeaple (2013) for a survey. The relative importance of the two motives is an empirical
question whose answer has evolved. The first modern tests identified motives by correlating
measures of FDI with host-nation size (market seeking) and host-home nation costs
differences (efficiency seeking). These studies find horizontal motives to be dominant (Carr,
Markusen and Maskus 2001, Blonigen, Davies and Head 2003, and Markusen and Maskus
2002). See Blonigen (2005) and Navaretti and Venables (2004) for surveys.
More recent empirical work reveals difficulties with the two-way division. One set of studies
uses the characteristics of parent-affiliate pairs to identify motives. Feinberg and Keane
(2006) – looking at trade – and Alfaro and Charlton (2009) – looking at production – find that
few parent-affiliate pairs fit neatly into the horizontal or vertical categories. Hanson, Mataloni
and Slaughter (2001, 2005) document three additional types of FDI where affiliates: (i)
produce for export to third markets (export platform FDI), (ii) add value to inputs sourced

1
  Graduate Institute, Geneva and University of Oxford,.rbaldwin@cepr.org; We thank Gordon Hanson, Andy
Bernard, Beata Javorcik, Kalina Manova, Nicolas Berman, and Peter Egger for constructive and incisive
comments that have improved the paper. The access to micro-data was arranged by RIETI. This research was
partly financed by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (Grant Number 21730194).
2
  Faculty of Economics, Keio University. okubo@econ.keio.ac.jp 2-15-45 Mita Minato-ku Tokyo Japan

                                                                                                           1
from their parents, or (iii) act as wholesale distributors. Yeaple (2003a, b) finds many
affiliates with mixed motives and places them in a catch-all category called ‘complex FDI’.3
Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen (2007) document the importance of ‘export-platform FDI’.
Arnold and Javorcik (2009) show that foreign-ownership makes plants both less horizontal
(more export oriented) and more vertical.
The principle contributions of our paper are threefold. First, using Japanese-affiliate data for
all sectors and all nations, we confirm the shortcomings of the horizontal-versus-vertical
distinction. Second, we apply a novel empirical approach to characterising the horizontal-
ness and vertical-ness of affiliates. Our method focuses on the trade behaviour of affiliates
rather than on parent-affiliate characteristics, or affiliates sales; it is best thought of as an
empirical implementation of Yeaple’s complex FDI concept.
In its simplest form, our method plots each affiliate in a ‘sales-sourcing box’ that has the
share of local sales on the y-axis and the share of local sourcing of intermediates on the x-
axis. We associate low levels of local sourcing with vertical motives. When affiliates import
intermediates for further processing, it is likely that the further processing is cheaper in the
host nation but the intermediates are cheaper abroad – a clear indication that the affiliate’s
location is at least in part motivated by efficiency seeking. Following this logic, we define an
affiliate’s vertical-ness as its non-local-sourcing share. By contrast, we associate high levels
of local sales with horizontal-ness; if most output is sold locally then market-seeking was
probably an important motive. We define an affiliate’s horizontal-ness as its local-sales share.
In this way, each affiliate is associated with a measure of vertical-ness and a measure of
horizontal-ness.
Using this perspective, we establish: (i) Japanese FDI in almost all sectors and almost all
nations involves some ‘vertical-ness’, and some ‘horizontal-ness’; (ii) North American
affiliates are far more ‘horizontal’ than those in Asia and Europe; and (iii) between 1996 and
2005 affiliates became more vertical in most nations and sectors. Moreover, using a four-way
sales-and-sourcing split (host-nation, home-nation, other nations in the region and rest-of-
world) we find a pattern that suggests many affiliates are part of international production
networks – especially in Asia. We call this ‘networked FDI’ to shift the emphasis from the
characteristics of individual affiliates and parent-affiliate-pairs to interactions among
affiliates.
One implication of networked FDI is the notion of ‘regional comparative advantage.’ That is,
the FDI-attractiveness of one host nation may be boosted by the existence of related affiliates
in the region – with both sales and sourcing mattering (FDI equivalent of backward and
forward linkages). We conjecture that such considerations could be important in informing
developing nations’ industrialisation policy. For example, it suggests that Vietnam’s
experience with FDI and international supply chains may have little relevance to, say,
Uruguay’s FDI prospects since Vietnam is in the midst of a dense FDI network while
Uruguay is not. Such third-nation effects have been explored and documented (Baltagi, Egger
and Pfaffermayr 2005, Blonigen, Davies, Waddell and Naughton 2007, Garretsen and Peeters,
2009) but only on the sales side (backward linkages).4 Third-nation effects on the sourcing
side (forward linkages) may also be in operation and are likely to be especially important in
sectors where production unbundling is particularly important. These have not, to our
knowledge, been explored empirically.


3
  Important syntheses and theoretical extensions of Yeaple’s distinctions include Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen
(2007), Grossman, Helpman and Szeidle (2003), and Egger, Larch and Pfaffermayr (2004).
4
  See also Coughlin and Segev (2007) for spatial econometric analysis.

                                                                                                             2
The third contribution of our paper is to suggest how our continuous measures of horizontal-
ness and vertical-ness could be used to test various hypotheses in the FDI literature. The rest
of the introduction reviews the relevant literature in more detail.

1.1. FDI literature and our paper
The first empirical tests of FDI motives were based on the intuitive observation that trade and
FDI should be complements under vertical motives but substitutes under horizontal motives.
Most studies found them to be complements (e.g. Lipsey and Weiss 1981, Clausing 2000).
The first modern evidence for horizontal motives came with the testing of the proximity-
versus-scale hypothesis. Brainard (1997) found that higher trade costs induced firms to
sacrifice scale economies (splitting up production) in exchange for greater proximity to
customers. The first theory-based tests that allowed for both motives came by considering
whether FDI activity was greatest between big nations (market seeking), or between nations
with big differences in endowments and/or factor prices (efficiency seeking). Here the main
papers are Carr, Markusen and Maskus (2001), Blonigen (2001), Blonigen, Davies and Head
(2003), Yeaple (2003b), Markusen and Maskus (2002), Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004),
Davies (2008), and Braconier, Norbäck, and Urban (2005). Most studies using this
identification strategy found horizontal to be the dominant motive.
As mentioned above, more recent studies tend to find evidence that the vertical motive is
present in most cases so the two-way classification is inadequate. One important paper that
uses trade data to investigate the horizontal versus vertical issues is Feinberg and Keane
(2006). The authors focus on US-Canada parent-affiliate trade. They show that few parent-
affiliate trade patterns correspond to pure horizontal or pure vertical motives with most
reflecting mixed motives. One paper that is close to ours in its use of firm-level data and its
focus on production networks is Antras and Foley (2009). Using US data, these authors
examine the impact of the Asian Free Trade Agreement (AFTA) on US affiliates in the
region. They find that AFTA raised the number and size of affiliates in the area compared to
other Asian host nations. They also found that the share of sales to third nations (i.e. not the
home or host nation) rose with AFTA, suggesting it fostered network-like integration rather
than just host-home linkages. While this focus on the sales pattern of affiliates is similar to
ours, the authors do not present information on the sourcing patterns as we do.
Arnold and Javorcik (2009) is also related as it shows how horizontal-ness and vertical-ness
are changed when an Indonesian plant is acquired by a foreign owner. Their main finding is
that foreign ownership boosts local-plant productivity. They suggest that one channel for
such improvement is the reduction in horizontal-ness and increase in vertical-ness. Another
paper that looks at production network aspects of FDI using firm level data is Alfaro and
Charlton (2009). Their focus differs from ours in its use of parent-affiliate production
classification rather than sales and sourcing data. The authors use Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) codes reported for each affiliate and its parent to classify each affiliate-
parent pair as horizontal, vertical or complex. Firms report up to six SIC categories for each
entity. If the parent-affiliate pair shares any code, the authors call it horizontal FDI. If the
affiliate has a code that is an input into one of the parent’s codes, it is vertical FDI (an input-
output table is used to determine inputs). If the pair meets both criteria, they call it complex
FDI. The authors do not question the three-way classification of FDI. Their main finding –
like Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2001) – is that earlier studies have misclassified much
vertical FDI as horizontal.




                                                                                                      3
Our paper focuses on the trade behaviour of Japanese foreign affiliates.5 Other papers also
focus on affiliates’ trade but use US data which include information that is more limited. For
instance, Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2005) study affiliates’ imports from US parents
but remark: “our data are not well suited to examine production networks in their entirety.”
These authors find trade costs and wage differences are important determinants of parent-
affiliate trade. Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2005) present evidence of US parent’s trade with
their affiliates in the context of a broad portrait of US exports and imports at the firm level,
but they focus only on parent-affiliate sales and sourcing. Borga and Zeile (2004) study the
US parent’s intermediate exports to their affiliates. Our work looks at broader indicators of
affiliate sales and sourcing.
A separate literature, which is not usually viewed as part of the FDI literature but which does
speak to production networks, focuses on fragmentation as measured by trade in parts and
components (Kimura and Ando, 2005; Athukorala and Yamashita, 2006; Athukorala, 2012).
In line with these studies, we confirm that Asian fragmentation is mainly present in the
electrical and mechanical machinery sectors.6
Finally our paper has some qualifications which we leave for future research. One important
missing point concerns FDI’s impact on the local economy. Using micro-data, the spillover
impact of FDI on local economy is investigated by Barrios, Görg and Strobl (2005), Javorcik
and Spatareanu (2008), Arnold and Javorcik (2009), and Javorcik (2004).7 Another important
missing aspect in our investigation is consideration of firm heterogeneity, especially the link
between sales-and-sourcing patterns and firm size.8

1.2. Plan of paper
Section 2 presents a brief overview of mainstream FDI theories and proposes a new diagram
for organising thinking about FDI categories. We also show how the diagram can be used to
organise thinking about the classic substitute-or-complement view of trade and FDI, and
about development-linked FDI policies. The next section, Section 3, presents data on
Japanese affiliates’ sales and sourcing patterns using a two-way (local-versus-non-local)
division of sales and sourcing patterns. Section 4 looks at four-way sale-and-sourcing
patterns. Here the main result is that most FDI is networked regionally rather than globally.
Section 5 discusses testable empirical hypotheses. Section 6 presents our concluding remarks.

2. Analytic framework
Foundational thinking about FDI was shaped by two-nation models that excluded
intermediate goods (Helpman 1984, and Markusen 1984).9 This was natural since the theory
arose just before the massive transformation of production known the second unbundling

5
  In terms of Japanese manufacturing FDI, Head et al. (1995) investigate location choice and agglomeration
effects. See also Head and Ries (2003, 2005) on Japanese FDI determinants.
6
  Kimura and Ando (2005) and Athukorala and Yamashita (2006) use product-level SITC trade data to estimate
the determinants of trade in parts and components in machinery sectors using the gravity equation and find
evidence of substantial fragmentation and production networks in Asia. Jones, Kierzkowski and Lurong (2005),
Athukorala (2012) and Kimura, Takahashi and Hayakawa (2007) provide related evidence. An early influential
paper in this line of work is Ng and Yeats (2003).
7
  Görg and Strobl (2001 and 2002), using Irish micro-data, show that the presence of FDI has life-enhancing
effect on local firms in high-tech industries. See Girma et al. (2001, 2002) and Girma and Wakelin (2001) for
similar results in UK data.
8
  For surveys of literature on firm heterogeneity in export and FDI, see Greenaway and Kneller (2007) and
Wagner (2007).
9
  See Helpman and Krugman (1985) Chapter 12 and 13, or Feenstra (2004) Chapter 11.

                                                                                                            4
(Baldwin 2006). This transformation has changed the motives behind and nature of FDI, but
before turning to these new developments, we present a thumbnail sketch of the 1980s FDI
theory.
The canonical model works with two nations, no intermediate goods, and a market structure
with no multi-market effects. In this setting, a firm may find it advantageous to produce
abroad for only two reasons: lower trade costs, and/or lower production costs.10 By satisfying
each market from a local factory, horizontal FDI avoids trade costs, so FDI is a substitute for
trade. Vertical FDI in its purest form involves final good production with value added in both
nations, but goods production in only one. In Helpman (1984), for example, skill-intensive
‘headquarter services’ are undertaken in the home country while physical production occurs
in the host country. Here FDI and trade in goods (and invisibles) are complements.
As trade and investment became increasingly entwined in the late 20th century, theory
evolved to account for the changes. The seminal paper by Yeaple (2003a) stepped beyond the
horizontal-or-vertical paradigm. In a simple three-nation model, he studied ‘complex’ FDI
strategies, i.e. individual firms engaging simultaneously in horizontal and vertical FDI. He
elucidated how a firm’s investments in various host nations can be complements or
substitutes, and how trade and FDI may act as complements or substitutes. Ekholm, Forslid
and Markusen (2007), and Grossman, Helpman and Szeidle (2006) generalised and
confirmed Yeaple’s results in richer models.11 The papers from the 2000s allow for third
countries and thus opened the door to third-nation effects – i.e. locational choices influenced
by something other than home and host nation factors. Baltagi, Egger and Pfaffermayr (2005)
provided clear empirical evidence that third-country effects are important. Following
development of the ‘new new trade theory’ (Melitz 2003), Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple
(2004) introduced firm heterogeneity that allows for the co-existing of multiple forms of FDI.

2.1. Classifying FDI by trade flows: The sales-sourcing box
The modest empirical innovation in our paper is to classify affiliates according to their trade
behaviour. Given the complexity of modern international supply chains, especially in East
Asia, we believe that it is increasingly difficult to determine why a particular plant is set up
abroad rather than at home. For example, in a world where final goods involve many inputs
and intermediate good producers sell to each other, the efficiency-seeking and market-
seeking dichotomy is blurred. Plants producing intermediates may locate near other
intermediate producers both to be near their suppliers (efficiency seeking) and to be near their
customers (market seeking) a la Krugman and Venables (1995). By focusing on the import
and export behaviour of Japanese affiliates, we admit both motives matter and measures of
both for each affiliate. We do not develop a formal model as it would be a simple extension
of existing work.12
The two dimensions are shown in the sales-sourcing box (Figure 1); the canonical form show
up on the edges. 13

10
   For FDI motivated by strategic reasons rather than costs, see Baldwin and Ottaviano (2001).
11
   The first draft of Yeaple (2003a) was submitted to the Journal of International Economics in 2001; the first
drafts of Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen (2007) and Grossman, Helpman and Szeidle (2006) came in 2003.
12
   A conceptually straightforward generalisation of Yeaple (2003a) – for example a many-nation version of
Grossman, Helpman and Szeidle (2006) – would permit a much more complex range of FDI and trade
outcomes. In such a model, we can envision foreign affiliates engaging in local and export sales as well as local
and import sourcing of intermediate inputs.
13
   Also see Ando and Kimura (2005) which suggest a different two-dimensional classification with the axes
being physical distance of the affiliate from the headquarters and tightness of corporate control over the affiliate.

                                                                                                                   5
    •    Pure horizontal FDI is the northeast corner; affiliates sell all output locally and source
         all intermediates locally (in the early 1980s theory, intermediates were ignored by
         implicitly bundling them into the production function).
    •    Pure vertical FDI (Helpman 1984) is the western border since all intermediates
         (headquarter services) are sourced from abroad, but some of the final good output is
         exported back to the home nation.
    •    Pure export-platform FDI (i.e. outward processing) is the southwest corner; all
         intermediates are imported and all output is exported.
    •    Tariff-jumping assembly FDI (e.g. assembly of final autos from kits) is the northwest
         corner since all intermediates are imported and all output is sold locally.
The last corner represents pure resource extraction (cash-crop agriculture, mining, fishing,
etc.) where all intermediate inputs (if any) are sourced locally and all output is exported. In
many cases (e.g. oil drilling), some intermediates are imported so the point would be on the
bottom edge but near the southeast corner. We label affiliates marked by intermediate levels
of local sales and local sourcing as ‘networked FDI’; these facilities are most naturally
viewed as part of international supply chains.


        Share of output
        sold locally                                                                                   Pure horizontal
                        Local assembly
                                                                                                             FDI
                              FDI
              100%


   ‘Networked’
                                                             FDI increasingly efficiency seeking




       FDI

  Pure ‘HQ’
  vertical FDI
  (trade in
  invisibles)


   Pure outward
 processing FDI                                                                                      Resource extraction
     (i.e. export                                                                                    FDI
       platform)           FDI increasingly market seeking
                                                                                                        Share of
                    0%                                                                             100% intermediates
                                                                                                        sourced locally

Figure 1: The sales-sourcing box diagram.


The substitutability of FDI and trade increases along the southwest to northeast diagonal. At
one extreme, pure horizontal FDI extinguishes all trade, while at the other extreme, outward
processing FDI maximises trade in both intermediates and final goods. The horizontal-ness of
affiliates rises as we move northwards in the box and the vertical-ness rises as we move
westwards.
Of course, this is a very rough classification and many nuances are hidden. One important
aspect that we cannot get at with our data is the role of technology. Authors such as Fosfuri

                                                                                                                           6
and Motta (1999), Siotis (1999), and Carvalho, Duysters and Costa (2010) stress that
multinationals (MNCs) may place affiliates abroad to exploit existing, firm-specific
technology advantages (technology exploiting; see Love 2003, Driffield and Love, 2003) but
others do so to acquire technology (technology acquiring). Our approach would be much
improved if we could get a handle on the role of technology in FDI motives. This is a topic
for future research.

2.2. FDI and development strategies
The sales-sourcing box can also illustrate typical development strategies involving FDI
(Figure 2). The traditional import-substitution strategy, for example, involves starting with
local assembly and pushing multinationals to produce more intermediates locally. The
eventual goal is to achieve export competitiveness with a high degree of local sourcing. This
would show up as a move from the northwest corner towards the southeast corner.
    Share of output
    sold locally                                                Pure horizontal
                      Local assembly or tariff-jumping FDI
                                                                      FDI

           100%


                                 Import-substitution
                                 industrialisation

 Pure ‘HQ’
 vertical FDI
 (trade in
 invisibles)

   Pure outward
 processing FDI
     (i.e. export                ‘Moving up the value
                                 chain’ industrialisation       Resource extraction
       platform)                                                FDI

                                                                    Share of
                0%                                           100%
                                                                    intermediates
                                                                    sourced locally

Figure 2: FDI and development strategies


The 21 st century version of this – pursued by China and other East Asian nations – starts from
the southwest ‘outward processing’ point and seeks to induce multinationals to source more
intermediates locally. This is a pure ‘eastward’ move from the lower left-hand corner. In
some cases, there is also a desire to develop the local market for the final good. This would
be a push to move affiliates’ position north-eastwards.


3. Japanese affiliates’ sales and sourcing: Aggregate data
Our data includes extensive firm-level information on Japan’s foreign affiliates called “The
Survey on Overseas Business Activities” prepared by the Research and Statistics Department



                                                                                                7
of the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI).14 The yearly survey is
conducted by METI using a questionnaire based on survey forms and covers all Japanese
affiliates in all sectors and in all nations. The parent firm and each foreign affiliate are
surveyed separately. The reply rate of parent firms is almost universal; that of affiliates is
about 70% in 2005 and 59% in 1996 (the first year in which the data is in electronically-
accessible form). The data, which is confidential, is prepared and managed by METI. The
survey questions asked cover a very broad range of economic issues including the number of
employees, assets, purchases, and some intellectual property indicators, etc. While the basic
questions are constant across years, there are some annual variations in a subset of questions.
The trend has been for the survey to be simplified in recent years.
The sector classifications used in the survey do not correspond to international practices (e.g.
UNIDO or OECD classifications), but they are broken down into 80 sectors in 2005. In
earlier years, the classification scheme involved more sectors but their decomposition was
slanted toward ‘old’ industries.
In this paper, we focus on the sales and sourcing patterns of firms, but we start with a few
summary statistics.15 Table 1 shows that the biggest sectors, by far, are services and
machinery. The biggest host regions are Asia, North America and the EU; Asia’s total
exceeds that of the sum of all other regions.


Table 1: Number of affiliates by region by sector, 2005.

                                                        Middle       North                   South       Sector
                             Africa    Asia     EU       East       America     Oceania     America       total
Services                     82       3,365    1,570    56         1,511        284        541          7,409
Machinery                    27       3,425    702      10         968          57         188          5,377
Chemical                     4        698      177      2          209          14         26           1,130
Primary                      7        421      94       2          158          133        74           889
Metal & metal products       7        503      31       1          127          11         18           698
Light manuf.                 1        580      27                  50           11         20           689
Region total                 128      8,992    2,601    71         3,023        510        867          16,192
Note: See appendix for list of sectors under each of the six broad headings.

Looking across sectors, we see a typical Pareto distribution of the importance of the sectors.
Using data for 2005, we see that in terms of assets and workers employed a handful of sectors
account for the lion’s share of global totals. The most important in terms of assets are
wholesale trade, financial and insurance, auto parts, communication equipment, motor
vehicles, electronics, and chemicals. In terms of employment, the ordering is somewhat
different, but electronics and financial services are significantly lower while clothing and
retail trade are significantly higher. Using either metric, the biggest FDI sectors are electrical
and mechanical machinery, clothing, and certain types of services that require local presence.
Figures for the total number of nations with at least one affiliate present a broadly similar
picture.




14
   It is “Kaigai Jigyou Katsudou Kihon Chousa” in Japanese.
15
   The questionnaire of the data asks about imports or local purchases of intermediate inputs and raw materials
(i.e. sourcing) and exports or local sales of final products.

                                                                                                                  8
3.1. The sales-sourcing patterns: Affiliates’ trade patterns
While we have data by nation by sector for each affiliate, we work with figures aggregated
across all affiliates within a country or region to bring the data’s dimensionality to a
manageable level. This helps us develop empirical hypotheses that can be tested
econometrically on the firm-level data.
The first task is to see how Japanese affiliates are placed in the sales-sourcing box diagram.
Specifically, we characterise each sector (aggregating over all affiliates in all nations)
according to the share of its output sold locally as well as by the share of its intermediate
purchases that are acquired locally (these purchases do not concern factors of production like
labour, capital and technology). Each sector is plotted as a point in the sales-sourcing box. In
keeping with the two-nation worldview, we aggregate the sales and sourcing information into
local (i.e. from or to the host nation) and non-local. This gives us 68 data points (one for each
two-digit sector), each with two characteristics – the share of local sales and the share of local
intermediates. These are displayed in a scatter plot (Figure 3).




                                                           1996
                                      1

                                     0.9

                                     0.8

                                     0.7
             Local sales of output




                                     0.6

                                     0.5

                                     0.4

                                     0.3

                                     0.2

                                     0.1

                                      0
                                           0   0.2           0.4          0.6        0.8   1
                                                     Local sourcing of intermediates




Figure 3: Sales and sourcing, Japanese affiliates, all host nations, 1996.


Figure 3, confirms that the canonical horizontal or vertical distinction is useful but
inadequate. In 1996, the horizontal motive covers a large number of sectors as can be seen
from the mass of data points along the north-eastern corner and eastern edge more generally.
Indeed if we ignored data on affiliate’s sourcing patterns, the 1996 would suggest that most
affiliates were examples of horizontal FDI. This feature of the data probably explains why
early empirical work, such as Brainard (1997), found that horizontal FDI was dominant. Such
studies focused only on the sales patterns of affiliates. To see this, we collapse all points onto
the box’s eastern edge to get a histogram of horizontal-ness (Figure 4). This shows the
predominance of sectors that sell 90% or more of their output locally.


                                                                                                 9
Moving away from the box’s eastern edge, we see that many data points display intermediate
shares of both local sales and local sourcing. In Yeaple’s terms, this is ‘complex’ FDI. It is
also interesting to note that in 1996 there were no sectors in the outward processing corner
(remember we have aggregated across all affiliates in all regions so even if many affiliates in,
say, IT equipment, were engaged in outward processing, the average need not show up in the
southwest corner).
             100%                               Histogram of local sales share
              90%
              80%
              70%                                        frequency
 Frequency




              60%                                        cumulative
              50%
              40%
              30%
              20%
              10%
               0%
                    0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% more
                                Local sales share by sector

Figure 4: Dominance of local sales, 1996.


                                                                      2005
                                             100%

                                             90%

                                             80%

                                             70%
                     Local sales of output




                                             60%

                                             50%

                                             40%

                                             30%

                                             20%

                                             10%

                                              0%
                                                    0%      20%       40%        60%        80%   100%
                                                              Local sourcing of intermediates




Figure 5: Sales and sourcing, Japanese affiliates, all host nations, 2005.


As production unbundling advanced, the sales-sourcing patterns of Japanese FDI changes
dramatically, as the comparison between 1996 and 2005 in Figure 5 and Figure 3 shows.
Although the sector classifications changed between the two years, the broad picture is clear
– most sectors saw a decrease in the local sourcing of intermediates. The idea here is that
progress in information and communication technology made it increasingly economic to
spatially unbundle production and disperse production stages to locations with attractive

                                                                                                         10
production costs (Baldwin 2006). A few sectors remain as classic horizontal sectors but there
a greater mass of sectors in the centre.
In particular, Figure 5 shows the emergence of what we called ‘networked FDI’ – i.e. FDI
where the affiliates import substantial shares of their intermediates and export substantial
shares of their output. In this sense, trade and investment became far more entwined between
1996 and 2005.

3.2. Focus on sectors
As might be expected, the sales-sourcing patterns vary according to the sector of the affiliate.
After all, the key determinant of market-seeking versus efficiency-seeking FDI depends upon
sector-varying characteristics such as scale economies, natural and manmade trade frictions,
and modularity of the production process. Figure 6 divides our two digit sector points into six
broad categories: light manufacturing, chemical, metal and metal products, machinery,
service and primary sector. The charts contain some surprising features.


                          100%                                                                           100%
                           90%                                                                            90%
                           80%                                                                            80%
  Local sales of output




                                                                                 Local sales of output
                           70%                                                                            70%
                           60%                                                                            60%
                           50%                                                                            50%
                           40%                                                                            40%
                           30%                                                                            30%
                           20%                                                                            20%
                           10%                                                                            10%
                            0%                                                                             0%
                                 0%     20%      40%      60%     80%     100%                                  0%   20%      40%      60%     80%     100%
                                        Local sourcing of intermediates                                              Local sourcing of intermediates
                          Light manufacturing           Chemicals
                                                                                                         Primary                     Light manuf
                          Metal and metal products      Machinery
                                                                                                         Chemicals                   Services
                          Services                      Primary
                                                                                                         Machinery                   Metal and metal products

Figure 6: Sales and sourcing by sector, 2005 (left) and 1996 (right).
Note: See appendix for list of sectors under each of the six broad headings.



Focusing on 2005 data (left panel), we see that service sectors are the sectors with patterns
closest to the tradition horizontal or vertical FDI. For example hotel and restaurant, real
estate, and advertising rely almost entirely on local intermediates and sell virtually all output
locally. More generally, service sectors tend to have extreme sales-sourcing patterns. The
communications industry, for example, sources only 5% of intermediates locally but sells
95% to the local market. The transportation-service sector sources only 16% locally and sells
only 14% locally.
Primary sectors also tend to be extreme in their trade patterns, generally showing up on the
eastern edge of the box. Extractive sectors such as forestry and metal mining have very low
local sales but very high local sourcing of intermediates. Note that we are measuring
intermediates as total purchases other than those related to labour, capital and technology.

                                                                                                                                                                11
There is also a group of primary sectors that closely fit the trade pattern of pure horizontal
FDI. Beverage manufacturing, construction, and food manufacturing are examples of sectors
with very high local sourcing and sales shares.
The classic FDI sectors – manufacturing of consumer and capital goods, which account for
the bulk of FDI by value – tend to have more intermediate sales-sourcing configurations.
Interestingly, the machinery sectors tend to be stretched out along the 45 degree line with
their sales and sourcing shares tending to rise or fall together. On the high side, Motor
vehicles as well as auto parts and accessory manufacturing have sales and sourcing shares
around 60-70%. Other transportation equipment, by contrast, has scant local sales and
sourcing; the numbers are 17% and 22% respectively. Such low shares suggest that these
affiliates are adding value at intermediate production stages and passing their output down
the international supply chain.
Chemicals tend to display high local sales shares with variable local sourcing shares. For
example, medicines, chemical fertilizers and cosmetics have local sourcing shares under 30%
but local sales shares over 80%. Finally, light manufacturing sectors (e.g. textiles, clothes,
wood, and paper products) tend to have patterns that are shifted toward the resource
extraction corner (100% local sourcing and 0% local sales) compared to heavy-industry
sectors.
The pattern for 1996 is difficult to compare exactly to 2005’s given the changes in sector
definitions, but much of the sector features in 2005 are also found in the 1996 data. For
example, services and primary sectors have extreme sales-sourcing patterns, and light
manufacturing sectors generally have higher local sourcing shares than machinery sectors.
One big change is the truncation of variation in machinery sectors. In 1996, many machinery
sectors had local sales and sourcing shares over 80%. By 2005, however, no machinery
sectors had more than 80% sales and sourcing shares. This surely reflects the
internationalisation of supply chains in the machinery sector.

3.3. Regional variations
The patterns depicted hereto reflect an average across all nations. As it turns out, there are
important differences among the sales-sourcing configurations of Japanese affiliates in the
three major host regions – Asia, North America and the EU. Figure 7 shows the 2005 figures
for sectors located in EU nations (left panel) and in Asian nations (right panel). Note that here
local means sales within the individual host nation, not within the region (e.g. EU or Asia).
Both panels show that FDI in both regions is what might be called ‘networked’ FDI
(excluding primary and service sectors). That is, the affiliates are very outward oriented in
that they import the bulk of their intermediates and export the bulk of their output.
For the EU, very few sectors have local sales shares over 50% or local sourcing shares over
60%. This is a natural consequence of Japanese firms viewing the EU as a single market; they
tend to place a facility in a limited number of EU nations, exporting from these to other EU
members. Likewise the local sourcing is limited given the relatively small nature of many EU
nations (this limits the range of available intermediates).
The sectoral sales-sourcing patterns in Asia are fairly similar to the EU patterns. Services and
primary tend to have extreme patterns. However, the Asian pattern for services seems to
reflect the more fragmented nature of Asian national markets for services. That is, many of
the services appear to be examples of pure horizontal FDI with mostly local sourcing and
sales. In the EU, by contrast, many of the service sectors sell less than 70% locally and about
half of them source less than 50% locally. When it comes to the big volume FDI sectors –

                                                                                              12
machinery – the Asia and EU pictures are both marked by the networked features, namely
intermediate shares of local intermediate purchases and intermediate shares of local sales.




                                                 EU                                                                              Asia
                          100%                                                                              100%
                          90%                                                                               90%
                          80%                                                                               80%
  Local sales of output




                                                                                    Local sales of output
                          70%                                                                               70%
                          60%                                                                               60%
                          50%                                                                               50%
                          40%                                                                               40%
                          30%                                                                               30%
                          20%                                                                               20%
                          10%                                                                               10%
                           0%                                                                                0%
                                 0%     20%      40%      60%     80%      100%                                    0%    20%      40%      60%     80%      100%
                                        Local sourcing of intermediates                                                  Local sourcing of intermediates

                            Primary                      Light manufacturing                                   Primary                    Light manufacturing
                            Chemicals                    Metal and metal products                              Chemicals                  Metal and metal products
                            Machinery                    Services                                              Machinery                  Services


Figure 7: Sales and sourcing by sector, EU and Asia, 2005.
Note: See appendix for list of sectors under each of the six broad headings.



                                          North America
                          100%
                          90%
                          80%
  Local sales of output




                          70%
                          60%
                          50%
                          40%
                          30%
                          20%
                          10%
                           0%
                                 0%     20%      40%      60%     80%      100%
                                        Local sourcing of intermediates

                            Primary                     Light manufacturing
                            Chemicals                   Metal and metal products
                            Machinery                   Services


Figure 8: Sales and sourcing by sector, North America, 2005.
Note: See appendix for list of sectors under each of the six broad headings.

The North American sales-sourcing patterns are strikingly different, especially for
manufacturing sectors (chemicals, light manufacturing, and machinery). The most salient
feature is the dominance of local sales. Almost every sector sees more than 50% of output

                                                                                                                                                                13
sold within the host nation (i.e. within US, Canada or Mexico). This outcome is probably due
to the vast size of the US market, which is almost as large as the EU market but which
consists of one nation rather than dozens.

4. The multi-nation sales-sourcing patterns
Hereto we have used the two-nation perspective; sales and sourcing is either home or foreign.
This was a natural point of departure for our analysis since the canonical theory – which still
shapes today’s theory and empirical work – was cast in a two-country world. Given the
extensive literature on global value chains, the next nature step is to turn to a more refined
categorisation of the sales-sourcing patterns. Fortunately, our data allows us to take a step in
this direction. In particular, we turn to a four-fold categorisation of the sales and sourcing
patterns: to/from local, to/from Japan, to/from other nations in the region, to/from rest-of-
world.
To provide a backdrop for our investigation of sector variations, we first consider the
aggregate sales-and-sourcing patterns of all Japanese affiliates in all sectors and all nations.
The left bar of Figure 9 decomposes the destination of foreign affiliate sales into local sales,
sales back to Japan, sales to other nations in the region, and sales to all other nations (RoW).
The regions here are North America, Asia, South America, the EU, Oceania, and Africa. The
right bar provides the same geographical breakdown for purchased inputs (intermediates).


 100%
                          7%      12%
  90%
                         18%
  80%                             16%
  70%                    14%
  60%                                                       To or from RoW

  50%                     61%                               to or from region
                                  33%
  40%                                                       to or from Japan
                                  39%                       to or from local
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
                 Sales                  Sourcing

Figure 9: Sales and source by region, 2005, all sectors and nations


A key fact shown by Figure 9 is that 25% of sales are to neither the home nation (Japan) nor
the host nation. Moreover, 28% of purchased inputs are not from home or host nations. Both
facts sit uncomfortably with the two nation thinking and suggest that empirical tests based on
this home-or-foreign aggregate will lead to misleading results. For example, looking only at
sales, the horizontal FDI story would look good (60% of sales to host market), but looking
only sourcing the horizontal FDI story looks bad (only 39% of inputs purchased locally). The
two-nation vertical story also struggles to account for the main facts as only 33% are sourced
from the home nation. Of course squashing our data to fit the two-nation model, we would
add the sourcing from Japan, the region and RoW to get a feeling for the non-local content.

                                                                                              14
The result would be that the vertical story looks much better than the horizontal story as 60%
of intermediates are non-local.

4.1. Sectoral perspective
The average numbers in Figure 9 hide massive cross-sector variation. The figures for all our
sectors (again aggregated across all Japanese affiliates worldwide) are shown in Figure 10.
The sectors have been ordered according to a crude ‘networked FDI index’ which reflects the
average share of sales and sourcing from third nations. This is a very rough measure of the
extent to which production chains are internationalised in complex ways.
Quite a few sectors at the top of the chart – i.e. sectors with large shares of non-local, non-
Japanese sales and sourcing – are generally viewed as being thoroughly involved in
networked production chains. These include electronic equipment, textiles, chemicals, and
machinery sectors. There are also some surprises, for example, the high ranking of the
finance and insurance sector.




                                                                                                  15
Sales    Other transportation equipment                                                            Sourcing
                    Finance and insurance
                        Petroleum refining
       Railway transport, road passenger…
                             Other services
               Printing and Allied Industry
                            Chemical fibers
                        Chemical fertilizers
                          Wholesale trade
     Woven fabric mills, knit fabrics mills
                Fisheries and Aquaculture
                     Electronic equipment
      Silk-reeling industry, spinning mills
                      Professional services
  Other electrical machinery equipment…
                 Goods rental and leasing
                              Metal mining
            Household electric appliances
              Electronic parts and devices
         Other precision instruments and…
 Communication equipment and related…
                         Organic chemicals
   Non-ferrous metals worked products
                                Pulp, paper
    Electronic data processing machines,…
          Manufacturing industries, n.e.c.
    Smelting and refining of non-ferrous…
           Optical instruments and lenses
   Office, servce industry and household…
               Special industry machinery
                Metal working machinery
                        Inorganic products
 Industrial electromechanical apparatus…
   Oil and fat products, soaps, synthetic…
Auto parts and accessory manufacturing
                     Glass and its products
                           Plastic products
                            Motor vehicles
                Other fiber manufacturing
 Other ceramic, stone and clay products
Cosmetics, toothpaste, and other make-…
                  Cement and its products
  Other general industry machinery and…
         Other fabricated metal products
              Lumber and wood products
                          Rubber products
                             Iron and Steel
                     Furniture and fixtures
             Miscellaneous iron and steel
                      Food Manufacturing
      Other chemical and allied products
                Communications Industry
                                Retail trade
      Other petroleum and coal products
       Apparel and other textile products
            Fabricated constructional and…
                          Warehousing etc
   Watches, clocks, clockwork-operated…
                                   Forestry
                  Beverage Manufacturing
                      Drugs and medicines
                            Paper products
                               Construction
         Internet supplementary services
 Electricity, Gas, Heat Supply and Water
                      Information services
                     Broadcasting Industry
                                Restaurants
                       Advertising industry
                          Lodging industry
                                 Real estate
      Prepared animal foods and organic…
                                           0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%100%   0%   50%      100%
          To or from local     To or fromJapan      To or fromregion   To or fromRoW


Figure 10: 4-way sales-source pattern by sector, 2005, all nations



                                                                                                        16
4.1.1. Focus on machinery
The production unbundling phenomenon has mostly occurred in the machinery sectors –
especially in the mechanical machinery and electronics sectors. Here we focus on the sales
and sourcing patterns in these sectors, again aggregating across all firms in all regions. In
essence, Figure 11 pulls out and magnifies several bars from Figure 10.
The chart arranges the sectors by order of importance of local sales. The motor vehicles
sector is the top sector on this dimension (largely due to trade, investment and industry
policies aimed at promoting local production, or at least local assembly, of autos and small
trucks). Averaging across all host nations, over 80% of outputs are sold locally, but only 60%
of the inputs are purchased locally. At the other end of the scale we have office and
household machines where only about a fifth of output is sold locally. A very large share is
sold to Japan and about 15% is sold to third markets. The networked feature of FDI in this
sector can be seen by noting that about 40% of the inputs are imported. This strongly
suggests that affiliates in this sector are involved in an international production network
where some parts are imported from Japan or third nations in the region, while the best part
of output is sent back to Japan.


                                                    Sales                                                 Sourcing

                                        Motor vehicles
               Auto parts and accessory manufacturing
     Other general industry machinery and equipment
                            Special industry machinery
                             Metal working machinery
      Communication equipment and related products
                        Optical instruments and lenses
 Industrial electromechanical apparatus manufacturing
                         Household electric appliances
    Other electrical machinery equipment and supplies
            Other precision instruments and machinery
Watches, clocks, clockwork-operated devices and parts
                           Electronic parts and devices
      Electronic data processing machines, digital and…
                        Other transportation equipment
                                  Electronic equipment
      Office, servce industry and household machines
                                                     0%      20%     40%        60%     80%   100%   0%    50%       100%
                                                To local    To Jpn    To region     To RoW


Figure 11: 4-way sales- pattern, machinery sectors, 2005, all sectors and nations.


Electronic equipment is another sector where FDI seems to be networked. Almost 75% of
intermediates are imported (about half of this from Japan) and about 70% of the output is
exported – mostly to other nations in the region. Similar patterns can be found in computers
(electronic data process machines), electronic parts and devices, other transport equipment
and precision instrument sectors (watches and other precision instruments).

4.1.2. Focus on electronics in Asia and Europe
To zoom in more closely on a sector where we expect network FDI to feature strongly in the
data, we narrow our focus to the three electronics sectors in our data and limit the analysis to
2005. As we are only looking at three sectors, we can breakdown sales-sourcing patterns by
nation (but aggregating over all affiliates in each host nation). We start with the most
networked region, namely Asia.
Starting with the sales pattern for phones and related products (top left panel marked 1501),
we see that except for China, most of Japanese affiliates’ sales are not local. Much is

                                                                                                                       17
exported back to Japan, to other Asian nations, or to the EU or the US. The export to non-
Asian markets however is quite marginal; the vast majority of sales are regional. An even
more extreme regionalization of the supply chain shows up on the sourcing side (top right
panel). Virtually all the inputs purchased by affiliates located in an Asian nation are from
Asia itself. Local purchases are small (except in Hong Kong).
This is clear evidence that ‘global value chains’ is a misnomer; value chains in Asia are
regional, not global. The regionalization of sales-and-sourcing in computers (two charts in the
middle panel) is even more marked. With the exception of Singapore, very little of the
computer production is sold locally – almost all of it is exported to other Asian nations with
Japan being a very large importer. When we compare the sales pattern with the sourcing
pattern, we see that Japan is also a very large supplier of intermediate inputs for computers.
Taken together, this suggests that computers are a classic case where Japanese computer
makers offshored some aspects of their production line to nearby, low-cost Asia locations but
maintain substantial production of intermediates at home.


  1501      China                                                     China
            Korea                                                     Korea
         Vietnam                                                   Vietnam
           Taiwan                                                    Taiwan
 Hong Kong, China                                          Hong Kong, China
       Philippines                                               Philippines
        Indonesia                                                 Indonesia
         Thailand                                                  Thailand
        Singapore                                                 Singapore
         Malaysia                                                  Malaysia
             India                                                     India
                      0        200000    400000   600000                       0        200000        400000
         To local   To Japan     To region     To RoW         From local   From Japan   From region    From RoW

  1502      China                                                     China
            Korea                                                     Korea
         Vietnam                                                   Vietnam
           Taiwan                                                    Taiwan
 Hong Kong, China                                          Hong Kong, China
       Philippines                                               Philippines
        Indonesia                                                 Indonesia
        Singapore                                                 Singapore
         Malaysia                                                  Malaysia
                      0         100000       200000                            0   50000 100000 150000 200000
         To local   To Japan     To region     To RoW         From local   From Japan   From region    From RoW

  1503      China                                                     China
            Korea                                                     Korea
         Vietnam                                                   Vietnam
           Taiwan                                                    Taiwan
 Hong Kong, China                                          Hong Kong, China
       Philippines                                               Philippines
        Indonesia                                                 Indonesia
         Thailand                                                  Thailand
        Singapore                                                 Singapore
         Malaysia                                                  Malaysia
                      0   200000 400000 600000 800000                          0    200000       400000    600000
         To local   To Japan     To region     To RoW         From local   From Japan   From region    From RoW

Figure 12: Networked FDI in Asia, electronics sectors, 2005.
Note: The left panels show sales; right panels show sourcing; 1501 is ‘Communication equipment and related
products’ (final goods including phones, fax, radio, TV, stereo, tape recorders, Karaoke machines, etc.); 1502
‘Electronic data processing machines, digital and analogue computer, equipment and accessories’ (final

                                                                                                                  18
goods), and 1503 is ‘Electronic parts and devices’ (parts and components such as semiconductors, tuners,
transistors, condensers, etc.).

As showed in the bottom panels, the sector marked 1503 (electronic parts and devices sector),
displays a high local sales share but also very high import shares of inputs from other Asian
nations, especially Japan. As these are parts, the local sales must be feeding into a supply
chain.


 Czech R                                            1501   Czech R
 Hungary                                                   Hungary
   Russia                                                    Russia
    Spain                                                     Spain
     Italy                                                     Italy
 Germany                                                   Germany
   France                                                    France
      UK                                                        UK
             0       100000 200000 300000 400000 500000                0       100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
      To local        To Japan    To region   To RoW           From local      From Japan      From region     From RoW


                                                    1502
    Spain                                                     Spain


 Germany                                                   Germany


      UK                                                        UK

             0         20000     40000   60000   80000                 0       10000    20000     30000      40000    50000
      To local        To Japan    To region   To RoW           From local      From Japan      From region     From RoW


   Slovak R                                         1503
                                                             Slovak R
   Denmark                                                   Denmark
        Italy                                                     Italy
 Netherlands                                               Netherlands
   Germany                                                   Germany
     France                                                    France
         UK                                                        UK
                 0       50000   100000 150000 200000                      0           50000        100000           150000
      To local        To Japan    To region   To RoW           From local      From Japan      From region     From RoW

Figure 13: Networked FDI in the EU, electronics sectors, 2005.
Note: see note to Figure 12 for category definitions.



The networked FDI features we saw in Asia are partly present in the EU, as Figure 13 shows.
When it comes to parts (bottom panel marked 1503), most of the output is exported, with
most of it going to other EU nations. The UK is an exception with local parts sales
dominating. The sales of phones (top panel marked 1501) and computers (middle panel
marked 1502) shows a remarkable emphasis on local and regional sales. Apart from small
slivers of sales back to Japan, virtually all of the output of these sectors is sold in the EU.
Among the EU nations, however, there are important differences. Some nations, like the

                                                                                                                          19
Italy, Czech Republic and Hungary, are classic export platforms with basically all their
output exported to other EU nations. Others, however, such as Germany, France and the UK,
show a mix of local and export sales.
The pattern for computers (middle panel) is quite stark. The UK is the dominant host nation
and it imports almost all of its intermediates from Japan while exporting almost all of its
output to other EU nations. This suggests that the manufacturing of Japanese computers in
the UK is basically an assembly operation.

4.1.3. Focus on electronics in the US: The odd man out
The broad similarity of sales-sourcing patterns in Asia and the EU stands in stark contrast to
the US pattern.16 In short, Japanese affiliates in the US do not seem to be engaged in
international production chains. The pattern is much more reminiscent of import-substitution
assembly. Figure 14 shows the facts.
Since the FDI pattern in North America is so simple (it is mostly in the US), we can show all
three electronics sectors in one figure. In the parts sector (1503) and computers (1502), the
US-based affiliates buy almost 100% of their intermediates from Japan and they sell almost
100% of the output in the US. In essence, the US-based FDI is basically assembling parts
from Japan into final goods – presumably to avoid importing the final goods directly. This is
not pure horizontal FDI, since there is almost no local purchasing of intermediates. In the
phone sector (1501), however, the US-based Japanese affiliates buy about a third of inputs
locally with the rest imported from Asia, with Japan playing the dominate role. On the sales
side, the pattern is almost 100% local sales.
The only hint of networked FDI in North America is found in Mexico, where the affiliates
import 100% of their inputs from the region (which must mean from the US given the lack of
Canadian production).


                       1501, 1502, 1503
     US (1503)                                                    US (1503)


     US (1502)                                                    US (1502)


 Mexico (1501)                                                 Mexico (1501)
     US (1501)                                                    US (1501)
                 0        1000000         2000000    3000000                    0           1000000        2000000
      To local       To Japan     To region         To RoW         From local       From Japan   From region   From RoW

Figure 14: Electronics FDI in the US, electronics sectors, 2005.
Note: see note to Figure 12 for category definitions.


4.1.4. Focus on auto sectors
To give a flavour of the vast range of multinational activities – and thus strengthen our
warning against the broad generalizations that often emerge in the empirical literature – we

16
  We note that this discussion hinges on the boundary of nations and regions. The US is a large economy and
composed of 50 states. If the data is disaggregated at the state level, results might change and be closer to EU
case. Likewise, if EU (or Euro) member countries are aggregated as one country, our results in the European
case might change.

                                                                                                                          20
look more closely at the auto sector nation by nation (grouped by the three main FDI hosting
regions, Asia, the EU and the US).
Figure 15 shows the facts for motor vehicles and auto parts for the eight Asia nations with
significant FDI production by Japanese affiliates. Looking at the left panels we see that sales
in the auto sectors are dominated by the local market. This is the polar opposite of the
electronics industry where exports are the main business of the affiliates. The local market
emphasis is stronger in final vehicles than it is in parts, but in both sectors the lion’s share of
sales is made inside the host nation. Thailand is an exception with about a third of its sales
exported, much of it to the US and the EU. The sales pattern in autos is more international on
the whole and some Asian nations, such as Vietnam and the Philippines, export their entire
output. Another key difference is the importance of the Japanese market as a destination for
auto parts. While this is always a moderate share (except for Vietnam), it is significant in
most host nations. Vietnam is perhaps the classic example of what seems to be the offshoring
of one segment of a Japanese auto production line. Japanese affiliates in the country import
basically 100% of intermediates from Japan and sell basically 100% of their output back to
Japan.
The sourcing side (right panels) shows more elements of production networks, with Japan
playing the largest role. However, with some exceptions (Philippines, Pakistan), a very large
share of intermediates are sourced locally; the share is usually over 50%.


   Vietnam                           Motor vehicles     Vietnam                               Motor vehicles
   Thailand                                             Thailand
     Taiwan                                               Taiwan
 Philippines                                          Philippines
   Pakistan                                             Pakistan
  Indonesia                                            Indonesia
       India                                                India
      China                                                China
            -        400,000      800,000                        -      200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000
     To local   To Japan   To region    To RoW            From local   From Japan From region From RoW


   Vietnam                              Auto parts      Vietnam                                  Auto parts
   Thailand                                             Thailand
     Taiwan                                               Taiwan
  Singapore                                            Singapore
 Philippines                                          Philippines
   Malaysia                                             Malaysia
      Korea                                                Korea
  Indonesia                                            Indonesia
       India                                                India
      China                                                China
            -         200,000      400,000                       -      100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000
     To local   To Japan    To region   To RoW            From local   From Japan From region From RoW


Figure 15: Sales & sourcing, auto sectors, Asia, 2005.


Corresponding numbers for the EU are shown in Figure 16. On the sales side (the left panels),
we see a dominance of local and regional markets as in Asia, but in Europe it is even
stronger. There are only negligible sales of autos or auto parts beyond the region. On the
sourcing side, the pattern differs sharply between final goods and parts. In several of the
nations, especially the Netherlands, Hungary and Turkey, an important fraction of
                                                                                                         21
intermediates comes from local or regional sources. This suggests that there is something of a
regional production network going in the EU when it comes to final autos. Auto parts,
however, is marked by more of a local assembly pattern. With the exception of affiliates
located in France, all of the host nations import the bulk of their intermediates from Japan or
from the rest of the world (mostly Asia).


                                        Motor vehicles
                                                                                                   Motor vehicles
      Turkey                                                  Turkey
        Spain                                                   Spain
     Portugal                                                Portugal
 Netherlands                                             Netherlands
     Hungary                                                 Hungary
    Germany                                                 Germany
     Belgium                                                 Belgium
              -    100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000                    -        100,000    200,000    300,000
      To local    To Japan To region To RoW                   From local   From Japan From region From RoW


       UK                                  Auto parts          UK                                     Auto parts
   Turkey                                                  Turkey
  Sweden                                                  Sweden
    Spain                                                   Spain
 Slovak R                                                Slovak R
  Portugal                                                Portugal
   Poland                                                  Poland
      Italy                                                   Italy
 Hungary                                                 Hungary
 Germany                                                 Germany
   France                                                  France
  Czech R                                                 Czech R
 Belgium                                                 Belgium
           -      200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000                 -        200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000
      To local    To Japan To region To RoW                  From local    From Japan From region From RoW


Figure 16: Sales & sourcing, auto sectors, EU, 2005.


Finally we turn to North America in Figure 17. Here auto FDI looks very much like pure
form of horizontal FDI, at least from the regional perspective. As the left panels reveal, the
vast majority of auto sector outputs, both parts and final vehicles, are sold inside North
America. Japanese affiliates in final autos are clearly acting as export platform for the US
market. On the input side, local purchases dominate parts and final goods production in
Canada, Mexico and the US, although a fifth of the intermediates are from Japan.
Overall, we see that auto sector FDI sales are highly regionalised on the sales side. Most of
the vehicles and parts made in a region are purchased in the same region. On the sourcing
side, Asia and North America are quite regionalised, i.e. most of the purchased inputs are
from the region itself. In autos, Europe is the outlier on the sourcing side; most of its
purchased inputs come from outside the region.




                                                                                                              22
                                          Motor vehicles                                              Motor vehicles

    US                                                        US

 Canada                                                    Canada

          -       500,000     1,000,000    1,500,000                -           500,000   1,000,000 1,500,000
                                                                        From local             From Japan
     To local     To Japan    To region    To RoW
                                                                        From region            From RoW

                                              Auto parts                                                 Auto parts
     US                                                       US

 Mexico                                                    Mexico

 Canada                                                    Canada

              -   1,000,000   2,000,000    3,000,000                -        500,000 1,000,0001,500,0002,000,000

                                                                        From local             From Japan
      To local    To Japan    To region    To RoW
                                                                        From region            From RoW

Figure 17: Sales & sourcing, auto sectors, US, 2005.



5. Testable hypotheses
Our ascribing a measure of horizontal-ness and vertical-ness to each affiliate suggests a direct
way of testing FDI theories. To give a couple of extreme examples, consider the case of
Vietnam in the auto parts sectors. Japanese affiliates in that nation import 100% of their
intermediates and re-export 100% of their output back to Japan. Given this pattern, and the
nature of the sector (intermediate goods), it is absolute obvious that this FDI is efficiency-
seeking rather than market-seeking. The key clue, however, is not in Vietnam’s factor
endowment – it is in the sales-sourcing pattern of the affiliates. At the other extreme,
Japanese affiliates in the auto parts sector buy only 24% of intermediates from outside
NAFTA and sell 93% of their output inside NAFTA. Again this is plainly a case of market-
seeking FDI, but the tell-tale lies not in macro indicators – it lies in the trade behaviour of
affiliates.
More generally, under pure horizontal FDI, production is placed abroad to economize on
trade costs – not to take advantage of the host-nation’s comparative advantage. Under pure
vertical FDI, production is placed abroad only to lower production costs. The most obvious
empirical lever to separate the two motives is the existence of trade in intermediates between
the home and the host nation. In the knowledge capital model, it would be simple to prove a
theorem that states that even minor trade costs mean that no intra-firm trade arises unless the
FDI is motivated in part by efficiency-seeking. If the foreign affiliate buys any intermediates
at all from the home nation, we know that the multinational has found it advantageous to
divide the production process between the home and host nation. Straightforward revealed-
preference arguments would then tell us that the cost of dividing production must be below
that of producing the product all in the home, or all in the host nation. Since this exploitation
of multi-nation comparative advantages is the hallmark of vertical FDI, we know that the
presence of any sourcing of intermediates from the home nation indicates that the FDI is at
least in part vertical FDI. This line of reasoning needs to be developed more fully, but it


                                                                                                                   23
seems that using affiliates’ sourcing and sales behaviour will provide a more refined test of
FDI theories.
The most obvious hypotheses to test are linked to the classic hypotheses that market size and
trade frictions foster horizontal-ness while comparative advantage differences foster vertical-
ness. Our measures provide new left-hand-side variables for the classical regressions
suggested by Carr et al. (2001). The two characteristics are determined simultaneously, so a
system estimation strategy is called for. A further robustness check would involve estimating
the system separately for sectors that clearly produce intermediate goods and those that
clearly produce final goods; vertical motive should be stronger in the former than the latter.
Another set of hypotheses are related to third-nation effects, or backward and forward
linkages. The pattern of sourcing should be affected by regional sales of other Japanese
affiliates in the region, while the pattern of sales should be affected by regional sourcing of
other Japanese affiliates in the region. This could be one way to separate demand-linked and
supply-linked third-nation effects on affiliate local.
One critical question in the literature is the impact of FDI on local variables such as wages,
productivity, etc. Reflections upon the possible channels for these effects suggest that the
nature of the local FDI might affect the impact. For example, affiliates with high degrees of
vertical-ness might be thought of as have a larger impact on local productivity, than affiliates
with a high degree of horizontal-ness.
A decade of empirical studies focusing on firm size suggests another set of hypotheses. Our
data would allow a search for systematic size differences in the degree of horizontal-ness and
vertical-ness. We conjecture that large firms would be more likely to engage in networked
FDI as they can amortise the fixed cost of organisation over more units sold. In other words,
we conjecture that larger Japanese multinationals should have more intermediate values of
our horizontal-ness and vertical-ness indices Smaller firms should have simpler FDI patterns
fitting more neatly into the two-fold classification.
Another fruitful line of investigation would be to use the affiliate data by nation and across
sectors to study how and whether multinational production in developing nations has ‘moved
up the value chain’ – at least as far as Japanese affiliate source practices are concerned. Of
particular interest would be changes in the share of intermediates sourced locally, the share
sourced from Japan and the share sourced regionally. Indeed, it would seem possible to build
a map of the development of the Asian production network using the increase in the number,
size and sales and sourcing patterns of Japanese affiliates. This would be a partial picture as it
would be limited to Japanese MNCs, however, the unique combination of FDI and trade
information at the affiliate level should provide a very valuable window on to the
development of regional value chains.

6. Concluding remarks
Early modelling of FDI focused on two motives for placing plants abroad: market-seeking
and efficiency-seeking. Numerous empirical strategies have been developed to identify the
importance of the two. The earliest studies found evidence for a preponderance of vertical
motives (Lipsey and Weiss 1981) – a conclusion that was reversed in the 2000s (Carr et al.
2001). More recent work finds that most FDI involves a blend of horizontal and vertical
motive (Alfaro and Charlton 2009, and Feinberg and Keane 2006).
Our paper offers three main contributions. First, we use Japanese-affiliate data to confirm the
preponderance of mixed motives in FDI. Second, we introduce a novel way of measuring
motives by assigning a degree of vertical-ness and a degree of horizontal-ness to each
                                                                                                24
affiliate. Using this method, we find a vast heterogeneity in the internationalisation strategies
of Japanese multinationals. These strategies vary across regions and across sectors (and by
region-sector pairs) in intuitive ways. For example, the auto industry in Asia and Europe
seem to involve much more internationally networked production structures than it does in
the US.
The paper documents a large number of stylised facts, but three stand out. First, FDI in
almost all sectors and almost all nations involves some ‘vertical-ness’, and some ‘horizontal-
ness’. The variance is so great that we suspect econometric studies aimed at establishing the
predominance of one motive are not constructive. Second North American affiliates are far
more ‘horizontal’ than those in Asia and Europe. Third, affiliates in most sectors and most
nations became more vertical between 1996 and 2005.
The paper also explores the presence of regional production networks and sounds of note of
caution in relying on parent-affiliate-pair characteristics to describe multinational activity.
We show that 25% of Japanese affiliate sales are to neither the home nation nor the host
nation and 28% of purchased inputs are not from home or host nations. In many of the classic
outsourcing sectors, the shares of intermediate purchases from third-nations in the region are
often in the double-digit range. The share of sales to third-nations in the regional is often
even greater. These facts suggest that third-nation effects could be important in determining
the location of affiliates. In short, it seems like backward- and forward- linkage forces are
important in FDI. The point has been documented for backward linkages (sales) but not
forward linkages (sourcing). This in turn should help inform developing nation policies with
respect to sectoral FDI policies. It should be easier to get FDI in sectors where related
affiliates already existing in nearby nations.
In closing, we hope that the focus on the sales and sourcing patterns of affiliates opens the
door to future empirical research on the complex and fast-paced evolution of trade and
investment.

   References
Alfaro, Laura and Andrew Charlton, (2009). "Intra-industry Foreign Direct Investment,"
American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 99(5), pages 2096-2119.
Antràs Pol and C. Fritz Foley, (2009). "Regional Trade Integration and Multinational Firm
Strategies," NBER Working Papers 14891, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Antràs, Pol, and Stephen R Yeaple. (2013). Multinational Firms and the Structure of
International Trade. In Handbook of International Economics. Vol. 4.
Arnold, Jen and Beata Jovorcik (2009). "Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Direct
Investment and Plant Productivity in Indonesia", Journal of International Economics, 79(1).
Athukorala, Prema-chandra and Yamashita, Nobuaki, (2006). "Production fragmentation and
trade integration: East Asia in a global context," The North American Journal of Economics
and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 17(3), pages 233-256.
Athukorala, Prema-chandra, (2012). "Asian trade flows: Trends, patterns and prospects,"
Japan and the World Economy, vol. 24(2), pages 150-162.
Baldwin, Richard (2006). “Globalisation: the great unbundling(s)”, Chapter 1, in
Globalisation challenges for Europe, Secretariat of the Economic Council, Finnish Prime
Minister’s Office, Helsinki, 2006, pp 5-47.


                                                                                                25
Baldwin, Richard and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2001). "Multiproduct Multinationals and
Reciprocal FDI Dumping”, Journal of International Economics, vol. 54, issue 2, pp. 429-448.
Baltagi, Badi, Peter Egger, and Michael Pfaffermayr (2005). “Estimating models of complex
FDI: Are there third-country effects?”, Center for Policy Research working paper 1525-3066,
Syracuse University.
Barrios, Salvador, Holger Gorg and Eric Strobl (2005). "Foreign direct investment,
competition and industrial development in the host country," European Economic Review,
vol. 49(7), pp 1761-1784.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott (2005). “Importers, Exporters, and
Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods." Working Paper 11404,
NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Blonigen, Bruce (2001). “In search of substitution between foreign production and exports",
Journal of International Economics 53, pp 81-104.
Blonigen, Bruce A (2005). “A Review of the Empirical Literature on FDI Determinants,”
NBER WP No. 11299.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head (2003). “Estimating the Knowledge-
capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise: Comment,” American Economic Review 93,
980–94.
Blonigen, Bruce, Ronald Davies, Glen Waddell and Helen Naughton (2007). “FDI in space:
Spatial autoregressive relationships in foreign direct investment”, European Economic
Review, 51 (5), 1303-25.
Borga, Maria and William Zeile (2004), “International Fragmentation of Production and The
Intrafirm Trade of U.S. Multinational Companies”, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, WP 2004-02.
Braconier, Henrik, Pehr-Johan Norbäck, and Dieter Urban (2005). “Vertical FDI Revisited,”
Review of International Economics 13:770–86
Brainard, Lael (1997), “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-o¤
Between Multinational Sales and Trade, “American Economic Review, 87:4, pp 520-544.
Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus (2001). “Estimating the
Knowledge-capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise,” American Economic Review 91,
pp 693–708.
Carvalho, Flavia, Geert Duysters, Ionara Costa (2010). “"Drivers of Brazilian foreign
investments – technology seeking and technology exploiting as determinants of emerging
FDI," UNU-MERIT Working Paper Series 017, United Nations University.
Clausing Kimberley (2000). “Does Multinational Activity Displaces Trade?” Economic
Inquiry, 38, pp. 190-205.
Coughlin, C. and E. Segev (2000). “Foreign direct investment in China: a spatial econometric
study”, The World Economy 23 (1), 1–23.
Davies, Ronald (2008). Hunting High and Low for Vertical FDI, Review of International
Economics, Volume 16, Issue 2, pages 250–267, May 2008
Driffield, Nigel and James H. Love, (2003). "Foreign Direct Investment, Technology
Sourcing and Reverse Spillovers," Manchester School, vol. 71(6), pages 659-672



                                                                                          26
Egger, Peter, Larch, Mario and Pfaffermayr, Michael, (2004). "Multilateral trade and
investment liberalization: effects on welfare and GDP per capita convergence," Economics
Letters, vol. 84(1), pages 133-140.
Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid and James Markusen (2007). “Export-platform foreign
direct investment”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(4):776–795.
Feenstra, Robert (2004). Advance international trade: theory and evidence, Princeton
University Press, Princeton USA.
Feinberg, Susan and Michael Keane (2006). "Accounting for the Growth of MNC-Based
Trade Using a Structural Model of U.S. MNCs." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1515-
1558.
Fosfuri, Andrea. and Massimo Motta. (1999). ‘Multinationals Without Advantages’,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 101, pp. 617–630.
Garretsen, Harry and Jolanda Peeters (2009). “FDI and the relevance of spatial linkages: do
third-country effects matter for Dutch FDI?” Review of World Economics, 145 (2), 319-38.
Girma Sourafel, David Greenaway and Katherine Wakelin, (2002). "Does antidumping
stimulate FDI? Evidence from Japanese firms in the UK," Review of World Economics
(Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), vol. 138(3), pages 414-436.
Girma, Sourafel and Wakelin, Katharine, (2001). "Regional Underdevelopment: Is FDI the
Solution? A Semiparametric Analysis," CEPR Discussion Papers 2995.
Girma, Sourafel, Greenaway, David and Wakelin, Katharine, (2001). "Who Benefits from
Foreign Direct Investment in the UK?," Scottish Journal of Political Economy, vol. 48(2),
pages 119-33.
Gorg, Holger & Strobl, Eric, (2002). "Multinational companies and indigenous development:
An empirical analysis," European Economic Review, vol. 46(7), pages 1305-1322.
Gorg, Holger and Strobl, Eric, (2001). "Multinational Companies and Productivity
Spillovers: A Meta-analysis," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 111(475),
pages F723-39.
Greenaway, David and Richard Kneller, (2007). "Firm heterogeneity, exporting and foreign
direct investment," Economic Journal, vol. 117(517), pages F134-F161, 02.
Grossman, Gene, Elhanan Helpman and Adam Szeidle (2006). “Optimal Integration
Strategies for the Multinational Firm” , Journal of International Economics 70: 216-238,
2006.
Hanson, Gordon, Raymond Mataloni and Matthew Slaughter (2001). "Expansion Strategies
of U.S. Multinational Firms," in Dani Rodrik and Susan Collins (eds.) Brookings Trade
Forum 2001, Brookings Institution Press.
Hanson, Gordon, Raymond Mataloni, and Matthew Slaughter (2005). “Vertical Production
Networks in Multinational Firms.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 664–678.
Head, Keith and Ries, John, 2003. "Heterogeneity and the FDI versus export decision of
Japanese manufacturers," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 17(4),
pages 448-467.
Head, Keith and Ries, John, 2005. "Judging Japan's FDI: The verdict from a dartboard
model," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 19(2), pages 215-232.


                                                                                            27
Head, Keith, John Ries and Deborah Swenson (1995). “Agglomeration benefits and location
choice: Evidence from Japanese manufacturing investments in the United States,” Journal of
International Economics 38 (3–4), 223–247.
Helpman, E. and P. Krugman (1985), Market Structure and International Trade. MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan (1984). “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy 92(3): 451-471.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2004). "Export Versus FDI with
Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review, vol. 94(1), pages 300-316.
Irarrazabaly, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes and Luca David Opromolla (2010).” The Margins of
Multinational Production and the Role of Intra-firm Trade”,
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska (2004). "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the
Productivity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,"
American Economic Review, vol. 94(3), pages 605-627.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska and Spatareanu, Mariana, (2008). "To share or not to share:
Does local participation matter for spillovers from foreign direct investment?," Journal of
Development Economics, vol. 85(1-2), pages 194-217.
Jones, Ronald, Kierzkowski, Henryk and Lurong, Chen, (2005). "What does evidence tell us
about fragmentation and outsourcing?," International Review of Economics and Finance, vol.
14(3), pages 305-316.
Karolina Ekholm, Rikard Forslid and James R. Markusen, (2007). "Export-Platform Foreign
Direct Investment," Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 5(4), pages 776-795,
06
Kimura, Fukunari & Takahashi, Yuya & Hayakawa, Kazunobu, (2007). "Fragmentation and
parts and components trade: Comparison between East Asia and Europe," The North
American Journal of Economics and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 18(1), pages 23-40.
Kimura, Fukunari and Mitsuyo Ando (2005). "Two-dimensional fragmentation in East Asia:
Conceptual framework and empirics," International Review of Economics and Finance,
Elsevier, vol. 14(3), pages 317-348.
Krugman, Paul R and Anthony Venables (1995). "Globalization and the Inequality of
Nations," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110(4), pages 857-80.
Lipsey Robert and Merle Weiss (1981). “Foreign Production and Exports in Manufacturing
Industries”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 488-494.
Love, James H. (2003): Technology sourcing versus technology exploitation: an analysis of
US foreign direct investment flows, Applied Economics, 35:15, 1667-1678
Markusen, J., Venables, A., 2000. The theory of endowment, intra-industry and multinational
trade. Journal of International Economics 52, 209–234.
Markusen, James (1984). ”Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from
Trade,” Journal of International Economics 16: 205-226.
Markusen, James R., and Keith E. Maskus. (2001). Multinational firms: Reconciling theory
and evidence. In Topics in empirical international economics: A festschrift in honor of Robert
E. Lipsey, ed. Magnus Blomstrom and Linda Goldberg, 71–95. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.


                                                                                              28
Markusen, James R., and Keith E. Maskus. (2002). Discriminating among alternative theories
of the multinational enterprise. Review of International Economics 10 (4): 694–707.
Melitz, Marc (2003). "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity," Econometrica, vol. 71(6), pages 1695-1725.
Navaretti, Giorgio Barba and Anthony J. Venables, (2004) Multinational Firms in the World
Economy, Princeton University Press.
Ng, Francis and Yeats, Alexander, (2003). "Major trade trends in East Asia : what are their
implications for regional cooperation and growth," Policy Research Working Paper Series
3084, The World Bank..Siotis, Georges. (1999). ‘Foreign Direct Investment Strategies and
Firms’ Capabilities’, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, Vol. 8, pp. 251–270.
Wagner, Joachim (2007). "Exports and Productivity: A Survey of the Evidence from Firm-
level Data," The World Economy, vol. 30(1), pages 60-82.
Yeaple, Stephen (2003a). “The complex integration strategies of multinationals and cross
country dependencies in the structure of foreign direct investment”, Journal of International
Economics 60 (2), 293–314.
Yeaple, Stephen (2003b). “The Role of Skill Endowments in the Structure of U.S. Outward
Foreign Direct Investment”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(3), 726-734.




                                                                                            29
Appendix: Classification of sectors
Table 2: 6-way classification of sectors
Primary                                              Machinery
Forestry                                             Metal working machinery
Fisheries and Aquaculture                            Special industry machinery
Metal mining                                         Office, service industry and household machines
Construction                                         Other general industry machinery and equipment
Food Manufacturing                                   Industrial electromechanical apparatus manufacturing
Beverage Manufacturing                               Household electric appliances
Prepared animal foods and organic fertilizers        Electronic equipment
Light manufacturing                                  Other electrical machinery equipment and supplies
Silk-reeling industry, spinning mills                Communication equipment and related products
                                                     Electronic data processing machines, digital and analog
Woven fabric mills, knit fabrics mills               computer, equipment and accessories
Other fiber manufacturing                            Electronic parts and devices
Apparel and other textile products                   Motor vehicles
Chemical fibers                                      Auto parts and accessory manufacturing
Lumber and wood products                             Other transportation equipment
Pulp, paper                                          Optical instruments and lenses
Paper products                                       Watches, clocks, clockwork-operated devices and parts
Chemicals                                            Other precision instruments and machinery
Chemical fertilizers                                 Furniture and fixtures
Inorganic products                                   Printing and Allied Industry
Organic chemicals                                    Plastic products
Oil and fat products, soaps, synthetic detergents,
surface-active agents and paints                     Rubber products
Drugs and medicines                                  Manufacturing industries, n.e.c.
Cosmetics, toothpaste, and other make-up
                                                     Services
goods
Other chemical and allied products                   Electricity, Gas, Heat Supply and Water
Petroleum refining                                   Communications Industry
Other petroleum and coal products                    Broadcasting Industry
Metal and metal products                             Information services
Glass and its products                               Internet supplementary services
                                                     Railway transport, road passenger transport, road
Cement and its products
                                                     freight transport, water transport, air transport
Other ceramic, stone and clay products               Warehousing, services incidental to transport
Iron and Steel                                       Wholesale trade
Miscellaneous iron and steel                         Retail trade
Smelting and refining of non-ferrous metals          Finance and insurance
Non-ferrous metals worked products                   Real estate
Fabricated constructional and architectural
metal products, including fabricated plate work
and sheet metal work                                 Restaurants
Other fabricated metal products                      Lodging industry
                                                     Professional services
                                                     Goods rental and leasing
                                                     Advertising industry
                                                     Other services


Table version of figure 10



                                                                                                           30
                                          To      To      To       To    From    From    From     From
                                          local   Japan   region   RoW   local   Japan   region   RoW
Prepared animal foods and organic
fertilizers
                                          100%      0%      0%     0%    100%      0%      0%      0%
Real estate                               100%     0%       0%     0%    100%     0%       0%      0%
Lodging industry                           97%     3%       0%     0%    100%     0%       0%      0%
Advertising industry                      100%     0%       0%     0%    100%     0%       0%      0%
Restaurants                               100%     0%       0%     0%     99%     1%       0%      0%
Broadcasting Industry                      44%    56%       0%     0%     92%     7%       0%      0%
Information services                       82%    18%       0%     0%     43%    57%       0%      0%
Electricity, Gas, Heat Supply and Water    99%     0%       0%     0%     87%    13%       0%      0%
Internet supplementary services            94%     6%       0%     0%     98%     0%       1%      0%
Construction                               97%     0%       1%     0%     96%     2%       1%      0%
Paper products                             97%     2%       0%     0%     89%     6%       1%      2%
Drugs and medicines                        90%     7%       1%     1%     10%    85%       3%      0%
Beverage Manufacturing                     91%     0%       2%     2%     97%     2%       0%      0%
Forestry                                    9%    82%       0%     4%    100%     0%       0%      0%
Watches, clocks, clockwork-operated
                                           39%    53%       3%     1%     46%    53%       1%      0%
devices and parts
Warehousing etc                            68%    24%       4%     0%     96%      1%      0%      1%
Fabricated constructional and
architectural metal products, including
fabricated plate work and sheet metal
                                           82%    14%       2%     0%     86%      7%      2%      2%
work
Apparel and other textile products         34%    60%       1%     1%     68%    26%       2%      1%
Other petroleum and coal products          95%     1%       2%     0%     69%    22%       0%      4%
Retail trade                               93%     1%       3%     0%     78%    15%       3%      1%
Communications Industry                    97%     1%       1%     0%      5%    82%       0%      7%
Other chemical and allied products         89%     3%       2%     2%     66%    25%       4%      1%
Food Manufacturing                         71%    21%       2%     2%     90%     2%       2%      2%
Miscellaneous iron and steel               86%    11%       1%     0%     60%    27%       3%      3%
Furniture and fixtures                     49%    47%       1%     1%     74%    12%       6%      1%
Iron and Steel                             86%     1%       6%     1%     58%    38%       1%      1%
Rubber products                            75%    13%       4%     2%     65%    30%       2%      1%
Lumber and wood products                   29%    55%       1%     7%     93%     5%       1%      0%
Other fabricated metal products            78%    10%       5%     1%     52%    41%       2%      1%
Other general industry machinery and
equipment
                                           69%    14%       7%     1%     50%    44%       2%      1%
Cement and its products                    98%      0%      0%     1%     76%      2%      0%     11%
Cosmetics, toothpaste, and other make-
up goods
                                           82%      4%      7%     0%     27%    62%       5%      0%
Other ceramic, stone and clay products     71%    18%       4%     1%     60%    25%       2%      5%
Other fiber manufacturing                  59%    21%       7%     3%     70%    22%       1%      3%
Motor vehicles                             76%     6%       6%     3%     58%    29%       5%      1%
Plastic products                           66%    17%       8%     1%     59%    28%       6%      0%
Glass and its products                     71%     9%       9%     0%     21%    67%       4%      1%
Auto parts and accessory manufacturing     72%     7%       9%     2%     57%    33%       4%      1%



                                                                                                   31
Oil and fat products, soaps, synthetic
detergents, surface-active agents and      78%   3%    6%    3%    55%   26%   6%    3%
paints
Industrial electromechanical apparatus
manufacturing
                                           54%   28%   8%    1%    41%   40%   9%    1%
Inorganic products                         75%   6%     2%    8%   49%   33%   4%    5%
Metal working machinery                    63%   8%    12%    2%   32%   59%   2%    3%
Special industry machinery                 63%   3%     3%   14%   40%   49%   4%    1%
Office, servce industry and household
machines
                                           21%   55%   9%    3%    60%   20%   8%    2%
Optical instruments and lenses             57%   16%   13%   1%    8%    72%   10%   0%
Smelting and refining of non-ferrous
metals
                                           66%   29%   2%    1%    55%   1%    1%    20%
Manufacturing industries, n.e.c.           60%   16%   8%    4%    46%   29%   7%    5%
Electronic data processing machines,
digital and analog computer, equipment     27%   39%   14%   3%    22%   63%   7%    0%
and accessories
Pulp, paper                                36%   28%    4%   14%   75%   11%    0%   6%
Non-ferrous metals worked products         67%   10%   10%    1%   45%   28%   11%   2%
Organic chemicals                          61%    9%   11%    4%   64%   17%    8%   1%
Communication equipment and related
products
                                           63%   10%   10%   4%    32%   45%   8%    4%
Other precision instruments and
machinery
                                           43%   15%   15%   6%    39%   51%   4%    1%
Electronic parts and devices               37%   28%   15%    3%   27%   55%    8%   1%
Household electric appliances              53%   13%   10%    7%   45%   33%   10%   1%
Metal mining                               13%   42%    3%   19%   87%    1%    0%   6%
Goods rental and leasing                   41%    0%   30%    0%   98%    2%    0%   0%
Other electrical machinery equipment
and supplies
                                           47%   15%   12%   7%    43%   34%   10%   2%
Professional services                      77%   12%    0%    5%   30%   19%   26%    0%
Silk-reeling industry, spinning mills      50%   17%   11%    5%   64%    5%    9%    6%
Electronic equipment                       21%   23%    5%   23%   59%   32%    4%    1%
Fisheries and Aquaculture                  17%   53%    8%    8%   50%   12%   10%    9%
Woven fabric mills, knit fabrics mills     34%   25%   10%   11%   55%   16%    9%    6%
Wholesale trade                            55%   16%   11%    4%   24%   32%   11%   11%
Chemical fertilizers                       80%    6%    7%    0%   21%   19%   12%   18%
Chemical fibers                            40%    8%   19%    8%   48%   27%    5%    8%
Printing and Allied Industry               59%    3%    9%   10%   35%   22%   11%   10%
Other services                             42%   19%   13%    6%   43%   15%   13%    8%
Railway transport, road passenger
transport, road freight transport, water   14%   21%   28%   5%    16%   59%   12%   1%
transport, air transport
Petroleum refining                         18%   80%    1%   1%     8%    3%   43%    1%
Finance and insurance                      65%    0%   13%   4%    13%    0%   34%   10%
Other transportation equipment             22%    6%   31%   5%    17%   25%   16%   12%




                                                                                      32
