                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE HETEROGENEITY OF THE CIGARETTE PRICE EFFECT ON BODY MASS
                                INDEX

                                         George Wehby
                                     Charles J. Courtemanche

                                       Working Paper 18087
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18087


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




Data analysis was supported in part by NIH/NIDCR grant R01 DE020895. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by George Wehby and Charles J. Courtemanche. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Heterogeneity of the Cigarette Price Effect on Body Mass Index
George Wehby and Charles J. Courtemanche
NBER Working Paper No. 18087
May 2012
JEL No. I10

                                              ABSTRACT

Previous studies estimate the average effect of cigarette price on body mass index (BMI), with recent
research showing that their different methodologies all point to a negative effect after several years.
This literature, however, ignores the possibility that the effect could vary throughout the BMI distribution
or across socioeconomic and demographic groups due to differences in underlying preferences for
health or risks for obesity. We evaluate heterogeneity in the long-run impact of cigarette price on
BMI by performing quantile regressions and stratifying the sample by race, education, age, and sex.
Cigarette price has a highly heterogeneous negative effect that is more than three times as strong at
high BMI levels – where weight loss is most beneficial for health – than at low levels. The effects
are also strongest for blacks, college graduates, middle-aged adults, and women. We also assess the
implications for disparities, conduct robustness checks, and evaluate potential mechanisms.


George Wehby
Assistant Professor
Dept. of Health Management and Policy
College of Public Health
University of Iowa
105 River Street, N248 CPHB
Iowa City, IA 52242
george-wehby@uiowa.edu

Charles J. Courtemanche
University of Louisville
College of Business
Department of Economics
Louisville, KY 40292
and NBER
cjcour02@louisville.edu
I. Introduction

        Obesity has become one of the leading population-level health risks in the United States.

Not only is the prevalence high, but obesity rates have increased significantly and steadily in

recent decades, from 15% in the early 1970s to 34% in 2007-2008 (CDC, 2010). Obesity-

related illnesses such as heart disease and diabetes now lead to an estimated 112,000 deaths

and $168.4 billion in medical expenditures per year (Cawley and Meyerhoefer, 2010; Flegal et

al., 2010; Sturm, 2002).1 This has prompted a major research effort to explain the rising

incidence of obesity, including an investigation of whether changes in other health

characteristics or behaviors may have played a role.

        The most notable population-level health behavior change concurrent with the rise in

obesity was a dramatic decline in cigarette smoking. Between 1965 and 2007, the smoking rate

among adults in the US decreased from 42% to 20% (CDC, 2010). The simultaneous nature of

the trends in smoking and obesity raises the question of whether the two are causally related.

This question is further motivated by the potential biologic pathways through which smoking

could affect body weight. Smoking may reduce appetite and enhance metabolism, leading to

lower caloric intake and higher caloric expenditure (Pinkowish, 1999). This theory is supported

by mice studies that show reductions in appetite, weight, and fat storage as well as biochemical

changes in the brain with nicotine exposure (Chen et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2005). However,

other factors suggest the opposite or no effect of smoking on obesity. Smoking may reduce the

ability to exercise by impairing respiratory functioning (Hedenstrom et al., 1986). Also, quitting

smoking could lead to healthier eating and exercise decisions by affecting expected longevity or

general enthusiasm about health (Courtemanche, 2009). Furthermore, the drop in smoking is

unlikely to explain the rise in childhood obesity unless changes in weight among adults caused

by the decrease in smoking influence weight in children.


1
  An individual is considered obese if her body mass index (BMI), or weight in kilograms divided by height
in squared meters, is greater than or equal to 30.
        Motivated by this theoretical ambiguity, several recent economic studies have attempted

to determine the causal effect of cigarette costs on weight.2 Chou et al. (2002; 2004) estimate

positive relationships between state cigarette price and both body mass index and obesity using

the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and models that include state fixed

effects, a quadratic time trend (or no time trend), and a set of control variables. Gruber and

Frakes (2006) show that replacing cigarette price with state cigarette tax rate and the quadratic

time trend with time period fixed effects switches the sign of the effect to negative. Rashad et

al. (2006) use a methodology similar to Gruber and Frakes but a different dataset – the National

Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) – and estimate a small positive effect of

cigarette taxes on weight. Nonnemaker et al. (2009) use the BRFSS and find that including

linear state-specific time trends leads to the estimation of a small and insignificant relationship

between cigarette costs and weight across the population using either price or tax as an

instrument for price. Baum (2009) considers the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY)

and a difference-in-difference approach where the “treatment” group consists of individuals who

have smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their life and are therefore most likely to be responsive to

cigarette costs. He estimates a positive effect of cigarette costs on weight regardless of

whether the other features of the model are similar to those of Chou et al. (2002; 2004) or

Gruber and Frakes (2006). Most recently, Courtemanche (2009) notes that the aforementioned

papers focus on the impact of contemporaneous cigarette costs, which may be insufficient to

capture the entire long-run effect since all three stages of the relationship – the effect of prices

on smoking, the effect of smoking on behaviors, and the effect of behaviors on BMI – could

occur gradually. He uses both the NLSY and BRFSS and shows that all the different




2
  See Courtemanche (2009) for a more detailed description of the models used by the different papers in
the literature.
methodologies used in the literature point to a negative long-run effect of cigarette costs on

weight if the effect is allowed to occur slowly over a six year period.3

        A limitation common to all of these studies is a focus on the effects of cigarette costs on

the mean of BMI or obesity status. While informative, focusing on “mean effects” may mask

substantial heterogeneity in the effects of cigarette costs across the population. This

heterogeneity may result from differences in biologic, demographic, socioeconomic, and

environmental factors as well as in preferences for body weight. Evaluating if cigarette costs

have heterogeneous effects is necessary to understand changes in the entire BMI distribution –

as opposed to merely one moment of the distribution – and also to identify the groups that are

most affected by these changes. This has important implications for understanding how

cigarette price changes over the past three decades have influenced the disparities in weight

across the BMI distribution and between various demographic and socioeconomic groups.

        While heterogeneity by observed characteristics can be easily evaluated by stratifying

the study sample, much of the heterogeneity may result from unobserved characteristics.

Studies typically find that observable individual characteristics and area-level economic factors

explain only a small portion of the variation in body weight.4 Given that most of the

determinants of obesity are still generally unknown, identifying the heterogeneity due to

unobserved characteristics is critical to our understanding of how different types of people

respond differently to changing cigarette costs. In this study, we identify the heterogeneity in

the long-run effect of cigarette price on BMI due to unobservable characteristics by using

quantile regression, a semi-parametric technique that estimates the impacts at different
3
  Other related research shows that overweight or obese female adolescents are more likely to initiate
smoking, perhaps as a method of weight control (Cawley et al., 2004; Rees and Sabia, 2010).
4
  For example, the R2 of the models for BMI and obesity in Chou et al. (2004), which included several
demographic and economic factors, is less than 0.1. The degree to which the unobservable determinants
of obesity are environmental as opposed to genetic is the subject of debate. Twin studies provide
evidence of a high genetic heritability of about 80% for body mass index (BMI) and 73% for obesity
(Hjelmborg et al., 2008; Watson et al., 2006). Some genes, such as FTO (Dina et al., 2007; Frayling et
al., 2007; Kring et al., 2008; Scuteri et al., 2007; Villalobos-Comparan et al., 2008) and MCR4 (Loos et
al., 2008; Qi et al., 2008; Willer et al., 2009) have been found to have consistent effects on body weight
but these two genes explain a very small percentage of the weight variation.
locations along the BMI distribution. We conduct quantile regressions for the total sample as

well as for subsamples stratified by race, education, age, and sex, observable characteristics

that have been shown to influence BMI. To our knowledge this is the first paper to study the

effects of cigarette costs on body weight using quantile regression and to examine

heterogeneity on the bases of education or age.5

       Our quantile regressions provide evidence that the long-run effect of cigarette price on

BMI, while consistently negative, is more than three times as strong at high levels of BMI than at

low levels. The health benefits – and corresponding savings in medical expenses – from the

reduction in population weight due to higher cigarette prices are therefore more substantial than

estimates of mean effects would suggest. The subsample analyses show that the mean effects

and the effects at most of the quantiles are strongest for blacks, college graduates, middle-aged

adults, and females. We then test the implications of these results for disparities, finding that

rising cigarette prices have reduced the obesity or severe obesity (BMI≥35) disparities between

blacks and whites, young and middle-aged adults, and women and men, but increased

disparities between those without a high school degree and college graduates and between

young and older adults. Next, we conduct a number of robustness checks and find that the key

results are generally not sensitive to specification. Finally, we investigate how the influences of

cigarette prices on smoking and obesity-related behaviors vary by BMI. The long-run effect of

cigarette price on cigarettes smoked is strongest at the tails of the BMI distribution, a pattern

that mirrors its effect on exercise. In contrast, cigarette prices have little to no impact on the

variables related to food and alcohol consumption at any BMI level. We hypothesize that the

heterogeneous effects of cigarette prices on exercise combined with heterogeneous effects of



5
  Fang et al. (2009) evaluated the effects of smoking on BMI quantiles using prices as instruments for
smoking and data from China. However, the instrumental variable approach employed in that study is
inconsistent for quantile regression (Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2004; Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005)
and the study does not report a reduced-form model that evaluates the effect of cigarette prices on BMI
quantiles.
exercise on BMI may help to explain the variation in the impact of cigarette price on BMI across

the BMI distribution.


II. Data

       The literature on the effect of cigarette cost on body weight utilizes three different

individual-level datasets: the pooled cross-sectional BRFSS (Chou et al., 2002; Chou et al.,

2004; Courtemanche, 2009; Gruber and Frakes, 2006; Nonnemaker et al., 2009), the pooled

cross-sectional NHANES (Rashad, 2006), and the panel NLSY (Baum, 2009; Courtemanche,

2009). The advantage of the BRFSS is its enormous sample size, which numbers in the

millions as opposed to the tens-of-thousands for the NHANES and NLSY. A large sample is

necessary for the precise estimation of the impacts of aggregate-level variables such as state

cigarette price. The advantage of the NHANES is its inclusion of actual, as opposed to merely

self-reported, height and weight. The advantage of the NLSY is its panel nature, which enables

the inclusion of individual (rather than just state) fixed effects and the tracking of movement

between states over time, which reduces measurement error when creating lagged cigarette

cost variables.

       A large sample size is of paramount importance when splitting the sample into race, age,

and education groups and employing quantile regression, so we utilize the BRFSS in this study.

Results from the literature suggest that this decision is unlikely to lead to inappropriate

conclusions. Courtemanche (2009) found that the estimated average effects were similar using

both the NLSY and BRFSS but that the BRFSS estimates were more precise. The NLSY

regressions’ use of individual as opposed to state fixed effects and tracking of between-state

moves therefore did not meaningfully impact the results. This is not surprising, as the cigarette

cost variables are state-level while only a fraction of individuals switch states over a six year
period. The literature also shows that results from the BRFSS are not sensitive to the correction

of self-reported height and weight for measurement error.6

        We utilize the 1984 to 2005 waves of the BRFSS, a telephone survey of the health

conditions and risky behaviors of randomly-selected individuals conducted by state health

departments and the Center for Disease Control. Only 15 states participated in 1984, but this

number steadily grew to 40 by 1989 and all 50 by 1996. The number of survey respondents

also increased over time, from 12,258 in 1984 to 356,112 in 2005. We compute BMI based on

the respondents’ self-reported height and weight. The BRFSS also includes a variety of

demographic information that we use to construct a set of individual-level control variables.

These variables include age, income, and dummies for gender, race, marital status, and

education.

        Several other health behavior-related BRFSS variables are used in the investigation of

mechanisms of the effects of cigarette prices on body weight. Our smoking variables are a

dummy for whether the individual currently smokes, number of cigarettes smoked per day by

smokers, and cigarettes per day for the whole sample with zeros assigned to non-smokers. The

BRFSS contains information on the frequency and duration of the respondents’ two main

sources of exercise; we use this to compute minutes of exercise per week (an underestimate for

those with three or more sources of exercise). Although the BRFSS does not report detailed

information on calorie consumption for most of the sample period, we use three proxy variables

for diet healthfulness: servings of fruits and vegetables per day, a dummy for whether the

respondent is restricting consumption of calories or fat in order to lose weight or maintain her

current weight, and alcoholic drinks per month.


6
  Specifically, Cawley (1999) introduced a “correction” for self-reported BMI that involves using the
NHANES to estimate actual BMI as a function of self-reported BMI. Gruber and Frakes’ (2006) dataset
does not employ this correction, but they show that their specification changes lead to virtually identical
results using Chou et al.’s (2002 and 2004) data, which does use the correction. The conclusions
reached using the BRFSS are therefore not sensitive to the utilization of the correction, so we do not use
it in this paper.
       We measure cigarette costs with annual state-level cigarette prices from The Tax

Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski and Walker, 2006). These prices are for a pack of twenty

cigarettes, and represent averages across single packs, cartons, and vending machine sales

(Chaloupka and Grossman, 1996). They are inclusive of state and federal excise taxes but not

sales taxes. After 1989, The Tax Burden on Tobacco reported prices both including and

excluding generic brands. We follow Chou et al. (2004) and use the series excluding generics

to allow for greater comparability across the sample period. We adjust prices for inflation using

the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Tax

Burden on Tobacco also provides monthly state cigarette excise tax rates, which we use instead

of price in a robustness check.

       We also include state-level control variables in some regressions. Number of health

clubs, golf courses, or members-only sports clubs in the state – which we add together and refer

to as “fitness centers” – come from the Economic Census, conducted by the U.S. Bureau every

five years. We use data from the 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002 censuses and interpolate for the

other years. Annual state government spending on nutritional education was graciously

provided by Kerry Anne McGeary; see McGeary (2009) for detailed information on this variable.

We construct a series of time-varying dummy variables reflecting the extent of state clean

indoor air laws, using the classification scheme of the 1989 Surgeon General’s Report (US

Department of Health and Human Services, 1989). The data come from a combination of the

1989 Surgeon General’s Report and Impacteen.7 Annual state unemployment rates come from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

       After merging the individual- and state-level datasets and dropping observations with

missing variables, our sample size is 2,428,009. Table 1 gives summary statistics for the

cigarette price, BMI, and health behavior variables used in this study, while Table A1 in the


7
  The data and classification scheme have been used in prior research, such as Eriksen and Chaloupka
(2007). We thank Frank Chaloupka, Michael Eriksen, and Gary Giovina for directing us to them.
appendix reports the summary statistics for the control variables. Some of the health behavior-

related variables are only available for a portion of the sample; Table 1 indicates this where

relevant.


III. Empirical Analysis


A. Baseline Model

       We study the effect of cigarette price on body mass index (BMI) by modifying the

preferred specification of Courtemanche (2009) to account for heterogeneity throughout the BMI

distribution and by race, sex, age, and education. We adopt the approach of Courtemanche

(2009) because he showed that the other methodologies used in the literature all point to

negative long-run average effects of cigarette costs on BMI and probability of being obese once

lagged costs are included in the model. After considering a number of specifications,

Courtemanche (2009; p. 794) ultimately settled on a preferred model that included as covariates

average state cigarette prices over years t to t-1, t-2 to t-3, and t-4 to t-5; demographic controls;

and state and year fixed effects. We adopt this approach as a starting point in our analysis of

heterogeneity. Our only change is that, in order to enable clearer presentation of the quantile

and subsample results, we use one six-year moving average spanning t to t-5 years rather than

three two-year averages; this does not meaningfully impact the results. The six-year moving

average of cigarette price increased significantly over time, more than doubling between 1984

and 2005 ($1.46 versus $3.89 per pack). Extensive price variation also exists between states.

For example, the six-year average cigarette price in 2005 ranged from $3.18 per pack in

Kentucky to $5.20 in New York.

       We evaluate the heterogeneity in the cigarette price effect at various locations of the BMI

distribution by unobserved characteristics that affect BMI using quantile regression (QR). The

QR model estimates the conditional distribution of BMI quantiles as a function of cigarette price

and other covariates and identifies the price effects on BMI at various quantiles. The effects of
the explanatory variables on the conditional quantiles, which we refer to as quantile effects

(QE), may be interpreted as price effects at different levels of the net value of all unobserved

characteristics that determine the rank of an individual on the BMI distribution conditional on the

observed characteristics. Such unobserved characteristics may include biologic/genetic,

demographic, socioeconomic, and environmental factors. Our QR model can be characterized

as follows:

      Wist  Q( Pst , Xist , S s , Yt , U ist ) ,                                                       (1)

where Wist is the BMI of individual i living in state s in year t, while Q is the conditional quantile

distribution. Pst is average inflation-adjusted state cigarette price, defined as

              Pst  Ps ,t 1  Ps ,t  2  Ps ,t  3  Ps ,t  4  Ps ,t  5
      Pst                                                                   .                          (2)
                                          6

Xist is a vector of individual demographic and socioeconomic characteristics consisting of age

(and age squared), race dummies (white, black, and other race), sex, a dummy for married,

dummies for education (less than a high school degree, high school degree but no further, some

college, and college graduate), and inflation-adjusted household income (and income squared).

S s and Yt denote dummy variables for state of residence and survey year. Finally, Uist ~ (0,1)

is a uniformly distributed ranking variable that determines individual i’s rank on the BMI

distribution conditional on the control variables, and therefore represents the net level of all

unobserved characteristics that are relevant for this rank. In other words, individuals with

different values of U but similar observable characteristics would have different ranks on the

BMI distribution. For each quantile q of BMI such that 0<q<1, Q( Pst , Xist , S s , Yt , q ) is the value

of the conditional qth BMI quantile. Since the effects of cigarette prices on BMI are estimated

holding U, the net level of the unobserved characteristics relevant to the individual’s BMI rank,

constant at q, the QE at different q represent effects on BMI at different levels of these
characteristics. In other words, the heterogeneity in effects of cigarette prices and other model

variables on BMI by U can be evaluated by estimating the QE at different quantiles as:

        Wist  Q( 0 q   q Pst  Xist γ q  S s λ q  Yt κ q )                          (3)


where  q represents the effects of cigarette prices at quantile q of BMI, γ q is a vector of the

effects of the control individual-level variables, and λ q and κ q are vectors of the state and year

fixed effects.

        The state and year fixed effects capture unobserved state-level determinants of BMI that

are stable over time as well as unobserved year-to-year changes in BMI that are shared by all

states. A natural concern with this model is whether changes over time in unobserved state-

level characteristics, such as demand for health, could lead to omitted variable bias by

influencing both cigarette prices and population weight. Courtemanche (2009) performed a

large number of robustness checks to help rule out this possibility in the context of mean effects.

In Section IIIE, we will conduct our own series of robustness checks which show that the results

are overall insensitive to different specifications.

        QR is estimated by minimizing a weighted sum of the absolute deviations of the actual

BMI values from conditional values for each q across all individuals in the sample (Koenker and

Bassett, 1978; Koenker and Hallock, 2001):

                    n                              n
        min[q  | Wi  Q i | (1  q)  | Wi  Q i |]                                               (4),
                 Wi  Q i                       Wi  Q i


where n is the total number of individuals.

        We estimate the QR model for the following five BMI quantiles that are expected to

provide adequate coverage of the entire BMI distribution: 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 0.9. In order

to test for differences in cigarette price effects between these quantiles in the main model, we

estimate the variance-covariance matrices of the QR models simultaneously using 200

bootstrap replications (Hao and Naiman, 2007).
        As a reference point, we also estimate the BMI function using OLS in order to compare

the cigarette price effects at the mean of BMI as has been calculated in previous studies to the

effects at the five quantiles. For OLS, we estimate standard errors that are heteroskedasticity-

robust and clustered by state (Moulton, 1986). Sampling probability weights cannot be

employed in the QR estimation. In unreported regressions, we estimate alternative OLS models

that use the sampling probability weights and find similar cigarette price effects to the

unweighted models. We estimate all models for the total sample and stratified by race,

education level, age, and sex.


B. Baseline Model Results

        The first row of Table 2 reports the marginal effect of cigarette price averaged over a six-

year period on the mean of BMI and the five BMI quantiles for the total sample.8 For the mean

effect, we also show the elasticity (in brackets) to aid the reader’s assessment of economic

significance.9 Cigarette price has a significant negative effect on BMI that monotonically

increases (in absolute value) by the quantile order and is significantly larger at higher than lower

quantiles in the total sample and most stratified samples. In the total sample, a one-dollar

increase in price reduces BMI by 0.12, 0.2, 0.28, 0.37 and 0.39 units at the 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75

and 0.9 quantiles, respectively; these effects are significantly different from each other (at

p<0.01). The effect at the mean is generally similar to the effect at the median (0.5 quantile).

Since the health benefits from weight loss are greatest for overweight and obese individuals,

these results imply that higher cigarette prices are even more beneficial for health than focusing

on mean effects alone would suggest.



8
  Appendix Table A2 gives the marginal effects for the control variables.
9
  The elasticities for the quantile regressions are available upon request but we do not present them here
because they can be misleading. Since the marginal effect is divided by a larger baseline BMI at higher
than lower quantiles when calculating the elasticity, differences in elasticities between quantiles may not
accurately reflect the differences in marginal effects. For instance, focusing on elasticities would treat a
five pound weight gain by a 100 pound person as equivalent to a fifteen pound weight gain by a 300
pound person, even though the latter is likely of more consequence for health.
C. Effects by Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics

       Table 2 also reports the cigarette price effects on BMI mean and quantiles for

subsamples defined by race, sex, age, and education. Stratifying by race, the largest price

effects are for black individuals, especially those at high BMI quantiles. This is consistent with

previous studies finding stronger price effects on smoking behaviors among blacks (e.g.

Farrelly, 2001; Nonnemaker and Farrelly, 2011). A one-dollar increase in cigarette price

reduces BMI by 0.76 and 0.58 units at the 0.9 and 0.75 quantiles, respectively, compared to a

decrease of 0.17 units at the 0.1 quantile and 0.36 units at the median (with a 0.36 unit

decrease at the mean). Smaller cigarette price effects are observed for whites and those of a

race other than white or black. Among whites, a one-dollar price increase reduces BMI by 0.32,

0.28 and 0.14 at the 0.9, 0.5 and 0.1 quantiles. Among individuals of another race, a one dollar

increase in price reduces the 0.9 and 0.5 quantiles of BMI by 0.34 and 0.17 units, but has a

smaller and insignificant effect at the 0.1 quantile. Price effects are overall significantly different

between the quantiles in the race-specific models.

       Stratifying by highest school grade completed reveals that education increases price

responsiveness at BMI quantiles 0.1 through 0.75. For example, cigarette prices have small

and insignificant effects on BMI at the 0.1 quantile among individuals of high school education

or less, but have a larger and significant effect at the 0.1 quantile for individuals of higher

education with a one dollar increase in price reducing BMI by 0.13 units. Similarly, at the

median cigarette prices have a small and insignificant impact on the BMI of individuals who did

not complete high school, but have larger and significant effects for more educated individuals

with a 0.23-0.26 decrease in BMI. In contrast, cigarette prices have the largest impacts at the

0.9 quantile for individuals who have less than a high school education and for college

graduates, decreasing their BMI by 0.44-0.45 units per one-dollar price increase, compared to

decreases of 0.2-0.3 units for individuals with intermediate education. The cigarette price

effects are significantly different between the five quantiles for all education subgroups.
       The finding that the BMI response to cigarette prices generally strengthens with

education may seem contradictory to prior research finding a larger cigarette price elasticity of

smoking for less educated than more educated individuals (e.g. Chaloupka, 1991). However,

our results are consistent with the theory that more educated individuals are more efficient and

motivated in capitalizing on an improvement in one health behavior such as reducing or

avoiding smoking to adopt a healthier lifestyle in general and improve other health behaviors

such as exercise. In other words, cigarette prices could have the strongest effect on smoking

for those with low education levels, but smoking changes could have the strongest effect on BMI

for those with high education levels.

       Cigarette prices have larger effects for younger (≤59) than older (≥60) adults at the

mean and all evaluated quantiles. This is consistent with previous studies showing lower

cigarette price elasticities of smoking for older adults (e.g. Chaloupka, 1991; Liu, 2010). The

largest cigarette price effects on BMI are at the 0.9 quantile for middle age adults (40-59), where

a one-dollar price increase reduces BMI by 0.82 units, compared to a 0.6-unit BMI decrease for

younger adults (<40) and a much smaller and insignificant decrease for older adults. The price

effects at the mean are also largest for middle age adults, where BMI is reduced by 0.45 units

with a one-dollar price increase, compared to a 0.36-unit decrease for individuals younger than

40 years. Except for a small effect at the 0.25 quantile, cigarette prices are generally not

statistically associated with BMI for older adults. The price effects are significantly different

between the five quantiles for young and middle age adults.

       Finally, cigarette prices have slightly larger effects for females than males, with the

largest difference at the BMI median, where a one-dollar price increase reduces BMI by 0.33

units for females and 0.23 units for males. This is consistent with prior findings of a larger

cigarette price elasticity of smoking among females (Farrelly et al., 2001; Tauras and

Chaloupka, 1999). Similarly to the total sample and other stratified samples, our estimated
cigarette price effects on BMI are overall significantly larger at higher than lower quantiles for

both females and males.


D. Implications for Disparities

       There are significant disparities in obesity and severe obesity by race, education, age,

and sex (see Table A3 in the appendix). About 30.4% of black individuals are obese (including

12% who are severely obese) compared to 18.3 of whites (5.7% severely obese). Obesity and

severe obesity rates decrease with education, with 24.7% of individuals with less than a

completed high school education being obese (8.6% are severely obese) compared to 15.2% of

college graduates (4.4% severely obese). Obesity and severe obesity rates are highest for

middle age adults (40-59) at 23.4% and 8.1%, and lowest for young adults (<40) at 15.7% and

5.2%. Finally, severe obesity rates are higher among women than men (7.2% versus 5.1%).

       Given the heterogeneity in the cigarette price effect observed across these groups, a

natural question is whether rising cigarette prices have ameliorated or worsened these

disparities. We attempt to quantify the impacts on disparities in Table 3. For each group, we

estimate a linear probability model for obesity using the same main specification described

above for the BMI function. From that regression, we predict the obesity rate in 2005 (the last

year of our sample) at both 1984 (the first year of our sample) cigarette prices and 2005

cigarette prices (prices are still averages over the current and past five years). We then

compute the predicted obesity rate disparity between each group and the group with the lowest

obesity rate (e.g. blacks or other race versus whites) at both 2005 and 1984 prices. Finally, we

calculate the difference (change) in these predicted obesity rate disparities. These difference

estimates quantify the degree to which obesity disparities are larger or smaller than they would

have been if cigarette prices had stayed at 1984 levels. We obtain standard errors for the

predicted disparities and their changes due to cigarette prices using 200 bootstrap replications.

We then repeat the same analysis for severe obesity.
       Several statistically significant results emerge. The increase in cigarette price between

1984 and 2005 has decreased the disparity in the severe obesity rate between blacks and

whites by about 4.8 percentage points, a striking 36% of the baseline disparity. In contrast,

rising cigarette prices have increased the obesity rate disparity between college graduates and

individuals with less than a high school degree by about 3.8 percentage points. Furthermore,

changes in cigarette prices decreased the disparity in obesity and severe obesity rates between

middle age and young adults by about 1.7 and 1.3 percentage points, respectively. However,

cigarette price changes have increased the disparity in obesity and severe obesity rates

between older (≥60) and young adults by about 4.6 and 2.4 percentage points. Finally, cigarette

price changes reduced the disparity in severe obesity rates between females and males.


E. Robustness Checks

       This subsection performs several robustness checks to evaluate the sensitivity of the

results to different sets of control variables and cigarette cost measures. The first adds several

time-varying state-level controls: fitness centers per capita, nutrition education spending, clean

indoor air laws, and unemployment rate.10 This specification aims to control for the most

obvious potential sources of omitted variable bias. Fitness centers proxy for unobservable

population attitudes toward healthy lifestyles and demand/supply for exercise facilities, nutrition

education spending proxies for state obesity-control policies, clean indoor air laws proxy for

other state tobacco-control policies besides cigarette taxes, and unemployment rate proxies for

state economic conditions.

       The second robustness check aims to control for time-varying state unobservable

characteristics more generally by including linear state-specific time trends. Multicollinearity is a

problem with this model: controlling for state trends along with state and year fixed effects and

the control variables results in a variance inflation factor of 133, well above the level of 10 at

10
  Following McGeary (2009), we do not scale nutrition education spending by population, but we have
verified that this does not impact our conclusions.
which the level of multicollinearity is considered problematic (Wooldridge, 2006: 203-204).11

Accordingly, the resulting estimates are too imprecise to be useful. As a solution, in the

regressions with state-specific time trends we replace the year fixed effects with a quadratic

time trend, an approach that has been taken by other papers in the obesity literature facing the

same problem (Chou et al., 2002; Courtemanche, 2011).12

        The third robustness check includes more detailed individual-level controls. Specifically,

we add a set of dummies for number of adults in the household (one for each number through 4,

with 5 or more as the reference category), and also control for age and income more flexibly.

For age, we include dummies for each five year increment from 25 until 85 years, then another

dummy for over 85 (18 to 25 is the reference category). We model income with dummies for

each $5,000 increment up to $100,000, and another dummy for income over $100,000 (income

≤ $5000 as the reference category).

        The fourth robustness check uses an 8-year rather than 6-year moving average for

cigarette price (unreported regressions also tried 10- and 12-year moving averages, obtaining

similar results). Finally, we return to the six-year moving average but use per-pack state

cigarette excise tax rates instead of prices.

        Table 4 summarizes the sensitivity of our key results to these alternative specifications,

while Appendix Tables A4 to A8 report the full array of cigarette price (or tax) effects. The key

conclusions from the baseline model generally hold up well. The only exception is that in the

model with state trends the largest effect (both at the mean and several quantiles) by age is for

those over 60 rather than for those ages 40 to 59. However, recall that the state trends model

replaces the year dummies with a quadratic time trend. If we add a cubic term to the time trend,

the age stratifications once again lead to the same conclusion as the baseline model: the


11
   Put differently, the state and year fixed effects, state trends, and control variables together explain over
99% of the variation in cigarette price.
12
   In unreported regressions we verified that our baseline results are generally not sensitive to replacing
the year dummies with a quadratic time trend, suggesting that such a switch is not inappropriate here.
strongest effect is for the 40 to 59 group, with essentially no response among those 60 and

over.


F. Cigarette Price Effects on Smoking and BMI-Related Behaviors Across the BMI Distribution

        Conceptually, the reduced-form impact of cigarette price on weight is the product of a

complicated chain of events: 1) the effect of price on smoking, which could occur along either

the extensive or intensive margins;13 2) the effect of smoking on behaviors related to calorie

intake or expenditure; and 3) the effects of these behaviors on weight. Heterogeneous impacts

across BMI levels and demographic and socioeconomic characteristics are possible at all three

of these stages. This section therefore investigates how the effects of cigarette prices on

variables related to these mechanisms vary with BMI in an attempt to shed some light on the

clearest source of heterogeneity observed in the preceding sections: the strengthening of the

cigarette price effect on BMI moving from left to right across the BMI distribution. We do this by

stratifying the sample into BMI quintiles and estimating for each quintile the impact of the six-

year moving average of cigarette price on the BMI-related health behavior variables from Table

1.14

        The results from this subsection should be interpreted subject to several caveats: 1)

several of the dependent variables are available for only a portion of the sample, as shown in

Table 1, so the estimates are relatively imprecise; 2) stratifying by BMI means stratifying by an

13
   Given the pooled cross-sectional nature of the BRFSS, we are only able to examine respondents’
smoking at one point in time as opposed to actually observing initiation and cessation. However, prior
research suggests that cigarette prices do influence both initiation and cessation. For instance,
Nonnemaker and Farrelly (2011) report a consistent effect of cigarette prices on reducing youth smoking
initiation, with larger effects among blacks. Liu (2010) finds significant cigarette price effects on initiation
up to age 44. That study also finds a positive and significant effect of cigarette prices on quitting
smoking, especially among individuals age 45 and older. DeCicca et al. (2008) report increased smoking
cessation with higher taxes among young adults. Tauras and Chalupka (1999) also find that higher
cigarette prices increase smoking cessation among young adults (for both men and women).
14
   We choose quintiles because each subsample therefore contains one of the locations on the BMI
distribution evaluated by our earlier quantile regressions (the first quintile contains the 10th percentile, the
second contains the 25th percentile, the third contains the 50th percentile, the fourth contains the 75th
percentile, and the fifth contains the 90th percentile). Unreported analyses further stratify by race,
education, age, and gender but this generally results in sample sizes too small to obtain meaningful
estimates.
endogenous variable; 3) the subsample approach is not an exact parallel of the quantile

regression approach used for BMI; and 4) we do not have complete food diaries and therefore

rely on proxies for diet healthfulness. For these reasons, further research is needed to fully

understand the mechanisms behind the negative long-run effect of cigarette price on body

weight and its heterogeneity. Nonetheless, some interesting preliminary results emerge.

        We begin by estimating the impact of price on three smoking variables. The first, a

dummy for whether the individual currently smokes, relates to smoking participation. Next,

number of cigarettes smoked per day conditional on being a current smoker captures intensity.15

Finally, we estimate an “overall” effect of price on smoking – encompassing both the extensive

and intensive margins – by using cigarettes per day among the whole sample, with zero values

assigned to non-smokers.16

        The first three columns of Table 5 report the results for these smoking variables. Higher

six-year average cigarette prices lead to statistically significant reductions in all three smoking

variables for the full sample and all BMI quintile groups. Cigarette price has the strongest

impact on the probability of currently smoking for the lowest BMI quintile. In contrast, the effect

on cigarettes smoked per day among smokers generally rises with BMI and is strongest in the

highest quintile. Interestingly, the way in which the cigarette price effect on BMI changes across

the BMI distribution more closely mirrors the pattern for the intensive margin of smoking than

the pattern for the extensive margin.17 The overall effect of cigarette price effect on cigarettes

smoked per day for the whole sample – shown in the third column – exhibits an inverted U-



15
   Whether the individual is a smoker is available in all survey years while cigarettes smoked per day is
only available through 2000. For consistency, we only use the years up to 2000 in all the smoking
regressions.
16
   We estimate linear models for all the regressions in this section, but have verified that the results are
similar using probit models for the binary dependent variables and Poisson regression for the counts.
17
   Appendix Table A9 takes a different approach to assessing whether changes in smoking along the
intensive margin play a role in explaining the cigarette price effect on weight: restricting the sample to
current smokers and estimating the baseline quantile regression model. The evidence suggests that
cigarette price influences the BMI of smokers for some subsamples, especially at higher quantiles
(quantile 0.75), consistent with smoking intensity contributing to our results.
shaped pattern in relationship to BMI quintile with negative impacts that are strongest at the two

tails of the BMI distribution.

        The last four columns of Table 5 show the results for the variables related to exercise,

eating, and drinking. A $1 increase in the six-year moving average of cigarette price leads to a

marginally significant increase in exercise for the whole sample, with a sizeable magnitude that

represents 12% of the sample mean exercise level. Importantly, the cigarette price effect on

exercise across the BMI distribution exhibits the same inverted U-shaped pattern of

heterogeneity observed for overall smoking (cigarettes per day for the whole sample). In

contrast, there is little evidence that any of the variables related to calorie consumption provide

viable mechanisms. Cigarette price does have a marginally significant influence on fruit and

vegetable consumption for the full sample, but the effect is relatively small (2.7% increase of the

sample mean with $1 price increase) and the pattern of heterogeneity does not match those in

price effects on either smoking or BMI. There is no evidence that cigarette price influences

calorie/fat restriction or alcohol intake, either for the full sample or any subsamples.

        It is noteworthy that the pattern of heterogeneity observed in the cigarette price effect on

exercise (strong effects at both tails) differs from the pattern observed in the cigarette price

effect on BMI (strongest effect at the right tail). This suggests that heterogeneity in price effects

on behaviors cannot fully account for the results, and that heterogeneous effects of behaviors

on BMI play a role as well. For instance, if individuals who are already thin lose less weight

from a specified increase in exercise than those who start with substantial excess body fat, it

would make sense that the similarly-sized cigarette price effects on exercise at the two tails of

the BMI distribution lead to greater weight loss at the right tail. Indeed, if we run a quantile

regression of BMI on minutes of exercise and the individual-level control variables, the
association between exercise and BMI steadily becomes more negative across the BMI

distribution.18


IV. Discussion

        Whether rising cigarette costs have had the unintended consequence of contributing to

the rise in obesity has become the subject of considerable debate, with recent research showing

that the average effect of cigarette prices on BMI is surprisingly negative using all

methodologies from the literature if the effect is allowed to occur gradually over six or more

years (Courtemanche, 2009). In this study, we build on Courtemanche (2009) by showing that

the relationship between cigarette prices and BMI becomes more strongly negative with body

weight and varies across subgroups defined by race, education, age, and sex,. We also assess

the implications for disparities and conduct a preliminary investigation of the behavioral

mechanisms that might contribute to this heterogeneity.

        The finding that individuals at higher BMI quantiles are significantly more responsive to

cigarette prices than those at lower BMI quantiles has important implications. Since weight-

related illnesses and their associated medical expenditures are concentrated amongst the

obese and severely obese, the health benefits and fiscal savings from higher cigarette taxes are

greater than one would infer from previous estimates of effects at BMI.19 The extent of the

heterogeneity is non-trivial. To illustrate, for the full sample the mean effects underestimate the

effects at the 0.9 percentile by about 28% and overestimate the effects at the 0.1 percentile by

more than 130%. Even larger differences between mean and quantile effects are observed in

certain groups: for example, mean effects underestimate the effect at the 0.9 quantile for blacks

by about 50%.

18
   The regression coefficients for minutes of exercise per day are -0.00005, -0.001, -0.003, -0.006, and -
0.009 at the 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 0.9 BMI quantiles, respectively. We have no appropriate
instruments for exercise to formally estimate its causal effects of BMI, so these associations should be
taken as preliminary.
19
   Cawley and Meyerhoefer (2010) note that the obese and severely obese are responsible for the largest
share of medical expenditures.
        Additionally, our study is the first to evaluate the implications of cigarette price increases

over the past decades for obesity disparities across major demographic and socioeconomic

characteristics. Perhaps most notably, we find the greatest weight response to cigarette prices

among blacks, which has translated into a statistically and economically significant reduction in

the severe obesity gap between blacks and whites. This result, combined with prior research

finding stronger price effects on smoking behaviors among blacks (e.g. Farrelly, 2001;

Nonnemaker and Farrelly, 2011), suggests that cigarette taxation could play an important role in

reducing racial disparities in health in the future – both directly through smoking and indirectly

through BMI. Beyond race, our results also suggest that the rise in cigarette prices has

mitigated weight-related disparities by gender, had mixed effects on disparities by age, and

increased disparities by education.

        A more conservative interpretation of the policy implications of our results would simply

be that they provide the most complete evidence to date that policymakers do not need to fear

the unintended consequence of weight gain when considering cigarette taxes. Prior research

has only been able to reach this conclusion with regard to population averages; even if cigarette

prices do not increase population weight on average they still might for certain vulnerable

populations, such as those with self-control problems or a genetic predisposition to be

overweight. Our results help to rule out this possibility. Between all the subsamples and

quantiles, Table 2 provides estimates for “78 categories” of individuals, and cigarette prices do

not significantly increase BMI for a single one of them. The concurrent trends in smoking and

obesity therefore appear to have been driven by coincidental population-level changes rather

than causal effects of smoking reductions on increasing body weight.20 The decrease in

smoking rates is thought to have been primarily driven by a combination of increased


20
  Alternatively, the rise in obesity could have causally reduced smoking rates due to increasing concerns
about health problems resulting from obesity such as hypertension and heart disease. While research
suggests that obesity may increase smoking initiation among female adolescents (Cawley et al., 2004;
Rees and Sabia, 2010), the causal effect of weight on smoking among adults remains unexplored.
knowledge of the health consequences of smoking and higher cigarette prices. The rise in

obesity may have been the result of unrelated factors such as an increasingly sedentary

lifestyle, greater fast-food and restaurant availability, food advertisements, improvements in food

production technology, falling real food prices, and historically cheap gasoline.21

        Another contribution of our study is to provide some insight into the mechanisms through

which the negative effect of cigarette prices on BMI occurs and why it is heterogeneous. First,

the effect appears to reflect more than simply the consequences of quitting smoking – the

intensive margin appears to play a role as well. The pattern of how the cigarette price effect on

BMI varies across the BMI distribution is more similar to the pattern for smoking intensity than

that for smoking participation. Moreover, the similarity of the patterns for overall smoking and

exercise is only apparent after accounting for smoking intensity. Our results also provide the

strongest evidence to date that exercise is one pathway through which the surprising long-run

negative effect of cigarette prices on weight occurs. Reducing or quitting smoking could lead to

more exercise by increasing lung capacity, enthusiasm about health, leisure time, or expected

longevity. Over a long enough time horizon, the additional exercise appears to counteract the

biological effects on appetite and metabolism, leading to net weight loss, particularly among

individuals at the higher weight quantiles.

        Finally, our study has implications for the broader literature on the economic causes of

obesity. If cigarette prices have heterogeneous effects on BMI both across BMI levels and

demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, then it stands to reason that the influences of

other environmental characteristics may be heterogeneous as well. Interesting insights may

emerge from applying a similar methodological approach to the one used here to study



21
   For a sample of research exploring these possibilities, see Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002), Philipson
and Posner (2003), Cutler et al. (2003), Chou et al. (2004), Rashad (2006), Eid et al. (2008), Chou et al.
(2008), Currie et al. (2010), Dunn (2010), Zhao and Kaestner (2010), Courtemanche and Carden (2011),
Anderson and Matsa (2011), Andreyeva et al. (2011), Courtemanche (2011), and Goldman et al.
(forthcoming).
heterogeneity in the effects of food prices, restaurant density, gasoline prices, and other

economic factors on BMI.
Table 1. Distribution of Key Variables
                                                                                          Mean
Variable                                                       Years     Sample Size
                                                                                       (Std. Dev.)
                                                                                          26.28
State average cigarette price over years t to t-5               All       2,428,009      (5.32)
                                                                                          0.42
State average cigarette tax over years t to t-5                 All       2,428,009      (0.28)
                                                                                         26.28
Body mass index (BMI)                                           All       2,428,009      (5.32)
                                                                                          0.20
Obese (BMI≥30)                                                  All       2,428,009      (0.40)
                                                                                          0.06
Severely obese (BMI≥35)                                         All       2,428,009      (0.24)
                                                                                          0.22
Currently smokes                                             1984-2000    1,316,034      (0.41)
                                                                                         18.83
Cigarettes smoked per day (current smokers only)             1984-2000    288,493       (10.65)
Cigarettes smoked per day (whole sample; 0 for non-                                       4.14
                                                             1984-2000    1,312,995      (9.26)
smokers)
                                                                                         26.39
Minutes of exercise per day                                  1984-2000    928,060       (39.38)
                                                                                          3.73
Fruits and vegetables per day                                1990-2003    1,050,985      (1.83)
Indicator for restricting calories/fat to lose or maintain                                0.48
                                                             1985-2003    1,162,221      (0.50)
weight
                                                                                         10.28
Alcoholic drinks per month                                      All       2,106,547
                                                                                        (23.04)
 Table 2. Effects of Cigarette Price on BMI Quantiles and Mean
 Model         Quantile                                                    “Mean” Effect        N
                  0.1         0.25        0.5      0.75       0.9
 Total          -0.12*** -0.20*** -0.28*** -0.37*** -0.39***              -0.28*** [-0.03] 2,428,009
 sample a        (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.05)            (0.06)
Stratified by race
 Black c, d     -0.17**      -0.24***   -0.36***   -0.58***   -0.76***    -0.37*** [-0.035]   194,295
                 (0.08)       (0.07)     (0.09)     (0.13)     (0.21)          (0.11)
 White a        -0.14***     -0.20***   -0.28***   -0.34***   -0.32***    -0.27*** [-0.029] 1,985,639
                 (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.05)          (0.06)
 Other a             -0.07   -0.17***   -0.17***   -0.43***    -0.34**     -0.19 [-0.021]     248,075
                    (0.06)    (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.08)      (0.15)         (0.12)
Stratified by education
 Incomplete          0.04     -0.10      -0.09       -0.14    -0.45***     -0.12 [-0.012]     279,480
 HS or lessb        (0.07)   (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.11)     (0.16)          (0.08)
 HS                  -0.03   -0.13***   -0.23***   -0.30***   -0.30***    -0.21*** [-0.022]   768,623
 graduate a         (0.04)    (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.08)          (0.08)
 Some b         -0.13***     -0.19***   -0.26***   -0.35***    -0.21**    -0.25*** [-0.027]   664,919
 college         (0.04)       (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.10)         (0.08)
 College        -0.13***     -0.18***   -0.26***   -0.37***   -0.44***    -0.29*** [-0.033]   714,987
 graduate a      (0.03)       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.08)          (0.07)
Stratified by age
 Under 40       -0.12***     -0.22***   -0.37***   -0.59***   -0.60***    -0.36*** [-0.038]   937,942
 years old a     (0.03)       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.08)          (0.07)
 40 to 59       -0.13***     -0.26***   -0.40***   -0.53***   -0.82***    -0.45*** [-0.048]   893,889
 years old a     (0.03)       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.06)     (0.09)          (0.09)
 60 years            -0.03   -0.1**      -0.04       -0.1*      -0.09      -0.06 [-0.006]     596,178
 and older          (0.05)   (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.05)     (0.09)          (0.06)
Stratified by sex
 Males a        -0.11***     -0.15***   -0.23***   -0.32***   -0.38***    -0.23*** [-0.024] 1,035,719
                 (0.03)       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.07)          (0.06)
 Females a      -0.13***     -0.22***   -0.33***   -0.41***   -0.39***    -0.30*** [-0.033] 1,392,290
                 (0.02)       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.08)          (0.07)
 Notes: Standard errors of the marginal effects are in parentheses. * indicates p<0.1; **
 indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p<0.01. a, b and c indicate that the marginal effects are
 significantly different between the five quantiles at p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.1 respectively. d
 indicates that the coefficients are significantly different between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles at p<
 0.01 (only evaluated when the differences across the five quantiles are insignificant or
 marginally significant at p<0.1). We also provide elasticities in brackets for the mean
 regressions.
Table 3. Changes in Obesity (and Severe Obesity) Disparities for Demographic and Socioeconomic Groups with Cigarette Prices
                                                        Obesity (BMI≥30)                                                     Severe Obesity (BMI≥35)
                              Cigarette price Predicted rate Predicted rate Change in Cigarette price Predicted rate Predicted rate Change in
                                 effect on      in 2005 at     in 2005 at  disparity from  effect on    in 2005 at      in 2005 at disparity from
                                probability 1984 cig. price 2005 cig. price higher cig.   probability 1984 cig. price 2005 cig. price higher cig.
Group                                                                          price                                                     price
Stratified by race
Black                             -0.021***          0.440***          0.390***           -0.008           -0.029***          0.240***           0.17***          -0.048***
                                    (0.007)          (0.017)           (0.004)            (0.018)           (0.006)           (0.011)           (0.003)            (0.012)
Other                              -0.021**          0.318***          0.269***           -0.008           -0.009***          0.118***          0.097***            0.001
                                    (0.009)          (0.013)           (0.003)            (0.013)           (0.004)           (0.008)           (0.002)            (0.008)
White                             -0.017***          0.289***          0.247***             Ref            -0.009***          0.107***          0.085***             Ref
                                    (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.001)                              (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.001)
Stratified by education
Incomplete HS or less               -0.004           0.328***          0.317***           0.038**          -0.012***          0.154***          0.126***           -0.002
                                   (0.005)           (0.013)           (0.003)            (0.015)           (0.004)           (0.008)           (0.002)            (0.009)
HS graduate                       -0.016***          0.330***          0.290***            0.008           -0.009***          0.127***          0.105***            0.005
                                   (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.002)             (0.01)           (0.003)           (0.005)           (0.001)            (0.006)
Some college                      -0.017***          0.320***          0.280***            0.008           -0.009***          0.124***          0.103***            0.006
                                   (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.002)            (0.009)           (0.004)           (0.005)           (0.001)            (0.006)
College graduate                   -0.02***          0.252***          0.204***             Ref            -0.011***          0.093***          0.066***             Ref
                                   (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.001)                              (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.001)
Stratified by age
Less than 40 years old            -0.024***          0.291***          0.233***             Ref            -0.014***          0.121***          0.088***              Ref
                                   (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.001)                              (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.001)
40 to 59 years old                -0.031***          0.363***          0.289***          -0.017*            -.019***          0.157***          0.111***           -0.013**
                                   (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.001)            (0.01)            (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.001)             (0.006)
60 years and older                 -0.005            0.258***          0.246***          0.046***          -0.004***          0.084***          0.074***           0.024***
                                   (0.004)           (0.008)           (0.001)            (0.01)            (0.003)           (0.005)           (0.001)             (0.006)
Stratified by sex
Males                             -0.020***          0.31***           0.261***           -0.004           -0.009***          0.101***          0.078***              Ref
                                   (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.001)            (0.009)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.001)
Females                           -0.019***          0.306***          0.26***              Ref            -0.013***          0.136***          0.104***            0.01**
                                   (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.001)                              (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.001)            (0.005)
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses (the standard errors for obesity rate predictions and changes are bootstrapped with 200 replications). “Ref” indicates the
reference group for calculating the changes in disparity. * indicates p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p<0.01. Disparity changes are calculated by differencing the
disparity at the 2005 prices from that at the 1984 prices. For example, the black-white obesity rate disparity at the 1984 price is 0.151 (0.440-0.289); the black-white obesity
rate disparity at the 2005 price is 0.143 (0.390-0.247); the obesity rate disparity change due to changes in price between 1984 and 2005 is -0.008 (0.143-0.151).
Table 4. Summary of Robustness of Key Results
                       Baseline     State        State     Extra       8-Year     Taxes
                        Model      Controls     Trends   Individual   Average   Instead of
                                                          Controls      Price     Prices
Negative and              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
significant mean effect
Effect stronger at high   Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
than low BMI quantiles
Effects strongest for     Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
blacks
Mean effect strongest     Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
for college graduates
Mean effect strongest     Yes        Yes         No        Yes         Yes         Yes
for those ages 40-59
Mean Effect stronger      Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
for females
 Table 5. Effects of Cigarette Price on Smoking and Obesity-Related Behaviors, Stratified by BMI
 Model                      P(Currently     Cigarettes   Cigarettes per  Minutes of        Fruits and     P(Restricting   Drinks per
                              Smokes)      smoked per      day (whole   exercise per      vegetables      calories/fat)     month
                                          day (currently sample; 0 for       day            per day
                                          smokers only) non-smokers)
Total sample                 -0.040***       -1.19***       -0.80***        3.19*            0.10*           -0.006           0.10
                               (0.007)        (0.21)         (0.14)         (1.85)           (0.06)          (0.015)         (0.33)
Stratified by BMI
 1st quintile                -0.073***       -0.92***         -1.30***         4.19**         0.12*           0.015          -0.08
                              (0.014)         (0.31)           (0.27)          (1.70)         (0.07)         (0.014)         (0.34)
 2nd quintile                -0.047***       -0.95***         -0.86***         3.85*          0.14**         -0.001           0.24
                              (0.010)         (0.34)           (0.22)          (2.02)         (0.07)         (0.014)         (0.43)
 3rd quintile                -0.035***        -0.79**         -0.58***          1.62          0.10*          -0.009          -0.36
                              (0.011)          (0.37)          (0.20)          (2.55)         (0.06)         (0.017)         (0.49)
 4th quintile                -0.040***        -1.37**         -0.90***          2.65          0.12*          -0.005           0.07
                              (0.009)          (0.52)          (0.21)          (1.94)         (0.06)         (0.018)         (0.39)
 5th quintile                -0.039***       -2.23***         -1.08***         3.65**          0.02          -0.011           0.12
                              (0.011)         (0.52)           (0.24)          (1.72)         (0.07)         (0.015)         (0.34)
 Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. * indicates p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05;
  *** indicates p<0.01.
Appendix

Table A1. Distribution of Control Variables
                                                                                      Mean
Variable               Description
                                                                                   (Std. Dev.)
Age                    Age in years                                               46.88 (16.99)
Female                 Indicator for female                                         0.57 (0.49)
Black                  Indicator for black race                                     0.08 (0.27)
Other                  Indicator for non-white and non-black race                    0.1 (0.3)
Married                Indicator for being married                                  0.55 (0.5)
                       Indicator for attending but not graduating from high
Some high school                                                                    0.08 (0.26)
                       school
                       Indicator for graduating from high school but not
High school graduate                                                                0.32 (0.47)
                       attending college
                       Indicator for attending but not graduating from
Some college                                                                        0.27 (0.45)
                       college
College graduate       Indicator for graduating from college                        0.29 (0.46)
Income                 Household income adjusted for inflation                44952.72 (25286.67)
                       State’s fitness centers or sports clubs per 10,000
Fitness centers                                                                     0.92 (0.21)
                       residents
Nutrition spending     State’s spending on nutritional education                    0.15 (0.45)
Clean indoor air laws Nominal (regulates smoking in 1 to 3 public places)           0.09 (0.28)
                       Basic (regulates smoking in 4 or more public places)         0.20 (0.38)
                       Moderate (regulates smoking in restaurants)                  0.20 (0.38)
                       Extensive (regulates smoking in private worksites)           0.42 (0.47)
Unemployment rate Monthly state unemployment rate                                   5.29 (1.43)
Notes: all state-level variables are six-year averages to mirror our treatment of cigarette price.
 Table A2. Estimated Regression Coefficients from the Baseline BMI Model
                                                Quantile Regression / Quantiles                                 Mean Effect-
                             0.1             0.25              0.5             0.75                 0.9              OLS
Cigarette Price          -0.12***          -0.20***          -0.28***        -0.37***            -0.39***          -0.28***
                           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)          (0.03)              (0.05)            (0.06)
Age                       0.17***          0.21***           0.28***          0.37***             0.47***           0.32***
                         (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.002)             (0.003)           (0.0004)
Age squared             -0.002***         -0.002***         -0.002***       -0.003***           -0.005***         -0.003***
                        (0.00001)         (9.2×10-6)        (0.00001)       (0.00001)           (0.00002)         (0.00004)
Female                   -2.02***          -1.99***          -1.65***        -0.91***             0.04**           -1.14***
                           (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.01)              (0.02)            (0.04)
Black                     1.03***          1.41***           1.88***          2.30***             2.65***           1.94***
                           (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.02)              (0.04)            (0.07)
Other                     0.15***          0.29***           0.33***          0.31***             0.23***           0.30***
                           (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.07)
Married                   0.29***          0.32***           0.33***          0.27***             0.08***           0.24***
                           (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.01)              (0.02)            (0.02)
Some high school          -0.06**          -0.11***          -0.16***        -0.20***            -0.26***          -0.17***
                           (0.03)           (0.02)            (0.03)          (0.03)              (0.05)            (0.04)
High school                 0.01           -0.21***          -0.47***        -0.72***            -0.91***          -0.51***
graduate                   (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)          (0.03)              (0.04)            (0.05)
Some college               -0.01           -0.29***          -0.59***        -0.82***            -0.93***          -0.57***
                           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)          (0.03)              (0.04)            (0.05)
College graduate         -0.33***          -0.78***          -1.27***        -1.72***            -2.02***          -1.31***
                           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)          (0.03)              (0.04)            (0.07)
                                                 -6
Income                 0.00002***       4.78×10 ***        -0.00001***    -0.00004***          -0.0001***        -0.00003***
                       (5.64×10-7)       (4.96×10-7)       (5.97×10-7)     (9.04×10-7)         (1.55×10-6)       (1.13×10-6)
Income squared       -1.54×10-10***    -7.93×10-11***     3.11×10-11***  1.90×10-10***        3.51×10-10***     8.56×10-11***
                                                   -12               -12
                      (5.27×10 )  -12
                                        (4.69×10 )        (5.52×10 )      (8.22×10-12)        (1.41×10-11)      (9.45×10-12)
Notes: The table reports the regression coefficients with standard errors in parentheses from QR and OLS for the total
sample. The year and state fixed effects are suppressed from the table for brevity. * indicates p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; ***
indicates p<0.01.
Table A3. Sample Obesity and Severe Obesity Rates by Demographic and
Socioeconomic Characteristics
                                  Obesity             Severe Obesity
Group                            (BMI≥30)                (BMI≥35)
Stratified by race
Black                          0.304 (0.001)          0.120 (0.0007)
Other                         0.204 (0.0008)          0.068 (0.0005)
White                         0.183 (0.0003)          0.057 (0.0002)
Stratified by education
Incomplete HS or less           0.247 (0.0008)            0.086 (0.0005)
HS graduate                     0.213 (0.0005)             0.07 (0.0003)
Some college                    0.200 (0.0005)            0.067 (0.0003)
College graduate                0.152 (0.0004)            0.044 (0.0002)
Stratified by age
Less than 40 years old           0.157 (0.0002)            0.052 (0.0002)
40 to 59 years old               0.234 (0.0004)            0.081 (0.0003)
60 years and older               0.197 (0.0005)            0.054 (0.0003)
Stratified by sex
Males                            0.194 (0.0004)            0.051 (0.0002)
Females                          0.196 (0.0003)             0.072 (.0002)
Note: The standard errors of the rates are in parentheses.
 Table A4: Cigarette Price Effects Adding State Nutrition Education Spending, Clean
 Indoor Air Laws, Fitness and Sports Clubs, and Unemployment Rate as Covariates
Model                                         Quantile                             “Mean”
                                                                                    Effect
                        0.1          0.25        0.5         0.75         0.9
Total sample          -0.08***     -0.14***    -0.2***     -0.28***    -0.27***    -0.21***
                       (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.07)
Stratified by race
Black                      -0.13     -0.15     -0.26**    -0.33**       -0.38       -0.21*
                          (0.11)     (0.1)      (0.11)     (0.16)      (0.26)       (0.12)
White                 -0.09***      -0.14***   0.21***    -0.23***    -0.23***     -0.20***
                       (0.02)        (0.02)    (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.06)       (0.06)
Other                      -0.06    -0.14**    -0.11      -0.27**       -0.22       -0.13
                          (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.08)      (0.11)      (0.18)       (0.12)
Stratified by education
Incomplete HS or          0.19**    -0.01      -0.03        -0.04       -0.24       -0.01
less                      (0.09)    (0.08)     (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.19)       (0.09)
HS graduate                0.02     -0.09**    -0.16***   -0.25***     -0.21**     -0.16**
                          (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.08)
Some college          -0.13***      -0.18***   -0.22***   -0.26***      -0.13      -0.21**
                       (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.07)      (0.12)       (0.08)
College graduate      -0.07**       -0.13***   -0.19***   -0.28***    -0.43***     -0.23***
                       (0.03)        (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.06)       (0.1)       (0.08)
Stratified by age
Under 40 years            -0.1***   -0.18***   -0.28***   -0.45***    -0.44***     -0.28***
old                       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.06)       (0.1)       (0.08)
40 to 59 years old        -0.07*    -0.17***   -0.29***   -0.35***    -0.61***     -0.33***
                          (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.06)       (0.1)       (0.09)
60 years and          0.96***       -0.07      -0.04        -0.1        -0.06       -0.04
older                 (0.02)        (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.07)       (0.1)       (0.07)
Stratified by sex
Males                     0.08**    -0.11***   -0.18***   -0.23***    -0.28***     -0.16**
                          (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.08)       (0.06)
Females               -0.11***      -0.16***   -0.24***   -0.31***    -0.29***     -0.23***
                       (0.03)        (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.09)       (0.07)
Notes: Classical asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. * indicates p<0.1; ** indicates
p<0.05; *** indicates p <0.01. The standard errors in this model are not bootstrapped due to
convergence problems in certain bootstrap samples. Therefore, the differences in price
effects between the quantiles are not formally tested since the covariance between effects
across quantiles is not estimated.
Table A5. Cigarette Price Effects Adding Linear State-Specific Trends
Model                                       Quantile                                     “Mean”
                                                                                          Effect
                       0.1         0.25           0.5          0.75          0.9
Total sample          -0.02      -0.08***      -0.14***      -0.26***      -0.36***      -0.19***
a
                     (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.04)
Stratified by race
Black                 -0.16       -0.19**        -0.15       -0.31**       -0.55**       -0.33***
                      (0.1)        (0.08)        (0.1)        (0.12)        (0.24)        (0.10)
White a               -0.02      -0.08***      -0.15***      -0.29***      -0.38***      -0.20***
                     (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.03)
Other                 -0.1        -0.06         -0.05         -0.07         -0.21          -0.07
                     (0.07)       (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.1)         (0.16)        (0.08)
Stratified by education
Incomplete            0.04        -0.07         -0.18**      -0.35***      -0.43***      -0.24***
HS or less a         (0.08)       (0.07)         (0.09)        (0.1)        (0.16)        (0.09)
HS graduate          0.003        -0.03         -0.05         -0.2***      -0.38***      -0.16***
a
                     (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.04)
Some                  0.01        -0.07*        -0.11**      -0.23***      -0.27**       -0.15***
college b            (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.05)       (0.07)        (0.13)        (0.06)
College              -0.08**     -0.13***      -0.23***      -0.37***      -0.54***      -0.26***
graduate a            (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.09)        (0.05)
Stratified by age
Under 40              -0.04      -0.09***       -0.08**      -0.14***      -0.18***      -0.13***
years old            (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.03)       (0.05)        (0.08)        (0.04)
40 to 59              0.03        -0.04        -0.13***      -0.29***       -0.5***      -0.21***
years old a          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.05)
60 years and          -0.06       -0.11**      -0.19***      -0.36***      -0.37***      -0.23***
older a              (0.05)        (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.05)
Stratified by sex
Males a               0.03        -0.03         -0.06**      -0.18***      -0.29***      -0.09***
                     (0.04)       (0.03)         (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.03)
Females a            -0.11***    -0.15***      -0.24***      -0.38***       -0.5***      -0.29***
                      (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.07)        (0.05)
Notes: Standard errors based on 50 bootstrap replications are in parentheses. * indicates
p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p <0.01. a and b indicate that the coefficients were
significantly different between the five quantiles at p<0.01 and p<0.05 , respectively.
Table A6. Cigarette Price Effects Adding Number of Adults in Household Plus More Flexible
Specifications for Age and Income
Model                                      Quantile                                “Mean”
                                                                                    Effect
                      0.1          0.25       0.5           0.75         0.9
Total sample       -0.12***       -0.2***   -0.28***      -0.39***     -0.4***     -0.27***
a
                    (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.06)       (0.06)
Stratified by race
Black d              -0.15*       -0.27***      -0.38***     -0.51***      -0.76***      -0.37***
                     (0.09)        (0.08)        (0.08)       (0.11)        (0.23)        (0.11)
White a              -0.13***     -0.19***      -0.25***     -0.31***      -0.31***      -0.26***
                     (0.023)       (0.02)       (0.023)      (0.032)       (0.049)        (0.06)
Other b               -0.05       -0.17***      -0.15***     -0.37***      -0.43***        -0.19
                     (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.08)        (0.15)        (0.12)
Stratified by education
Incomplete            0.01          -0.1         -0.08        -0.17        -0.44***        -0.13
HS or less b         (0.08)        (0.08)        (0.08)       (0.11)        (0.17)        (0.08)
HS graduate           -0.03       -0.12***      -0.21***      -0.3***      -0.31***      -0.21***
a
                     (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.08)
Some c               -0.13***     -0.18***      -0.24***     -0.31***       -0.24**      -0.23***
college               (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.06)         (0.1)        (0.08)
College              -0.13***     -0.16***      -0.23***     -0.32***      -0.37***      -0.26***
graduate a            (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.08)        (0.07)
Stratified by age
Under 40             -0.12***     -0.21***      -0.36***     -0.57***      -0.54***      -0.35***
years old a           (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.05)        (0.08)        (0.07)
40 to 59             -0.13***     -0.24***      -0.38***     -0.53***      -0.73***      -0.44***
years old a           (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.04)       (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.09)
60 years and          -0.02       -0.09**        -0.05        -0.10          -0.11         -0.06
older                (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.06)
Stratified by sex
Males a              -0.1***      -0.15***      -0.22***      -0.3***      -0.35***      -0.22***
                     (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.06)
Females a            -0.14***     -0.21***      -0.3***      -0.41***      -0.43***      -0.29***
                      (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.08)        (0.07)
Notes: Standard errors based on 50 bootstrap replications are in parentheses. * indicates
p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p <0.01. a, b and c indicate that the coefficients were
significantly different between the five quantiles at p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.1 respectively. d
indicates that the coefficients were significantly different between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles at
p<0.05 (only evaluated when the differences across the five quantiles were insignificant or
marginally significant at p<0.1).
Table A7. Cigarette Price Effects Using 8-Year Instead of 6-Year Average of Cigarette Price
Model                                       Quantile                                 “Mean”
                                                                                      Effect
                     0.1           0.25          0.5         0.75         0.9
Total sample      -0.18***       -0.30***     -0.43***     -0.56***    -0.57***      -0.43***
a
                   (0.02)         (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.047)     (0.06)        (0.10)
Stratified by race
Black a              -0.32**      -0.43***      -0.65***     -1.03***      -1.25***      -0.64***
                      (0.13)       (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.18)        (0.29)        (0.17)
White a              -0.19***     -0.29***      -0.41***     -0.47***      -0.46***      -0.38***
                      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.08)        (0.11)
Other a              -0.15*       -0.31***      -0.34***     -0.67***       -0.47**       -0.34**
                     (0.09)        (0.08)        (0.09)       (0.12)         (0.21)        (0.16)
Stratified by education
Incomplete            0.05          -0.13        -0.18*       -0.33**      -0.75***       -0.23**
HS or less a         (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.10)        (0.14)       (0.23)         (0.10)
HS graduate           -0.03       -0.22***      -0.34***     -0.39***      -0.41***       -0.29**
a
                     (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.06)       (0.08)        (0.13)         (0.12)
Some a               -0.20***     -0.28***      -0.40***     -0.53***      -0.39***      -0.38***
college               (0.06)       (0.04)        (0.06)       (0.09)        (0.12)        (0.13)
College              -0.21***     -0.26***      -0.40***     -0.57***      -0.66***      -0.43***
graduate a            (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.06)        (0.11)        (0.11)
Stratified by age
Under 40             -0.16***     -0.32***      -0.57***     -0.86***      -0.91***      -0.54***
years old a           (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.11)
40 to 59             -0.20***     -0.39***      -0.62***     -0.83***      -1.21***      -0.68***
years old a           (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.06)       (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.13)
60 years and          -0.06         -0.17        -0.09*       -0.14*         -0.10         -0.09
older                (0.07)        (5.66)        (0.05)       (0.08)        (0.12)        (0.10)
Stratified by sex
Males a              -0.17***     -0.24***      -0.37***     -0.48***      -0.60***      -0.35***
                      (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.08)        (0.08)
Females a            -0.21***     -0.32***      -0.49***     -0.61***      -0.58***      -0.44***
                      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.12)
Notes: Standard errors based on 50 bootstrap replications are in parentheses. * indicates
p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p <0.01. a, b and c indicate that the coefficients were
significantly different between the five quantiles at p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.1 respectively. d
indicates that the coefficients were significantly different between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles at
p<0.01 (only evaluated when the differences across the five quantiles were insignificant or
marginally significant at p<0.1).
Table A8. Effects Using Cigarette Taxes Instead of Prices
Model                                       Quantile                                     “Mean”
                                                                                          Effect
                        0.1         0.25           0.5         0.75          0.9
Total sample         -0.15***     -0.25***      -0.34***     -0.47***      -0.48***      -0.34***
a
                      (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.09)
Stratified by race
Black c              -0.25**      -0.37***      -0.52***     -0.85***      -1.08***      -0.55***
                      (0.11)       (0.10)        (0.11)       (0.17)        (0.30)        (0.13)
White a              -0.16***     -0.24***      -0.33***     -0.41***      -0.39***      -0.31***
                      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.10)
Other a               -0.13       -0.22***      -0.25***     -0.57***      -0.40***        -0.25
                     (0.09)        (0.07)        (0.09)       (0.11)        (0.15)        (0.16)
Stratified by education
Incomplete            0.08          -0.08        -0.16        -0.27**      -0.64***       -0.19*
HS or less b         (0.09)        (0.08)        (0.11)        (0.13)       (0.22)        (0.10)
HS graduate           -0.03       -0.18***      -0.25***     -0.32***      -0.30***       -0.23**
a
                     (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.07)        (0.12)         (0.11)
Some b               -0.12**      -0.18***      -0.28***     -0.39***       -0.33**       -0.26**
college               (0.05)       (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.07)         (0.14)        (0.11)
College              -0.17***     -0.24***      -0.33***     -0.48***      -0.56***      -0.37***
graduate a            (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.10)        (0.11)
Stratified by age
Under 40             -0.14***     -0.28***      -0.48***     -0.78***      -0.87***      -0.47***
years old a           (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.07)        (0.12)        (0.10)
40 to 59             -0.19***     -0.34***      -0.53***     -0.73***      -1.06***      -0.60***
years old a           (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.08)        (0.11)        (0.12)
60 years and          0.02         -0.08         -0.02        -0.06          0.02          -0.01
older                (0.05)       (8007)         (0.05)       (0.08)        (0.11)        (0.08)
Stratified by sex
Males a              -0.16***     -0.28***      -0.40***     -0.53***      -0.53***      -0.28***
                      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.10)        (0.08)
Females a            -0.15***     -0.18***      -0.28***     -0.39***      -0.49***      -0.37***
                      (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.11)
Notes: Standard errors based on 50 bootstrap replications are in parentheses. * indicates
p<0.1; ** indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p <0.01. a, b and c indicate that the coefficients were
significantly different between the five quantiles at p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.1 respectively. d
indicates that the coefficients were significantly different between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles at
p<0.01 (only evaluated when the differences across the five quantiles were insignificant or
marginally significant at p<0.1).
Table A9. Effects for the Sample of Current Smokers Using the Main Specification
Model                                       Quantile                             “Mean”             N
                                                                                  Effect
                       0.1        0.25         0.5        0.75       0.9
Total sample f        -0.02      -0.08*      -0.10**    -0.17**     -0.16          -0.08         561,631
                     (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.10)        (0.07)
Stratified by race
Black g              0.50***        0.23         0.08        -0.01         0.07         0.26      45,519
                     (0.18)        (0.16)       (0.15)       (0.23)       (0.42)       (0.21)
White f               -0.07       -0.09**      -0.11**      -0.17**       -0.17         -0.11    458,535
                     (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.07)       (0.12)       (0.08)
Other                 -0.08         -0.15      -0.33**      -0.43**        -0.33        -0.14     57,577
                     (0.14)        (0.12)       (0.14)       (0.21)       (0.33)       (0.15)
Stratified by education
Incomplete HS         0.10          -0.12       -0.14*      -0.24**       -0.30         0.15      89,578
or less e            (0.09)        (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.12)       (0.19)       (0.14)
HS graduate           -0.06         -0.02      -0.12**      -0.23**      -0.33**        -0.13    221,615
                     (0.08)        (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.09)       (0.16)       (0.09)
Some college d        -0.02        -0.11*       -0.05        -0.06        0.33*         0.04     159,187
                     (0.07)        (0.07)       (0.08)       (0.12)       (0.20)       (0.07)
College              -0.19**        -0.12       -0.16*      -0.36***     -0.47**      -0.20*      91,251
graduate              (0.10)       (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.12)       (0.21)      (0.11)
Stratified by age
Under 40              -0.02        -0.11*      -0.20***     -0.36***      -0.33*      -0.15*     250,268
years old b          (0.05)        (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.10)       (0.19)      (0.08)
40 to 59 years        -0.07        -0.11*      -0.20***     -0.25***     -0.36**      -0.19*     229,277
old f                (0.07)        (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.10)       (0.16)      (0.10)
60 years and          -0.03       -0.10**       -0.04       -0.10*        -0.09         0.10      82,086
older                (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.06)        (0.11)       (0.13)
Stratified by sex
Males b               -0.05         -0.02       -0.1**      -0.25***      -0.14         -0.09    253,444
                     (0.07)        (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.09)       (0.16)       (0.07)
Females               -0.03        -0.08*       -0.07*      -0.23***      -0.19         -0.07    308,187
                     (0.06)        (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.08)       (0.15)       (0.08)
Notes: Standard errors based on 50 bootstrap replications are in parentheses. * indicates p<0.1; **
indicates p<0.05; *** indicates p<0.01. b indicates that the coefficients were significantly different
between the five quantiles at p<0.05. d and e indicate that the coefficients were significantly different
between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles at p<0.1 and 0.05, respectively (only evaluated when the
differences across the five quantiles were insignificant or marginally significant at p<0.1). f and g
indicate that the coefficients were significantly different between the 0.1 and 0.75 quantiles at p<0.1
and p<0.05, respectively (only evaluated when the differences between the 0.1 and 0.9 quantiles
were insignificant at p<0.1).
References

Anderson, M. L., & Matsa, D. A. (2011). Are Restaurants Really Supersizing America?
      American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1), 152-188. doi:
      http://www.aeaweb.org/aej-applied/
Andreyeva, Y., Kelly, I., & Harris, J. (2011). Exposure to food advertising on television:
      Associations with children’s fast food and soft drink consumption and obesity. .
      Economics & Human Biology 9(11), 12.
Baum, C. L. (2009). The effects of cigarette costs on BMI and obesity. Health Economics, 18(1),
      3-19. doi: 10.1002/hec.1340
Cawley, J. (1999). Rational addiction, the consumption of calories, and body weight. Ph.D.
      Dissertation. University of Chicago. Chicago, IL.
Cawley, J., Markowitz, S., & Tauras, J. (2004). Lighting up and slimming down: The efects of
      body weight and cigarette prices on adolescent smoking initiation. Journal of Health
      Economics 23(2), 293-311.
Cawley, J., & Meyerhoefer, C. (2010). The medical care costs of obesity: An instrumental
      variables approach. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 16467.
CDC. (2010). Health, United States, 2009: With Special Feature on Medical Technology.
      National Center for Health Statistics.
Chaloupka, F. (1991). Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette-Smoking. Journal of Political
      Economy, 99(4), 722-742.
Chaloupka, F. J., & Grossman, M. (1996). Price, Tobacco Control Policies and Youth Smoking.
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 5740.
Chen, H., Hansen, M. J., Jones, J. E., Vlahos, R., Anderson, G. P., & Morris, M. J. (2008).
      Long-term cigarette smoke exposure increases uncoupling protein expression but
      reduces energy intake. Brain Res, 1228, 81-88. doi: S0006-8993(08)01537-0 [pii]
      10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.067
Chen, H., Vlahos, R., Bozinovski, S., Jones, J., Anderson, G. P., & Morris, M. J. (2005). Effect
      of short-term cigarette smoke exposure on body weight, appetite and brain neuropeptide
      Y in mice. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30(4), 713-719. doi: 1300597 [pii]
      10.1038/sj.npp.1300597
Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen. (2004). The effects of 401(k) participation on the wealth
      distribution: an instrumental quantile regression analysis. Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 86(3), 735-751.
Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2005). An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Effects.
      Econometrica, 73(1), 245-261.
Chou, S., Grossman, M., Saffer, H. (2002). An economic analysis of adult obesity: An
      instrumental variables approach. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
      Paper, No. 16467.
      Chou, S. Y., Grossman, M., & Saffer, H. (2004). An economic analysis of adult obesity:
      results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Journal of Health
      Economics, 23(3), 565-587. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2003.10.003 S0167-6296(04)00020-
      7 [pii]
Courtemanche, C. (2009). Rising cigarette prices and rising obesity: coincidence or unintended
      consequence? Journal of Health Economics, 28(4), 781-798. doi: S0167-
      6296(09)00037-X [pii]
      10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.03.003
Courtemanche, C. (2011). A Silver Lining? The Connection between Gasoline Prices and
      Obesity. Economic Inquiry, 49(3), 935-957. doi: DOI 10.1111/j.1465-7295.2009.00266.x
Courtemanche, C., & Carden, A. (2011). Supersizing supercenters? The impact of Walmart
         Supercenters on body mass index and obesity. Journal of Urban Economics, 69(2), 165-
         181. doi: DOI 10.1016/j.jue.2010.09.005
Currie, J., Della Vigna, S., Moretti, E., & Pathania, V. (2010). The Effect of Fast Food
         Restaurants on Obesity and Weight Gain. American Economic Journal: Economic
         Policy, 2(3), 32-63. doi: http://www.aeaweb.org/aej-policy/
Cutler, D. M., Glaeser, E. L., & Shapiro, J. M. (2003). Why have Americans become more
         obese? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3), 93-118.
DeCicca, P., Kenkel, D., & Mathios, A. (2008). Cigarette taxes and the transition from youth to
         adult smoking: Smoking initiation, cessation, and participation. Journal of Health
         Economics, 27(4), 904-917. doi: DOI 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.02.008
Dina, C., Meyre, D., Gallina, S., Durand, E., Korner, A., Jacobson, P., Froguel, P. (2007).
         Variation in FTO contributes to childhood obesity and severe adult obesity. Nat Genet,
         39(6), 724-726.
Dunn, R. A. (2010). The Effect of Fast-Food Availability on Obesity: An Analysis by Gender,
         Race, and Residential Location. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 92(4),
         1149-1164. doi: Doi 10.1093/Ajae/Aaq041
Eid, J., Overman, H. G., Puga, D., & Turner, M. A. (2008). Fat city: Questioning the relationship
         between urban sprawl and obesity. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2), 385-404. doi:
         DOI 10.1016/j.jue.2007.12.002
Eriksen, M., & Chaloupka, F. (2007). The economic impact of clean indoor air laws. [Research
         Support, Non-U.S. Gov't Review]. CA Cancer J Clin, 57(6), 367-378. doi:
         10.3322/CA.57.6.367
Fang, H., Ali, M. M., & Rizzo, J. A. (2009). Does smoking affect body weight and obesity in
         China? Econ Hum Biol, 7(3), 334-350.
Farrelly, M. C., Bray, J. W., Pechacek, T., & Woollery, T. (2001). Response by adults to
         increases in cigarette prices by sociodemographic characteristics. Southern Economic
         Journal, 68(1), 156-165.
Flegal, K. M., Carroll, M. D., Ogden, C. L., & Curtin, L. R. (2010). Prevalence and trends in
         obesity among US adults, 1999-2008. Jama, 303(3), 235-241. doi: 2009.2014 [pii]
         10.1001/jama.2009.2014
Frayling, T. M., Timpson, N. J., Weedon, M. N., Zeggini, E., Freathy, R. M., Lindgren, C. M.,
         McCarthy, M. I. (2007). A common variant in the FTO gene is associated with body
         mass index and predisposes to childhood and adult obesity. Science, 316(5826), 889-
         894.
Goldman, D., Lakdawalla, D., & Zheng, Y. (forthcoming). Food prices and the dynamics of body
         weight.
Gruber, J., & Frakes, M. (2006). Does falling smoking lead to rising obesity? Journal of Health
         Economics, 25(2), 183-197; discussion 389-193. doi: S0167-6296(05)00060-3 [pii]
         10.1016/j.jhealeco.2005.07.005
Hao, L., & Naiman, D. (2007). Quantile Regression: Sage Publications.
Hedenstrom, H., Malmberg, P., & Fridriksson, H. V. (1986). Reference values for lung function
         tests in men: regression equations with smoking variables. Ups J Med Sci, 91(3), 299-
         310.
Hjelmborg, J. B., Fagnani, C., Silventoinen, K., McGue, M., Korkeila, M., Christensen, K.,
         Kaprio, J. (2008). Genetic influences on growth traits of BMI: a longitudinal study of adult
         twins. Obesity (Silver Spring), 16(4), 847-852.
Koenker, R., & Bassett, G., Jr. (1978). Regression Quantiles. Econometrica, 46(1), 33-50.
Koenker, R., & Hallock, K. F. (2001). Quantile Regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
         15(4), 143-156.
Kring, S. I., Holst, C., Zimmermann, E., Jess, T., Berentzen, T., Toubro, S., Sorensen, T. I.
         (2008). FTO gene associated fatness in relation to body fat distribution and metabolic
         traits throughout a broad range of fatness. PLoS ONE, 3(8), e2958.
Lakdawalla, D., & Philipson, T. (2002). The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change: A
         Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper No. 8965.
Liu, F. (2010). Cutting through the smoke: separating the effect of price on smoking initiation,
         relapse and cessation. Applied Economics, 42(23), 2921-2939. doi: Pii 908134774
         Doi 10.1080/00036840801964880
Loos, R. J., Lindgren, C. M., Li, S., Wheeler, E., Zhao, J. H., Prokopenko, I., Mohlke, K. L.
         (2008). Common variants near MC4R are associated with fat mass, weight and risk of
         obesity. Nat Genet, 40(6), 768-775.
McGeary, K. A. (2009). The Impact of State-Level Nutrition-Education Program Funding on BMI:
         Evidence from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. National Bureau of
         Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 15001.
Moulton, B. R. (1986). Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.
         Journal of Econometrics, 32(3), 385-397.
Nonnemaker, J., Finkelstein, E., Engelen, M., Hoerger, T., Farrelly, M. (2009). Have efforts to
         reduce smoking really contributed to the obesity epidemic. Economic Inquiry, 47, 366-
         376.
Nonnemaker, J. M., & Farrelly, M. C. (2011). Smoking initiation among youth: The role of
         cigarette excise taxes and prices by race/ethnicity and gender. Journal of Health
         Economics, 30(3), 560-567. doi: DOI 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.03.002
Orzechowski, W., & Walker, R. (2006). The Tax Burden on Tobacco, Historical Compilation
         (Vol. 41). Arlington, Virginia.
Philipson, T. J., & Posner, R. A. (2003). The long-run growth in obesity as a function of
         technological change. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 46(3), S87-S107.
Pinkowish, M. (1999). Hand in glove: Smoking cessation and weight gain. Patient Care, 33, 134.
Qi, L., Kraft, P., Hunter, D. J., & Hu, F. B. (2008). The common obesity variant near MC4R gene
         is associated with higher intakes of total energy and dietary fat, weight change and
         diabetes risk in women. Hum. Mol. Genet., 17(22), 3502-3508. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn242
Rashad, I. (2006). Structural estimation of caloric intake, exercise, smoking, and obesity.
         Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 46, 268-283.
Rees, D. I., & Sabia, J. J. (2010). Body weight and smoking initiation: Evidence from Add
         Health. Journal of Health Economics, 29(5), 774-777.
Scuteri, A., Sanna, S., Chen, W. M., Uda, M., Albai, G., Strait, J., Abecasis, G. R. (2007).
         Genome-wide association scan shows genetic variants in the FTO gene are associated
         with obesity-related traits. PLoS Genet, 3(7), e115.
Sturm, R. (2002). The effects of obesity, smoking, and drinking on medical problems and costs.
         Health Aff (Millwood), 21(2), 245-253.
Tauras, J. A., & Chaloupka, F. J. (1999). Determinants of Smoking Cessation: An Analysis of
         Young Adult Men and Women. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
         Series, No. 7262.
US Department of Health and Human Services. (1989). Reducing the Health Cunsequences of
         Smoking: 25 Years of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of
         Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, Center
         for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.,
         DHHS Publication No. (CDC) 89-8411.
Villalobos-Comparan, M., Teresa Flores-Dorantes, M., Teresa Villarreal-Molina, M., Rodriguez-
         Cruz, M., Garcia-Ulloa, A. C., Robles, L., Canizales-Quinteros, S. (2008). The FTO
        Gene Is Associated With Adulthood Obesity in the Mexican Population. Obesity, 16(10),
        2296-2301.
Watson, N. F., Goldberg, J., Arguelles, L., & Buchwald, D. (2006). Genetic and environmental
        influences on insomnia, daytime sleepiness, and obesity in twins. Sleep, 29(5), 645-649.
Willer, C. J., Speliotes, E. K., Loos, R. J., Li, S., Lindgren, C. M., Heid, I. M., Hirschhorn, J. N.
        (2009). Six new loci associated with body mass index highlight a neuronal influence on
        body weight regulation. Nat Genet, 41(1), 25-34.
Wooldridge, J. (2006). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach: South-Western College
        Pub.
Zhao, Z. X., & Kaestner, R. (2010). Effects of urban sprawl on obesity. Journal of Health
        Economics, 29(6), 779-787. doi: DOI 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.07.006
