                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       FINANCIAL RISK MEASUREMENT FOR FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT

                                        Torben G. Andersen
                                           Tim Bollerslev
                                       Peter F. Christoffersen
                                        Francis X. Diebold

                                        Working Paper 18084
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18084


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




Forthcoming in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Volume 2, North Holland, an imprint of Elsevier.
For helpful comments we thank Hal Cole and Dongho Song. For research support, Andersen, Bollerslev
and Diebold thank the National Science Foundation (U.S.), and Christoffersen thanks the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council (Canada). We appreciate support from CREATES funded by the
Danish National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Peter F. Christoffersen, and Francis X. Diebold. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Risk Measurement for Financial Risk Management
Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Peter F. Christoffersen, and Francis X. Diebold
NBER Working Paper No. 18084
May 2012
JEL No. C1,G1

                                                ABSTRACT

Current practice largely follows restrictive approaches to market risk measurement, such as historical
simulation or RiskMetrics. In contrast, we propose flexible methods that exploit recent developments
in financial econometrics and are likely to produce more accurate risk assessments, treating both portfolio-level
and asset-level analysis. Asset-level analysis is particularly challenging because the demands of real-world
risk management in financial institutions – in particular, real-time risk tracking in very high-dimensional
situations – impose strict limits on model complexity. Hence we stress powerful yet parsimonious
models that are easily estimated. In addition, we emphasize the need for deeper understanding of the
links between market risk and macroeconomic fundamentals, focusing primarily on links among equity
return volatilities, real growth, and real growth volatilities. Throughout, we strive not only to deepen
our scientific understanding of market risk, but also cross-fertilize the academic and practitioner communities,
promoting improved market risk measurement technologies that draw on the best of both.


Torben G. Andersen                                      Peter F. Christoffersen
Kellogg School of Management                            Professor of Finance
Northwestern University                                 Rotman School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road                                      University of Toronto
Evanston, IL 60208                                      105 St. George Street 447
and NBER                                                Toronto, ON, M5S 3E6, Canada
t-andersen@kellogg.northwestern.edu                     peter.christoffersen@rotman.utoronto.ca

Tim Bollerslev                                          Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Duke University                                         University of Pennsylvania
Box 90097                                               3718 Locust Walk
Durham, NC 27708-0097                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER                                                and NBER
boller@econ.duke.edu                                    fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                      1
  1.1 Six Emergent Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       1
  1.2 Conditional Risk Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
  1.3 Plan of the Chapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

2 Conditional Portfolio-Level Risk Analysis                                          7
  2.1 Modeling Time-Varying Volatilities Using Daily Data and GARCH             .    8
      2.1.1 Exponential Smoothing and RiskMetrics . . . . . . . . . . .         .    8
      2.1.2 The GARCH(1,1) Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   11
      2.1.3 Extensions of the Basic GARCH Model . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   14
  2.2 Intraday Data and Realized Volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   18
      2.2.1 Dynamic Modeling of Realized Volatility . . . . . . . . . . .       .   24
      2.2.2 Realized Volatilities and Jumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   29
      2.2.3 Combining GARCH and RV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   33
  2.3 Modeling Return Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   36
      2.3.1 Procedures Based on GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   41
      2.3.2 Procedures Based on Realized Volatility . . . . . . . . . . .       .   43
      2.3.3 Combining GARCH and RV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   45
      2.3.4 Simulation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   46
      2.3.5 Extreme Value Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   48

3 Conditional Asset-Level Risk Analysis                                             49
  3.1 Modeling Time-Varying Covariances Using Daily Data and GARCH              .   51
      3.1.1 Dynamic Conditional Correlation Models . . . . . . . . . . .        .   54
      3.1.2 Factor Structures and Base Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   59
  3.2 Intraday Data and Realized Covariances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   61
      3.2.1 Regularizing Techniques for RCov Estimation . . . . . . . .         .   65
      3.2.2 Dynamic Modeling of Realized Covariance Matrices . . . . .          .   71
      3.2.3 Combining GARCH and RCov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   76
  3.3 Modeling Multivariate Return Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   79
         3.3.1 Multivariate Parametric Distributions . . .    . . . . . . . . . .                     .    80
         3.3.2 Copula Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     . . . . . . . . . .                     .    82
         3.3.3 Combining GARCH and RCov . . . . . .           . . . . . . . . . .                     .    84
         3.3.4 Multivariate Simulation Methods . . . . .      . . . . . . . . . .                     .    86
         3.3.5 Multivariate Extreme Value Theory . . . .      . . . . . . . . . .                     .    87
   3.4   Systemic Risk and Measurement . . . . . . . . . .    . . . . . . . . . .                     .    90
         3.4.1 Marginal Expected Shortfall and Expected       Capital Shortfall                       .    90
         3.4.2 CoVaR and ∆CoVaR . . . . . . . . . . . .       . . . . . . . . . .                     .    92
         3.4.3 Network Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . .                     .    93

4 Conditioning on Macroeconomic Fundamentals                                                               95
  4.1 The Macroeconomy and Return Volatility . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    96
  4.2 The Macroeconomy and Fundamental Volatility .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    98
  4.3 Fundamental Volatility and Return Volatility . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    99
  4.4 Other Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   100
  4.5 Factors as Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   103

5 Concluding Remarks                                                                                      105

References                                                                                                107
1     Introduction
Financial risk management is a huge field with diverse and evolving components, as
evidenced by both its historical development (e.g., Diebold (2012)) and current best
practice (e.g., Stulz (2002)). One such component – probably the key component –
is risk measurement, in particular the measurement of financial asset return volatil-
ities and correlations (henceforth “volatilities”). Crucially, asset-return volatilities
are time-varying, with persistent dynamics. This is true across assets, asset classes,
time periods, and countries, as vividly brought to the fore during numerous crisis
events, most recently and prominently the 2007-2008 financial crisis and its long-
lasting aftermath. The field of financial econometrics devotes considerable attention
to time-varying volatility and associated tools for its measurement, modeling and
forecasting. In this chapter we suggest practical applications of the new “volatility
econometrics” to the measurement and management of market risk, stressing parsi-
monious models that are easily estimated. Our ultimate goal is to stimulate dialog
between the academic and practitioner communities, advancing best-practice market
risk measurement and management technologies by drawing upon the best of both.


1.1    Six Emergent Themes
Six key themes emerge, and we highlight them here. We treat some of them directly
in explicitly-focused sections, while we treat others indirectly, touching upon them
in various places throughout the chapter, and from various angles.
    The first theme concerns aggregation level. We consider both portfolio-level (ag-
gregated, “top-down”) and asset-level (disaggregated, “bottom-up”) modeling, em-
phasizing the related distinction between risk measurement and risk management.
Risk measurement generally requires only a portfolio-level model, whereas risk man-
agement requires an asset-level model.
    The second theme concerns the frequency of data observations. We consider
both low-frequency and high-frequency data, and the associated issue of parametric
vs. nonparametric volatility measurement. We treat all cases, but we emphasize
the appeal of volatility measurement using nonparametric methods used with high-

                                           1
frequency data, followed by modeling that is intentionally parametric.
    The third theme concerns modeling and monitoring entire time-varying condi-
tional densities rather than just conditional volatilities. We argue that a full condi-
tional density perspective is necessary for thorough risk assessment, and that best-
practice risk management should move – and indeed is moving – in that direction.
We discuss methods for constructing, evaluating and combining full conditional den-
sity forecasts.
    The fourth theme concerns dimensionality reduction in multivariate “vast data”
environments, a crucial issue in asset-level analysis. We devote considerable atten-
tion to frameworks that facilitate tractable modeling of the very high-dimensional
covariance matrices of practical relevance. Shrinkage methods and factor structure
(and their interface) feature prominently.
    The fifth theme concerns the links between market risk and macroeconomic funda-
mentals. Recent work is starting to uncover the links between asset-market volatility
and macroeconomic fundamentals. We discuss those links, focusing in particular on
links among equity return volatilities, real growth, and real growth volatilities.
    The sixth theme, the desirability of conditional as opposed to unconditional risk
measurement, is so important that we dedicate the following subsection to an ex-
tended discussion of the topic. We argue throughout the chapter that, for most
financial risk management purposes, the conditional perspective is distinctly more
relevant for monitoring daily market risk.


1.2    Conditional Risk Measures
Our emphasis on conditional risk measurement is perhaps surprising, given that
many popular approaches adopt an unconditional perspective. However, consider,
for example, the canonical Value-at-Risk (V aR) quantile risk measure,
                                                            p
                                                   Z   −V aRT +1|T
          p = P rT (rT +1 ≤ −V   aRTp +1|T )   =                     fT (rT +1 )drT +1 ,   (1)
                                                   −∞




                                           2
where fT (rT +1 ) denotes the density of future returns rT +1 conditional on time-T
information. As the formal definition makes clear, V aR is distinctly a conditional
measure. Nonetheless, banks often rely on V aR from “historical simulation” (HS-
V aR). The HS-V aR simply approximates the V aR as the 100pth percentile or the
T pth order statistic of a set of T historical pseudo portfolio returns constructed using
historical asset prices but today’s portfolio weights.
    Pritsker (2006) discusses several serious problems with historical simulation. Per-
haps most importantly, it does not properly incorporate conditionality, effectively
replacing the conditional return distribution in equation (1) with its unconditional
counterpart. This deficiency of the conventional HS approach is forcefully high-
lighted by banks’ proprietary P/L as reported in Berkowitz and O’Brien (2002) and
the clustering in time of the corresponding V aR violations, reflecting a failure by
the banks to properly account for persistent changes in market volatility.1 The only
source of dynamics in HS-V aR is the evolving window used to construct historical
pseudo portfolio returns, which is of minor consequence in practice.2
    Figure 1 directly illustrates this hidden danger of HS. We plot on the left axis
the cumulative daily loss (cumulative negative return) on an S&P500 portfolio, and
on the right axis the 1% HS-V aR calculated using a 500 day moving window, for a
sample period encompassing the recent financial crisis (July 1, 2008 - December 31,
2009). Notice that HS-V aR reacts only slowly to the dramatically increased risk in
the fall of 2008. Perhaps even more strikingly, HS-V aR reacts very slowly to the
decreased risk following the market trough in March 2009, remaining at its peak
through the end of 2009. This happens because the early-sample extreme events
that caused the increase in HS-V aR remain in the late-sample 500-day estimation
window.
    More generally, the sluggishness of HS-V aR dynamics implies that traders who
base their positions on HS will reduce their exposure too slowly when volatility
increases, and then increase exposure too slowly when volatility subsequently begins
  1
    See also Perignon and Smith (2010a).
  2
    Boudoukh et al. (1998) incorporate more aggressive updating into historical simulation, but
the basic concerns expressed by Pritsker (2006) remain.



                                              3
                               70                                                    50



                               60
                                                                                     40

                               50




                                                                                          10−Day 1% HS VaR
                                                                                     30
             Cumulative Loss


                               40



                               30
                                                                                     20


                               20

                                                                                     10
                               10

                                                Cumulative Loss
                                                HistSim VaR
                             0                                                       0
                           2008:07   2009:01                 2009:07             2010:01




Figure 1: Cumulative S&P500 Loss (left-scale, dashed) and 1% 10-day HS-V aR
(right scale, solid), July 1, 2008 - December 31, 2009. The dashed line shows the cumulative
percentage loss on an S&P500 portfolio from July 2008 through December 2009. The solid line shows
the daily 10-day 1% HS-VaR based on a 500-day moving window of historical returns.



to subside.
    The sluggish reaction to current market conditions is only one shortcoming of
HS-V aR. Another is the lack of a properly-defined conditional model, which implies
that it does not allow for the construction of a term structure of V aR. Calculating a
1% 1-day HS-V aR may be sensible on a window of 500 observations, but calculating
a 10-day 1% V aR on 500 daily returns is not. Often the 1-day V aR is simply scaled
by the square root of 10, but this extrapolation is typically not valid unless daily
returns are iid and normally distributed, which they are not.3
    To further illustrate the lack of conditionality in the HS-V aR method consider
Figure 2. We first simulate daily portfolio returns from a mean-reverting volatility
model and then calculate the nominal 1% HS-V aR on these returns using a moving
   3
    The iid return assumption alone is generally not enough because the distribution of returns, for
the non-Gaussian case, will vary with the VaR horizon of interest; see, e.g., Bakshi and Panayotov
(2010).


                                                 4
                      12




                      10




                       8
True Probability, %




                       6




                       4




                       2




                       0
                           0   100   200   300   400       500      600   700   800     900      1000
                                                       Day Number




 Figure 2: True Exceedance Probabilities of Nominal 1% HS-V aR When Volatility
 is Persistent. We simulate returns from a realistically-calibrated dynamic volatility model, after
 which we compute 1-day 1% HS-V aR using a rolling window of 500 observations. We plot the
 daily series of true conditional exceedance probabilities, which we infer from the model. For visual
 reference we include a horizontal line at the desired 1% probability level.



 window of 500 observations. As the true portfolio return distribution is known, the
 true daily coverage of the nominal 1% HS-V aR can be calculated using the return
 generating model. Figure 2 shows the conditional coverage probability of the 1%
 HS-V aR over time. Notice from the figure how an HS-V aR with a nominal coverage
 probability of 1% can have a true conditional probability as high as 10%, even though
 the unconditional coverage is correctly calibrated at 1%. On any given day the risk
 manager thinks that there is a 1% chance of getting a return worse than the HS-V aR,
 but in actuality there may as much as a 10% chance of exceeding the V aR. Figure 2
 highlights the potential benefit of conditional density modeling: The HS-V aR may
 assess risk correctly on average (i.e., unconditionally) while still being terribly wrong
 at any given time (i.e., conditionally). A conditional density model will generate a
 dynamic V aR that attempts to keep the conditional coverage rate at 1% on any
 given day.
     The above discussion also hints at a problem with the V aR risk measure itself.
 It does not say anything about how large the expected loss will be on days when
 V aR is exceeded. Other risk measures, such as Expected Shortfall (ES), attempt to



                                                         5
remedy that defect. We define ES as
                                                    Z       p
                             ESTp+1|T    = p   −1
                                                                V aRTγ+1|T dγ .                   (2)
                                                        0


Because it integrates over the left tail, ES is sensitive to the shape of the entire left
tail of the distribution.4 By averaging all of the V aRs below a prespecified coverage
rate, the magnitude of the loss across all relevant scenarios matters. Thus, even if
the V aR might be correctly calibrated at, say, the 5% level, this does not ensure that
the 5% ES is also correct. Conversely, even if the 5% ES is estimated with precision,
this does not imply that the 5% V aR is valid. Only if the return distribution is
characterized appropriately throughout the entire tail region can we guarantee that
the different risk measures all provide accurate answers.
    Our main point of critique still applies, however. Any risk measure, whether V aR,
ES, or anything else, that neglects conditionality, will inevitably miss important
aspects of the dynamic evolution of risk. In the conditional analyses of subsequent
sections, we focus mostly on conditional V aR, but we also treat conditional ES.5


1.3     Plan of the Chapter
We proceed systematically in several steps. In section 2 we consider portfolio level
analysis, directly modeling conditional portfolio volatility using exponential smooth-
ing and GARCH models, along with more recent “realized volatility” procedures that
effectively incorporate the information in high-frequency intraday data.
    In section 3 we consider asset level analysis, modeling asset conditional covariance
matrices, again using GARCH and realized volatility techniques. The relevant cross-
sectional dimension is often huge, so we devote special attention to dimensionality-
reduction methods.
   4
      In contrast to V aR, the expected shortfall is a coherent risk measure in the sense of Artzner
et al. (1999) as demonstrated by, e.g., Föllmer and Schied (2002). Among other things, this ensures
that it captures the beneficial effects of portfolio diversification, unlike V aR.
    5
      ES is increasingly used in financial institutions, but it has not been incorporated into the
international regulatory framework for risk control, likely because it is harder than V aR to estimate
reliably in practice.


                                                    6
   In section 4 we consider links between return volatilities and macroeconomic
fundamentals, with special attention to interactions across the business cycle.
   We conclude in section 5.


2     Conditional Portfolio-Level Risk Analysis
The portfolio risk measurements that we discuss in this section require only a univari-
ate portfolio-level model. In contrast, active portfolio risk management, including
V aR minimization and sensitivity analysis, as well as system-wide risk measure-
ments, all require a multivariate model, as we discuss subsequently in section 3.
    In practice, portfolio level analysis is often done via historical simulation, as
detailed above. We argue, however, that there is no reason why one cannot esti-
mate a parsimonious dynamic model for portfolio level returns. If interest centers
on the distribution of the portfolio returns, then this distribution can be modeled
directly rather than via aggregation based on a larger, and almost inevitably less
well-specified, multivariate model.
    The construction of historical returns on the portfolio in place is a necessary
precursor to any portfolio-level risk analysis. In principle it is easy to construct a
time series of historical portfolio returns using current portfolio holdings, WT =
                      0                                                          0
(w1,T , . . . , wN,T ) and historical asset returns,6 Rt = (r1,t , . . . , rN,t ) :

                                N
                                                     0
                                X
                      rw,t =          wi,T ri,t ≡ WT Rt , t = 1, 2, ..., T .                   (3)
                                i=1


In practice, however, historical prices for the assets held today may not be avail-
able. Examples where difficulties arise include derivatives, individual bonds with
various maturities, private equity, new public companies, merger companies and so
on. For these cases “pseudo” historical prices must be constructed using either pric-
ing models, factor models or some ad hoc considerations. The current assets without
   6
     The portfolio return is a linear combination of asset returns when simple rates of returns are
used. When log returns are used the portfolio return is only approximately linear in asset returns.



                                                 7
historical prices can, for example, be matched to “similar” assets by capitalization,
industry, leverage, and duration. Historical pseudo asset prices and returns can then
be constructed using the historical prices on the substitute assets.
    We focus our discussion on V aR.7 We begin with a discussion of the direct com-
putation of portfolio V aR via exponential smoothing, followed by GARCH modeling,
and more recent realized volatility based procedures. Notwithstanding a number of
well-know drawbacks, see, e.g., Stulz (2008), V aR remains by far the most prominent
and commonly-used quantitative risk measure. The main techniques that we discuss
are, however, easily adapted to allow for the calculation of other portfolio-level risk
measures, and we will briefly discuss how to do so as well.


2.1     Modeling Time-Varying Volatilities Using Daily Data
        and GARCH
The lack of conditionality in the HS-V aR and related HS approaches discussed above
is a serious concern. Several procedures are available for remedying this deficiency.
Chief among these are RiskMetrics (RM) and Generalized Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models, both of which are easy to implement on a
portfolio basis. We discuss each approach in turn.

2.1.1    Exponential Smoothing and RiskMetrics

Whereas the HS-V aR methodology makes no explicit assumptions about the dis-
tributional model generating the returns, the RM filter/model implicitly assumes
a very tight parametric specification by incorporating conditionality via univariate
portfolio-level exponential smoothing of squared portfolio returns. This directly par-
allels the exponential smoothing of individual return squares and cross products that
   7
     Although the Basel Accord calls for banks to report 1% V aR’s, for various reasons banks tend
to report more conservative V aR’s; see, e.g., the results in Berkowitz and O’Brien (2002), Perignon
et al. (2008), Perignon and Smith (2010a) and Perignon and Smith (2010b). Rather than simply
scaling up a 1% V aR based on some “arbitrary” multiplication factor, the procedures that we
discuss below may readily be used to achieve any desired, more conservative, V aR.




                                                 8
underlies the basic RM approach at the individual asset level.8
    Again, taking the portfolio-level pseudo returns from (3) as the data series of
interest we can define the portfolio-level RM variance as

                               σt2 = λ σt−1
                                        2              2
                                            + (1 − λ) rw,t−1 ,                                 (4)

where the variance forecast for day t is constructed at the end of day t − 1 using the
square of the return observed at the end of day t − 1 as well as the variance on day
t−1. In practice this recursion can be initialized by setting the initial σ02 equal to the
unconditional sample variance, say σ̂ 2 . Note that repeated substitution in (4) yields
an expression for the current smoothed value as an exponentially weighted moving
average of past squared returns:
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                    σt2 =             2
                                                  ϕj rw,t−1−j ,
                                            j=0


where
                                       ϕj = (1 − λ) λj .

Hence the name “exponential smoothing.”
   In the RM framework, V aR is then simply obtained as

                                RM-VaRTp +1|T ≡ σT +1 Φ−1
                                                       p ,                                     (5)

where Φ−1p is the p
                    th
                       quantile of the standard normal distribution. Although other
distributions and quantiles could be used in place of the normal – and sometimes are –
the assumption of conditional normality remains dominant. Similarly, the smoothing
parameter λ may in principle be calibrated to best fit the specific historical returns at
hand although, following RM, it is typically fixed at a preset value of 0.94 with daily
   8
     Empirically more realistic long-memory hyperbolic decay structures, similar to the long-memory
type GARCH models briefly discussed below, have also been explored by RM more recently; see,
e.g., Zumbach (2006). However, following standard practice we will continue to refer to exponential
smoothing simply as the RM approach.



                                                  9
returns. Altogether, the implicit assumption of zero mean returns, a fixed smoothing
parameter, and conditional normality therefore implies that no parameters and/or
distributions need to be estimated.
    Extending the approach to longer return horizons, the conditional variance for
the k-day return in RM is

                                                              2            2
              V ar(rw,t+k + rw,t+k−1 + ... + rw,t+1 | Ft ) ≡ σt:t+k|t = k σt+1 .   (6)

Hence the RM model can be thought of as a random walk model in variance, insofar
as the variance scales with the return horizon. More precisely, exponential smoothing
is optimal if and only if squared returns follow a “random walk plus noise” model – a
“local level” model in the terminology of Harvey (1989) – in which case the minimum
MSE forecast at any horizon is simply the current smoothed value.9
    Unfortunately, however, the historical record of volatility across numerous asset
classes suggest that volatilities are unlikely to follow random walks, and hence that
the flat forecast function associated with exponential smoothing is inappropriate for
volatility. In particular, the lack of mean-reversion in the RM variance calculations
implies that the term structure of volatility is always flat, which violates both in-
tuition and historical experience. Suppose, for example, that current volatility is
high by historical standards, as was the case during the height of the financial crisis
and the earlier part of the sample in Figures 1 and 2. The RM model will then
simply extrapolate the high current volatility across all future horizons. By contrast,
an empirically more realistic mean-reverting volatility model would correctly predict
that the high volatility observed during the crisis would eventually subside.
    The dangers of simply scaling the daily variance by the horizon k, as done in
(6), are discussed further in Diebold et al. (1998a). Of course, the one-day RM
volatility does adjust much more quickly to changing market conditions than the
HS approach, but the flat volatility term structure is unrealistic and, when taken
literally, RM does not appear to be a prudent approach to volatility modeling and
measurement. Furthermore, it is only valid as a volatility filter and not as a data
  9
      See Nerlove and Wage (1964).


                                             10
generating process for simulating future returns. Hence we now turn to GARCH
models, which allow for much richer terms structures of volatility and which can be
used to simulate the return process forward in time.

2.1.2   The GARCH(1,1) Model

To allow for time variation in both the conditional mean and variance of univariate
portfolio returns, we write

            rw,t = µt + σt zt ,    zt ∼ i.i.d. , E(zt ) = 0 , V ar(zt ) = 1 .        (7)

For simplicity we will henceforth assume a zero conditional mean, µt ≡ 0. This
directly parallels the RM approach, and it is a common assumption in risk manage-
ment when short (e.g., daily or weekly) return horizons are considered. It is readily
justified by the fact that the magnitude of the daily volatility (conditional standard
deviation) σt easily dominates that of µt for most portfolios of practical interest. This
is also indirectly manifest by the fact that, in practice, accurate estimation of the
mean is typically much more difficult than accurate estimation of volatility. Still,
conditional mean dynamics could easily be incorporated into any of the GARCH
models discussed below by considering demeaned returns rw,t − µt in place of rw,t .
    The key object of interest is the conditional standard deviation, σt . If it depends
non-trivially on the currently observed conditioning information, we say that rw,t
follows a GARCH process. Numerous competing parameterizations for σt have been
proposed in the literature for best capturing the temporal dependencies in the con-
ditional variance of portfolio returns; see, e.g., the list of models and corresponding
acronyms in Bollerslev (2010). However, the simple symmetric GARCH(1,1) intro-
duced by Bollerslev (1986) remains by far the most commonly used formulation in
practice. The GARCH(1,1) model is defined by

                                         2
                            σt2 = ω + α rw,t−1      2
                                               + β σt−1 .                            (8)

Extensions to higher order GARCH models are straightforward but usually unnec-


                                           11
essary empirically, so we concentrate on the GARCH(1,1) throughout most of the
chapter, while discussing some important generalizations in the following section.
    Perhaps surprisingly, GARCH is closely-related to exponential smoothing of squared
returns. Repeated substitution in (8) yields
                                               ∞
                                        ω     X
                              σt2 =        +α     β j−1 rt−j
                                                         2
                                                             ,
                                       1−β    j=1


so the GARCH(1,1) process implies that current volatility is an exponentially weighted
moving average of past squared returns. Hence GARCH(1,1) volatility measurement
is related to RM volatility measurement.
    There are, however, crucial differences between GARCH and RM. First, the
GARCH parameters, and hence ultimately the GARCH volatility, are estimated
using rigorous statistical methods that facilitate probabilistic inference. By contrast,
the parameters used in exponential smoothing are set in an ad hoc fashion. More
specifically, the vector of GARCH parameters, θ = (ω, α, β), is typically estimated
by maximizing the log likelihood function,

                                                T
                                                X
                                                      ln σt2 (θ) − σt−2 (θ)rw,t
                                                                            2
                                                                              
               ln L(θ; rw,T , ..., rw,1 ) ∝ −                                     .             (9)
                                                t=1


This likelihood function is based on the assumption that zt in (7) is i.i.d. N (0, 1).
However, the assumption of conditional normality underlying the (quasi-) likelihood
function in (9) is merely a matter of convenience. If the conditional return distri-
bution is non-normal, the resulting quasi MLE generally still produces consistent
and asymptotically normal, albeit not fully efficient, parameter estimates, see, e.g.,
Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992). The log-likelihood optimization in (9) can only be
done numerically. However, GARCH models are parsimonious and specified directly
in terms of univariate portfolio returns, so that only a single numerical optimization
is needed.10
  10
    This optimization can be performed in a matter of seconds on a standard desktop computer
using standard software such as Excel, as discussed by Christoffersen (2003). For further discussion



                                                12
   Second, and crucially from the vantage point of financial market risk measure-
ment, the covariance stationary GARCH(1,1) process has dynamics that eventually
produce reversion in volatility to a constant long-run value. This enables interesting
and realistic forecasts and contrasts sharply with the RM exponential smoothing
approach in which, as discussed earlier, the term structure of volatility is forced to
be flat. To see the mean reversion that GARCH enables, rewrite the GARCH(1,1)
model in (8) as
                     σt2 = (1 − α − β) σ 2 + α rw,t−1
                                                  2          2
                                                       + β σt−1 ,                 (10)

where σ 2 ≡ ω/(1 − α − β) denotes the long-run, or unconditional daily variance, or
equivalently as

                    (σt2 − σ 2 ) = α (rw,t−1
                                       2
                                             − σ 2 ) + β (σt−1
                                                           2
                                                               − σ2) .           (11)

Hence the forecasted deviation of the conditional variance from the long-run vari-
ance is a weighted average of the deviation of the current conditional variance from
the long-run variance, and the deviation of the squared return from the long-run
variance. RM’s exponential smoothing creates a parallel weighted average, with the
key difference that exponential smoothing imposes α + β = 1, whereas covariance
stationary GARCH(1,1) imposes α + β < 1. Finally, we can rearrange (11) to write

                 (σt2 − σ 2 ) = (α + β) (σt−1
                                          2
                                              − σ 2 ) + α σt−1
                                                           2     2
                                                               (zt−1 − 1),       (12)

where the last term on the right has zero mean. Hence, the mean reversion of
the conditional variance (or lack thereof) is governed by (α + β). So long as (α +
β) < 1, which must hold for the covariance stationary GARCH(1,1) processes of
empirical relevance, the conditional variance is mean-reverting, with the speed of
mean reversion governed by (α + β).
    The mean-reverting property of GARCH volatility forecasts has important impli-
cations for the volatility term structure. To construct the volatility term structure
corresponding to a GARCH(1,1) model, we need the k-day ahead conditional vari-
of inference in GARCH models, see also Andersen et al. (2006a).


                                              13
ance forecast. By repeated substitution in equation (12), we obtain

                        2
                       σt+k|t = σ 2 + (α + β)k−1 (σt+1
                                                   2
                                                       − σ2) .                   (13)

Under our maintained assumption that returns have conditional mean zero, the vari-
ance of the k-day cumulative return is simply the sum of the corresponding 1- through
k-day ahead variance forecasts. Simplifying this sum, it may be informatively ex-
pressed as
                                                    1 − (α + β)k
                                                                
                    2            2      2      2
                   σt:t+k|t = k σ + (σt+1 − σ )                    .              (14)
                                                     1−α−β
Hence, in contrast to the flat volatility term structure associated with the RM fore-
cast in (6), the GARCH volatility term structure is upward or downward sloping
depending on the level of current conditional variance compared to long-run vari-
ance.
    To summarize the discussion thus far, we have seen that GARCH is attractive
relative to RM because it moves from ad hoc exponential smoothing to rigorous yet
simple likelihood-based probabilistic modeling, and because it allows for the mean
reversion routinely observed in actual financial market volatilities. In addition, and
crucially, the basic GARCH(1,1) model is readily extended in a variety of important
and empirically-useful directions, to which we now turn.

2.1.3   Extensions of the Basic GARCH Model

One important generalization of the basic GARCH(1,1) model involves the enrich-
ment of the dynamics via higher-order specifications to obtain GARCH(p,q) models
with p ≥ 1, q ≥ 1. Indeed, Engle and Lee (1999) show that the GARCH(2,2) is
of particular interest because, under certain parameter restrictions, it implies that
conditional variance dynamics may be decomposed into long-run and short-run com-
ponents,
                  (σt2 − qt ) = α (rw,t−1
                                    2                    2
                                          − qt−1 ) + β (σt−1 − qt−1 ) ,          (15)




                                         14
where the long-run component, qt , is a separate autoregressive process,

                                                 2        2
                           qt = ω + ρ qt−1 + φ (rw,t−1 − σt−1 ).                              (16)

Of course, this “component GARCH” model is a very special version of a component
model, and one may argue that it is not a component model at all, but rather just
a restricted GARCH(2,2).
    More general component modeling is easily undertaken, however, allowing for
additive superposition of independent autoregressive-type components, as in Gallant
et al. (1999), Alizadeh et al. (2002) and Christoffersen et al. (2008), all of whom
find evidence of component structure in volatility. Under appropriate conditions,
such structures may be shown to approximate very strong dependence, i.e. “long-
memory,” in which shocks to the conditional variance decay at a slow hyperbolic
rate, see, e.g., Granger (1980), Cox (1981), Andersen and Bollerslev (1997), and
Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001).
    Exact long-memory behavior can also easily be incorporated into the GARCH
modeling framework to more closely mimic the dependencies observed with most
financial assets and/or portfolios; see, e.g., Bollerslev and Mikkelsen (1999).11 As
discussed further below, properly incorporating these types of long-memory depen-
dencies generally also results in more accurate volatility forecasts over long horizons.
    To take a second example of the extensibility of GARCH models, note that all
of the models considered so far, including the RM filter, imply symmetric response
to positive and negative return shocks. However, equity markets, and particularly
equity indexes, often seem to display a strong asymmetry, whereby a negative return
boosts volatility by more than a positive return of the same absolute magnitude.
The standard GARCH model is readily extended to capture this effect by simply
including a separate term for the past negative return shocks, as in the so-called
  11
    The basic RiskMetrics approach has also recently been extended to allow the smoothing param-
eters ϕj used in filtering the returns to exhibit a fixed pre-specified hyperbolic slow long-memory
type decay; see Zumbach (2006). However, the same general set of drawbacks pertaining to the
basic RM filter remain.




                                                15
threshold-GARCH model proposed by Glosten et al. (1993),

                            2
               σt2 = ω + α rw,t−1      2
                                  + γ rw,t−1                    2
                                             I(rw,t−1 < 0) + β σt−1 ,            (17)

where I(·) denotes the indicator function. For well diversified equity portfolios γ is
typically estimated to be positive and highly statistically significant. In fact, the
asymmetry in the volatility appears to have increased over time and the estimate
for the conventional α ARCH coefficient in equation (17) is often insignificant with
recent data, so that the dynamics appear to be driven exclusively by the negative
shocks.
    Other popular asymmetric GARCH models include the EGARCH model of Nel-
son (1991), in which the logarithmic conditional variance is a function of the “raw”
and absolute standardized return shocks, and the NGARCH model of Engle and Ng
(1993). In the NGARCH(1,1) model,

                     σt2 = ω + α (rw,t−1 − γ σt−1 )2 + β σt−1
                                                          2
                                                              ,                  (18)

where asymmetric response in the conventional direction occurs for γ > 0.
    In parallel to the RM-V aR defined in equation (5), a GARCH-based one-day
V aR may correspondingly be calculated by simply multiplying the one-day volatility
forecast from any GARCH model by the requisite quantile in the standard normal
distribution,
                         GARCH-VaRTp +1|T ≡ σT +1 Φ−1 p .                     (19)

This GARCH-V aR, of course, implicitly assumes that the returns are conditionally
normally distributed. This is a much better approximation than assuming the returns
are unconditionally normally distributed, and it is entirely consistent with the fat
tails routinely observed in unconditional return distributions.
    As noted earlier, however, standardized innovations zt from GARCH models
sometimes have fatter tails than the normal distribution, indicating that conditional
normality is not acceptable. The GARCH-based approach explicitly allows us to
remedy this problem, by using other conditional distributions and corresponding


                                         16
                                   70                                               50



                                   60
                                                                                    40

                                   50


                                                                                    30




                                                                                         10−Day 1% VaR
                 Cumulative Loss   40
                                                                  Cumulative Loss
                                                                  RM−VaR
                                                                  GARCH−VaR
                                   30
                                                                                    20


                                   20

                                                                                    10
                                   10



                                 0                                                0
                               2008:07   2009:01        2009:07               2010:01




Figure 3: Cumulative S&P500 Loss (dots, left scale) and 1% 10-day RM-V aR and
GARCH-V aR (solid and dashed, right scale), July 1, 2008 - December 31, 2009.


quantiles in place of Φ−1
                        p , and we will discuss various ways for doing so in section
2.3 below to further enhance the performance of the simple GARCH-V aR approach.
Note also that in contrast to the RM-based V aRs, which simply scale with the
square-root of the return horizon, the multi-day GARCH-based V aRs explicitly in-
corporate mean reversion in the forecasts. They cannot be obtained simply by scaling
the V aRs in equation (19). Again, we will discuss this in more detail in section 2.3
below.
    For now, to illustrate the conditionality afforded by the GARCH-V aR, and to
contrast it with HS-V aR, we plot in Figure 3 the V aRs from an NGARCH model
and RiskMetrics (RM). The figure clearly shows that allowing for GARCH (or RM)
conditionally makes the V aRs move up and, equally importantly, come down much
faster than the HS-V aRs. Moreover, contrasting the two curves, it is evident that
allowing for asymmetry in a rising market desirably allows NGARCH-V aR to drop
more quickly than RM-V aR. Conversely, the NGARCH-V aR rises more quickly
than RM-V aR (and V aRs based on symmetric GARCH models) in falling markets.

                                                   17
Several studies by Engle (2001), Engle (2004), Engle (2009b), and Engle (2011) have
shown that allowing for asymmetries in the conditional variance can materially affect
GARCH-based V aRs.
    The procedures discussed in this section were originally developed for daily or
coarser frequency returns. However, high-frequency intraday price data are now
readily available for a host of different assets and markets. We next review recent
research on so-called realized volatilities constructed from such high-frequency data,
and show how to use them to provide even more accurate assessment and modeling
of daily market risks.


2.2    Intraday Data and Realized Volatility
Higher frequency data add little to the estimation of expected returns. At the same
time, however, the theoretical results in Merton (1980) and Nelson (1992) suggest
that higher frequency data should be very useful in the construction of more accurate
volatility models, and in turn expected risks. In practice, however, the statistical
modeling of high-frequency data is notoriously difficult, and the daily GARCH and
related volatility forecasting procedures discussed in the previous section have been
shown to work poorly when applied directly to high-frequency intraday returns;
see, e.g., Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) and Andersen et al. (1999). Fortunately,
extensive research efforts over the past decade have shown how the rich information
inherent in the now readily available high-frequency data may be effectively harnessed
through the use of so-called realized volatility measures.
    To formally define the realized volatility concepts, imagine that the instantaneous
returns, or logarithmic price increments, evolve continuously through time according
to the stochastic volatility diffusion

                           dp(t) = µ(t) dt + σ(t) dW (t) ,                        (20)

where µ(t) and σ(t) denote the instantaneous drift and volatility, respectively, and




                                          18
W (t) is a standard Brownian motion.12 This directly parallels the general discrete-
time return representation in equation (7), with rw,t ≡ p(t) − p(t − 1) and the unit
time interval normalized to a day. Just as the conditional mean in equation (7) can
be safely set to zero, so too can the drift term in equation (20). Hence, in what
follows, we set µ(t) = 0.
    Following Andersen and Bollerslev (1998b), Andersen et al. (2001b) and Barndorff-
Nielsen and Shephard (2002), the realized variation (RV ) on day t based on returns
at the ∆ intra-day frequency is then formally defined by

                                        N (∆)
                                         X                                2
                        RVt (∆) ≡               pt−1+j∆ − pt−1+(j−1)∆          ,                 (21)
                                         j=1


where pt−1+j∆ ≡ p (t − 1 + j∆) denotes the intraday log-price at the end of the jth
interval on day t, and N (∆) ≡ 1/∆. For example, N (∆) = 288 for 5-minute
returns in a 24-hour market, corresponding to ∆ = 5/(24 · 60) ≈ 0.00347, while 5-
minute returns in a market that is open for six-and-half hours per day, like the U.S.
equity markets, would correspond to N (∆) = 78 and ∆ = 5/(6.5·60) ≈ 0.01282. The
expression in equation (21) looks exactly like a sample variance for the high-frequency
returns, except that we do not divide the sum by the number of observations, N (∆),
and the returns are not centered around the sample mean.
    Assume for the time being that the prices defined by the process in equation
(20) are continuously observable. In this case, letting ∆ go to zero, corresponding
to progressively finer sampled returns, the RV estimator approaches the integrated
variance of the underlying continuous-time stochastic volatility process on day t,
  12
    The notion of a continuously evolving around-the-clock price process is, of course, fictitious.
Most financial markets are only open for part of the day, and prices are not continuously updated and
sometimes jump. The specific procedures discussed below have all been adapted to accommodate
these features and other types of market microstructure frictions, or “noise,” in the actually observed
high-frequency prices.




                                                  19
formally defined by,13                         Z   t
                                     IVt =              σ 2 (τ ) dτ.                            (22)
                                                t−1

Hence, in contrast to the RM- and GARCH-based volatility estimates discussed
above, the true ex-post volatility for the day effectively becomes observable. And it
does so in an entirely model-free fashion regardless of the underlying process that
actually describes σ(t).
    In practice, of course, prices are not available on a continuous basis. However,
with prices for many assets recorded, say, every minute, a daily RV could easily
be computed from one-minute squared returns. Still, returns at the one-minute
frequency are likely affected by various market microstructure frictions, or noise,
arising from bid-ask bounces, a discrete price grid, and the like.14 Of course, even
with one-minute price observations on hand, we may decide to construct the RV
measures from five-minute returns, as these coarser sampled data are less susceptible
to contamination from market frictions. Clearly, this involves a loss of information
as the majority of the recorded prices are ignored. Expressed differently, it is feasible
to construct five different sets of (overlapping) 5-minute intraday return sequences
from the given data, but in computing the regular five-minute based RV measure we
exploit only one of these series – a theme we return to below.
    The optimal choice of high-frequency grid over which to measure the returns
obviously depends on the specific market conditions. The “volatility signature plot”
of Andersen et al. (2000b) is useful for guiding this selection. It often indicates the
adequacy of 5-minute sampling across a variety of assets and markets, as originally
advocated by Andersen and Bollerslev (1998a).15 Meanwhile, as many markets have
become increasingly more liquid it would seem reasonable to resort to even finer
sampling intervals with more recent data although, as noted below, the gains from
doing so in terms of the accuracy of realized volatility based forecast appear to be
                                                                           R1
  13
     More precisely, ∆−1/2 (RVt (∆) − IVt ) → N (0, 2IQt ), where IQt ≡ 0 σ 4 (t − 1 + τ ) dτ and the
convergence is stable in law; for a full theoretical treatment, see, e.g., Andersen et al. (2010a).
  14
     Brownlees and Gallo (2006) contain a useful discussion of the relevant effects and some of the
practical issues involved in high-frequency data cleaning.
  15
     See also Hansen and Lunde (2006) and the references therein.


                                                   20
fairly minor.
    One way to exploit all the high-frequency returns, even if the RV measure is based
on returns sampled at a lower frequency, is to compute alternative RV estimator using
a different offset relative to the first return of the trading day, and then combine
them. For example, if one-minute returns are given, one may construct a new RV
estimator using an equal-weighted average of the five alternative regular five-minute
RV estimators available each day. We will denote this estimator AvgRV below. The
upshot is that the AvgRV estimator based on five-minute returns is much more
robust to microstructure noise than the single RV based on one-minute returns.
    In markets that are not open 24 hours per day, the change from the closing price
on day t − 1 to the opening price on day t should also be accounted for. This can
be done by simply scaling up the trading day RV by the proportion corresponding
to the missing over-night variation, or any of the other more complicated methods
advocated in Hansen and Lunde (2005). As is the case for the daily GARCH mod-
els discussed above, corrections may also be made for the fact that days following
weekends and holidays tend to have proportionally higher than average volatility.
    Several other realized volatility estimators have been developed to guard against
the influences of market microstructure frictions. In contrast to the simple RVt (∆)
estimator, which formally deteriorates as the length of the sampling interval ∆ ap-
proaches zero if the prices are observed with error, these other estimators are typ-
ically designed to be consistent for IVt as ∆ → 0, even in the presence of mar-
ket microstructure noise. Especially prominent are the realized kernel estimator of
Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2008), the pre-averaging estimator of Jacod et al. (2009),
and the two-scale estimator of Aı̈t-Sahalia et al. (2011). These alternative estimators
are generally more complicated to implement than the AvgRV estimator, requiring
the choice of additional tuning parameters, smoothing kernels, and appropriate block
sizes. Importantly, the results in Andersen et al. (2011a) show that, when used for
volatility forecasting, the simple-to-implement AvgRV estimator performs on par
with, and often better than, these more complex RV estimators.16
  16
    Note, however, that while the AvgRV estimator provides a very effective way of incorporat-
ing ultra high-frequency data into the estimation by averaging all of the possible squared price


                                              21
                                              Daily close−to−close Returns (%)
                     15

                     10

                      5

                      0

                     −5

                    −10

                    −15
                      1990   1992   1994   1996   1998    2000    2002    2004    2006   2008   2010


                                           Daily Annualized Realized Volatility (%)
                    150



                    100



                     50



                      0
                      1990   1992   1994   1996   1998    2000    2002    2004    2006   2008   2010




Figure 4: S&P500 Daily Returns and Volatilities (Percent). The top panel shows daily
S&P500 returns, and the bottom panel shows daily S&P500 realized volatility. We compute realized
volatility as the square root of AvgRV , where AvgRV is the average of five daily RVs each computed
from 5-minute squared returns on a 1-minute grid of S&P500 futures prices.



   To illustrate, we plot in Figure 4 the square root of daily AvgRV s (in annualized
percentage terms) as well as daily S&P 500 returns for January 1, 1990 through
December 31, 2010. Following the discussion above, we construct AvgRV from a
one-minute grid of futures prices and the average of the corresponding five five-
minute RVs.17 Looking at the figure, the assumption of constant volatility is clearly
untenable from a risk management perspective. The dramatic rise in the volatility in
the Fall of 2008 is also immediately evident, with the daily realized volatility reaching
an unprecedented high of 146.2 on October 10, 2008, which is also the day with the
increments over the fixed non-trivial time interval ∆ > 0, the AvgRV estimator is formally not
consistent for IV as ∆ → 0.
  17
     We have one-minute prices from 8:31am to 3:15pm each day. We do not adjust for the overnight
return.


                                                          22
                                                                                 QQ plot of Daily Realized Volatility
                                                                10




                        Quantiles of Realized Volatility
                                                                 5


                                                                 0


                                                               −5


                                                               −10
                                                                 −5   −4   −3   −2       −1       0      1         2    3   4   5
                                                                                      Standard Normal Quantiles

                                                                                     QQ plot of Daily log RV−AVR
                        Quantiles of Log Realized Volatility

                                                                10


                                                                 5


                                                                 0


                                                               −5


                                                               −10
                                                                 −5   −4   −3   −2       −1       0      1         2    3   4   5
                                                                                      Standard Normal Quantiles




Figure 5: S&P500: QQ Plots for Realized Volatility and Log Realized Volatility. The
top panel plots the quantiles of daily realized volatility against the corresponding normal quantiles.
The bottom panel plots the quantiles of the natural logarithm of daily realized volatility against
the corresponding normal quantiles. We compute realized volatility as the square root of AvgRV ,
where AvgRV is the average of five daily RVs each computed from 5-minute squared returns on a
1-minute grid of S&P500 futures prices.



largest ever recorded NYSE trading volume.
    Time series plots such as that of Figure 4, of course, begin to inform us about
aspects of the dynamics of realized volatility. We will shortly explore those dynamics
in greater detail. But first we briefly highlight an important empirical aspect of the
distribution of realized volatility, which has been documented in many contexts:
realized volatility is highly right-skewed, whereas the natural logarithm of realized
volatility is much closer to Gaussian. In Figure 5 we report two QQ (Quantile-
Quantile) plots of different volatility transforms against the normal distribution.
The top panel shows the QQ plot for daily AvgRV in standard deviation form, while
the bottom panel shows the QQ-plot for daily AvgRV in logarithmic form. The
right tail in the top panel is obviously much fatter than for a normal distribution,
whereas the right tail in the bottom panel conforms more closely to normality. This


                                                                                              23
approximate log-normality of realized volatility is often usefully exploited, even if
it provides only a rough approximation, based on empirical observation rather than
theoretical derivation.18

2.2.1    Dynamic Modeling of Realized Volatility

Although daily RV is ultimately only an estimate of the underlying true integrated
variance, it is potentially highly accurate and thus presents an intriguing opportunity.
By treating the daily RV s, or any of the other high-frequency based RV measures, as
direct ex-post observations of the true daily integrated variances, the RV approach
permits the construction of ex-ante volatility forecasts using standard ARMA time
series tools. Moreover, recognizing the fact that the measures are not perfect, certain
kinds of measurement errors can easily be incorporated into this framework. The
upshot is that if the frequency of interest is daily, then using sufficiently high-quality
intra-day price data enables the risk manager to treat volatility as effectively ob-
served. This is fundamentally different from the RM filter and GARCH style models
discussed above, in which the daily variances are inferred from past daily returns
conditional on the specific structure of the filter or model.
    To further help motivate such an approach, we plot in Figure 6 the autocorrelation
function (ACF) of daily AvgRV and daily returns. The horizontal lines in each
plot show the Bartlett two-standard-deviation bands around zero. The ACFs are
strikingly different; the realized variance ACF is always positive, highly statistically
significant, and very slowly decaying, whereas the daily return ACF is insignificantly
different from zero. The exceptionally slow decay of the realized variance ACF
suggests long-memory dynamics, in turn implying that equity market volatility is
highly forecastable. This long-memory property of RV is found across numerous asset
classes; see, for example, Andersen et al. (2001b) for evidence on foreign exchange
rates and Andersen et al. (2001a) for comparable results pertaining to individual
equities and equity-index returns.
  18
   Indeed, as noted by Forsberg and Bollerslev (2002), among others, RV cannot formally be log-
normally distributed across all return horizons, because the log-normal distribution is not closed
under temporal aggregation.


                                               24
                                                  ACF of Daily RV−AVR
                                    0.8

                                    0.6




                  Autocorrelation
                                    0.4

                                    0.2

                                     0

                                          50      100               150   200   250
                                                        Lag Order

                                                   ACF of Daily Return
                                    0.8

                                    0.6
                  Autocorrelation




                                    0.4

                                    0.2

                                     0

                                          50      100               150   200   250
                                                        Lag Order




Figure 6: S&P500: Sample Autocorrelations of Daily Realized Variance and Daily
Return. The top panel shows realized variance autocorrelations, and the bottom panel shows
return autocorrelations, for displacements from 1 through 250 days. Horizontal lines denote 95%
Bartlett bands. Realized variance is AvgRV , the average of five daily RVs each computed from
5-minute squared returns on a 1-minute grid of S&P500 futures prices.



   Simple AR type models provide a natural starting point for capturing these
dependencies. Let RVt denote any of the high-frequency-based realized volatility
measures introduced above. As an example, one could specify a simple first-order
autoregressive model for the daily volatility series,

                                          RVt = β0 + β1 RVt−1 + νt .                      (23)

This, and any higher order AR models for RVt , can easily be estimated by a standard
OLS regression package.
   One could go farther and endow integrated variance with AR(1) dynamics, and
recognize that RVt contains some measurement error since in real empirical work the

                                                        25
underlying sampling cannot pass all the way to continuous time. Then RVt would
equal an AR(1) process plus a measurement error, which yields an ARMA(1,1) model
if the two are independent,

                           RVt = β0 + β1 RVt−1 + α1 νt−1 + νt .

Estimation of this model formally requires use of non-linear optimization techniques,
but it is still very easy to do using standard statistical packages.
    Although the simple short-memory AR(1) model above may be adequate for
short-horizon risk forecasts, the autocorrelation function for AvgRV shown in Fig-
ure 6 clearly suggests that when looking at longer, say monthly, forecast horizons,
more accurate forecasts may be obtained by using richer dynamic models that better
capture the long-range dependence associated with slowly-decaying autocorrelations.
Unfortunately, however, when |β1 | < 1 the AR(1) process has short memory, in the
sense that its autocorrelations decay exponentially quickly. On the other hand, when
β1 = 1 the process becomes a random walk (1 − L)RVt = β0 + νt , and has such strong
memory that covariance stationarity and mean reversion are both lost. A useful mid-
dle ground may be obtain by allowing for fractional integration,19

                                     (1 − L)d RVt = β0 + νt .                                     (24)

This long-memory model is mean reverting if 0 < d < 1 and covariance stationary
if 0 < d < 1/2. Fractional integration contrasts to the extremely strong integer
integration associated with the random walk (d = 1) or the covariance-stationary
AR(1) case (d = 0). Crucially, it allows for long-memory dynamics in the sense that
autocorrelations decay only hyperbolically, akin to the pattern seen in Figure 6.
    Long-memory models can, however, be somewhat cumbersome to estimate and
implement. Instead, a simpler approach may be pursued by directly exploiting longer
run realized volatility regressors. Specifically, letting RVt−4:t and RVt−21:t denote the
  19
     The fractional differencing operator (1 − L)d is formally defined by its binomial expansion; see,
e.g., Baillie et al. (1996) and the discussion therein pertaining to the so-called fractional integrated
GARCH (FIGARCH) model.


                                                  26
weekly and monthly realized volatilities, respectively, obtained by summing the cor-
responding daily volatilities. Many researchers, including Andersen et al. (2007a),
have found that the so-called heterogenous autoregressive, or HAR-RV, model, orig-
inally introduced by Corsi (2009),

              RVt = β0 + β1 RVt−1 + β2 RVt−5:t−1 + β3 RVt−21:t−1 + νt ,                       (25)

provides a very good fit for most volatility series. As shown in Corsi (2009), the
HAR model may be viewed as an approximate long-memory model. In contrast
to the exact long-memory model above, however, the HAR model can easily be
estimated by OLS. Even closer approximations to exact long-memory dependence
can be obtained by including coarser, say quarterly, lagged realized volatilities on
the right-hand side of the equation. A leverage effect, along the lines of the GJR-
GARCH model discussed above, can also easily be incorporated into the HAR-RV
modeling framework by including on the right-hand-side additional volatility terms
interacted with dummies indicating the sign of rt−1 , as in Corsi and Reno (2010).
    The HAR regressions can, of course, also be written in logarithmic form

       log RVt = β0 + β1 log RVt−1 + β2 log RVt−5:t−1 + β3 log RVt−21:t−1 + νt .              (26)

The log specification conveniently induces approximate normality, as demonstrated
in Figure 5 above. It also ensures positivity of volatility fits and forecasts, by expo-
nentiating to “undo” the logarithm.20
    Armed with a forecast for tomorrow’s volatility from any one of the HAR-RV
or other time series models discussed above, say RVd T +1|T , a one-day V aR is easily
computed as
                         RV − V aRTp+1|T = RV  d T +1|T Φ−1p ,                      (27)

where Φ−1
       p refers to the relevant quantile from the standard normal. Andersen et al.

  20
    Note however that forecasts of RVt+1 obtained by exponentiating forecasts of log RVt+1 are
generally biased, due to the nonlinearity of the exp(·) transformation. Although we will not pursue
it here, one could perform a bias correction, which would depend on the possibly time-varying
variance of νt . A similar problem applies to the EGARCH model briefly discussed above.


                                                27
                       50


                       45


                       40


                       35


                       30
       10−Day 1% VaR




                                                                      HAR−VaR
                       25
                                                                      GARCH−VaR


                       20


                       15


                       10


                        5


                     0
                   2008:07      2009:01                2009:07                2010:01



Figure 7: 10-day 1% HAR-V aR and GARCH-V aR, July 1, 2008 - December 31,
2009. The dashed line shows 10-day 1% HAR-V aR based on the HAR forecasting model for 10-
day realized volatility. The solid line shows 10-day 1% GARCH-V aR. When computing V aR the
10-day returns divided by the expected volatility are assumed to be normally distributed.



(2003a) use this observation to construct RV-based V aRs with properties superior to
GARCH-V aR. We will discuss this approach in more detail in section 2.3.2 below.
    To illustrate, we show in Figure 7 the GARCH-V aR from Figure 3 together with
the HAR-RV-V aR based on equation (27) constructed using the simple linear HAR-
RV specification in (25). The figure shows that HAR-RV-V aR reaches its peak before
GARCH-V aR. Equally important, the HAR-RV-V aR drops back to a more normal
level sooner than the GARCH-V aR after the trough in the market on March 2009.
Intuitively, by using the more accurate RV measure of current volatility the model
is able to more quickly adjust to the changing market conditions and overall level of
market risk. Of course, the commonly employed RM-V aR in Figure 3 is even slower
to adjust than the GARCH-V aR, and the HS-V aR in Figure 1 adjusts so slowly that
it remains at its maximum sample value at the end of 2009.
    As discussed above, V aR and other risk measures are often computed for a two-
week horizon. The risk manager is therefore interested in a 10-day volatility forecast.

                                            28
Another advantage of the RV based approach, and the HAR-RV model in particular,
is that it can easily be adapted to deliver the required multi-period variance forecasts.
Specifically, consider the modified HAR-RV regression,

           RVt:t+9 = β0 + β1 RVt−1 + β2 RVt−5:t−1 + β3 RVt−21:t−1 + νt:t+9 .                  (28)

An RV based V aR can now easily be computed via

                           RV − V aRTp +10|T = RV
                                               d T +1:T +10|T Φ−1 ,
                                                               p


where
               RV
               d T +1:T +10|T = β̂0 + β̂1 RVT + β̂2 RVT −4:T + β̂3 RVT −20:T ,

denotes the 10-day forecast obtained directly from the modified HAR-RV model in
equation (28). Hence, in contrast to GARCH models, there is no need to resort to
                                                                                 2
the use of complicated recursive expressions along the lines of the formula for σt:t+k|t
for the GARCH(1,1) model in equation (14). The modified HAR-RV model in (28)
builds the appropriate mean reversion directly into the requisite variance forecasts.21

2.2.2      Realized Volatilities and Jumps

The continuous-time process in equation (20) formally rules out discontinuities in the
underlying price process. However, financial prices often exhibit “large” movements
over short time-intervals, or “jumps.” A number of these jumps are naturally associ-
ated with readily identifiable macroeconomic news announcement, see, e.g., Andersen
et al. (2003b) and Andersen et al. (2007b), but many others appear idiosyncratic or
asset specific in nature. Such large price moves are inherently more difficult to guard
against, and the measurement and management of jump risk requires the use of dif-
ferent statistical distributions and risk management procedures from the ones needed
to measure and manage the Gaussian diffusive price risks implied by the price process
in equation (20).
    In particular, taking into account the possibility of jumps in the underlying price
 21
      Note however that a new HAR-RV model must be estimated for each forecast horizon of interest.

                                                 29
process, the realized variation measures discussed above no longer converge to the
integrated variance. Instead, the total ex-post variation is given by

                                     QVt = IVt + JVt ,                                      (29)

where IVt as before, in equation (22), accounts for the variation coming from the
continuous, or smooth, price increments over the day, and

                                                Jt
                                                X
                                                         2
                                      JVt =            Jt,j ,                               (30)
                                                 j=1


measures the variation due to the Jt jumps that occurred on day t; i.e., Jt,j , j =
1, 2, ..., Jt . This does not invalidate AvgRV , or any of the other RV estimators
discussed above, as an ex-post measure for the total daily quadratic variation, or
QVt . It does, however, suggest the use of more refined procedures for separately
estimating QVt and IVt , and in turn JVt .
    Several alternative volatility estimators that are (asymptotically) immune to the
impact of jumps have been proposed in the literature. The first was the bipower
variation estimator of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004b),

                                             N (∆)−1
                        π N (∆)                X
            BP Vt (∆) =                                |∆pt−1+j∆ | |∆pt−1+(j+1)∆ | ,        (31)
                        2 N (∆) − 1            j=1


where ∆pt−1+j∆ ≡ pt−1+j∆ − pt−1+(j−1)∆ . The idea behind the bipower variation
estimator is intuitively simple. When ∆ goes to zero the probability of jumps arriving
both in time interval j∆ and (j + 1)∆ goes to zero along with the absolute value of
the non-jump returns. The product |∆pt−1+j∆ | |∆pt−1+(j+1)∆ | will therefore vanish
asymptotically. Consequently, BP Vt (∆) will converge to the integrated variance
IVt , as opposed to QVt , for ∆ approaching zero, even in the presence of jumps.22
In contrast, the key terms in the realized variance estimator, namely the intraday
  22
    The π/2 normalization arises from the fact that the expected value of an absolute standard
normal random variable equals (π/2)1/2 , while the ratio involving N (∆) provides a finite-sample
adjustment for the loss of one term in the summation.

                                               30
squared returns (∆pt−1+j∆ )2 , will include the price jumps as well as the “smooth”
continuous price variation. The RVt (∆) estimator therefore always converges to QVt
for ∆ approaching zero.
    The BP Vt (∆) estimator is subject to the same type of microstructure frictions
that plague the RVt (∆) estimator at ultra-high sampling frequencies. Thus, even
if a one-minute grid of prices is available, it might still be desirable to use coarser,
say five-minute, returns in the calculation of BP Vt (∆) to guard against market
microstructure noise. A simple average of the five different BP Vt (∆)’s could then
used to compute an improved AvgBP V estimator.
    Although the BP Vt (∆) estimator is formally consistent for IVt in the idealized
setting without market microstructure noise, the presence of large jumps can result
in non-trivial upward biases in practice. Motivated by this observation, Andersen
et al. (2010c) recently proposed an alternative class of jump-robust estimators, the
neighborhood truncation measures. The simplest version takes the form,

                                             NX
                                                (∆)−1
                π                 N (∆)                                                   2
 M inRVt (∆) =                                          min |∆pt−1+j∆ |, |∆pt−1+(j+1)∆ |       .
               π−2               N (∆) − 1      j=1


The intuition behind the MinRV estimator is similar to that for the original BPV
estimator. When ∆ goes to zero, the probability of jumps arriving in two adjacent
time-intervals of length ∆ goes to zero, so the minimum is unaffected by jumps. The
main difference is that the jump is now fully neutralized, even at a given discrete
sampling frequency, in the sense that the jump size has no direct impact on the
estimator. Hence the finite sample distortion of the MinRV estimator is significantly
less than that of BPV estimator.23 By this same reasoning, a related jump-robust
MedRV estimator may be constructed from the properly scaled square of the median
of three adjacent absolute returns cumulated across the trading day, see Andersen
et al. (2010c) for details.
  23
    This is true as long as there are no adjacent jumps at the sampling frequency used. Both
estimators suffer from significant upward biases if adjacent jumps are present. This has led to
additional procedures that enhance the robustness properties even further; see the discussion in
Andersen et al. (2011b).


                                               31
   Another intuitively simple approach for estimating IVt , first explored empirically
by Mancini (2001), is to use truncation, the idea being that the largest price incre-
ments are the ones associated with jumps. Specifically, by only summing the squared
return below a certain threshold,

                                N (∆)
                                X
                  T Vt (∆) =            ∆p2t−1+j∆ I ( ∆pt−1+j∆ < T ) ,
                                 j=1


the resulting estimator again consistently estimates only the continuous variation
provided that the threshold T converges to zero at an appropriate rate as ∆ goes
to zero. Since the continuous variation changes over time, and in turn the likely
magnitude of the corresponding continuous price increments, it is also important to
allow the threshold to vary over time, both within and across days. This choice of
time-varying threshold can be somewhat delicate to implement in practice; see, e.g.,
Bollerslev and Todorov (2011b) and the discussion therein.
    Regardless of which of these different IVt estimators is used, we obtain an empir-
ically feasible decomposition of the total daily variation into the part associated with
the “small”, or continuous, price moves, and the part associated with the “large,”
and generally more difficult to hedge, price moves, or jumps. Even if the risk man-
ager is not interested in this separation per se, this decomposition can still be very
useful for the construction of improved V aRs and other related risk measures.
    In particular, it is often the case that the variation associated with jumps tends
to be much more erratic and less predictable than the variation associated with the
continuous price component. As such, the simple HAR-RV type forecasting models
discussed above may be improved by allowing for different dynamics for the two
different sources of daily variation. Such an approach was first pursued by Andersen
et al. (2007a), who found that the HAR-RV-CJ model,

              RVt = β0 + β1 IVt−1 + β2 IVt−5:t−1 + β3 IVt−21:t−1
                                                                                   (32)
                      + α1 JVt−1 + α2 JVt−5:t−1 + α3 JVt−21:t−1 + νt ,

indeed produces even better RV forecasts than the HAR-RV model in equation (25),

                                            32
which implicitly restricts the αi and βi coefficients in equation (32) to be identi-
cal. Instead, by allowing for “α effects” and “β effects” in the HAR-RV-CJ model,
we capture the fact that the variation associated with jumps is less persistent and
predictable than the continuous variation.
    Further refinements allowing for leverage effects and/or other asymmetries and
non-linearities could easily be incorporated into the same HAR-RV modeling frame-
work by including additional explanatory variables on the right-hand-side. But the
simple-to-estimate HAR-RV-CJ model typically does a remarkably good job of ef-
fectively incorporating the empirically most relevant dynamic dependencies of the
intraday price data into the daily and longer-run volatility forecasts of practical
interest.

2.2.3    Combining GARCH and RV

So far we have presented GARCH and RV based procedures as two distinct ap-
proaches. There are, however, good reasons to combine the two. The ability of RV
to rapidly deliver precise information regarding the current level of volatility along
with the ability of GARCH to appropriately smooth noisy volatility proxies make
such a combination appealing. Another advantage of combined models is the ability
to integrate the RV process naturally within a complete characterization of the return
distribution, thus allowing the RV dynamics to become a natural and direct deter-
minant of the time-variation in risk measures such as V aR and expected shortfall.
The following section will elaborate on those features of the approach.
    The simplest way of cobining GARCH and RV is to include the RV measure as
an additional explanatory variable on the right-hand-side of the GARCH equation,

                                     2
                        σt2 = ω + α rw,t−1       2
                                           + β σt−1 + γ RVt−1 .                             (33)

This is often referred to as a GARCH-X model.24 Estimating this model typically re-
  24
    Professor Robert F. Engle in his discussion of Andersen et al. (2003a) at the 2000 Western
Finance Association meeting in Sun Valley, Idaho, was among the first to empirically explore this
idea. Related analysis appears in Engle (2002b). Lu (2005) provides another early comprehensive
empirical study of GARCH-X type models.


                                               33
sults in a statistically insignificant α (ARCH) coefficient, so that the model effectively
reduces to
                               σt2 = ω + β σt−1
                                             2
                                                 + γ RVt−1 .                          (34)

Intuitively, the high-frequency-based RV measure affords a superior estimate of the
true ex-post daily variation compared to the daily (de-meaned) squared returns, in
turn driving out the latter as an explanatory variable for tomorrow’s volatility. As
such, whenever high-frequency based RV measures are available, it is always a good
idea to use the GARCH-X model instead of the conventional GARCH(1,1) model
based solely on daily return observations.25
    The GARCH-X model defined by equations (7) and (33) or (34) directly provides
                                                                             2
one-day volatility forecasts. The calculation of longer-run k-day forecasts σt+k|t ne-
cessitates a model for forecasting RVt+k as well. This could be accomplished in an ad
hoc fashion by simply augmenting the GARCH-X model with any one of the HAR-RV
type models discussed in the previous sections. The so-called Realized GARCH class
of models developed by Hansen et al. (2010a) provides a more systematic approach
for doing exactly that.
    As an example, consider the specific Realized GARCH model defined by equation
(7) and

                              σt2 = ω + β σt−1
                                            2
                                               + γRVt−1 ,                                      (35)
                            RVt = ωX + βX σt2 + τ (zt ) + νt ,                                 (36)

where νt denotes a random error with the property that Et (νt ) = 0, and the τ (zt )
function allows for a contemporaneous leverage effect via the return shock zt in equa-
tion (7).26 Substituting the equation for σt2 into the equation for RVt shows that the
  25
     In a related context, Visser (2011) has recently shown how the accuracy of the coefficient
estimates in conventional daily GARCH models may be improved through the use of intraday
RV-based measures in the estimation.
  26
     A closely related class of two-shock Realized GARCH models, in which the return volatility is a
weighted average of the GARCH and RV volatilities, has recently been proposed by Christoffersen
et al. (2011b). Their affine formulation has the advantage that option valuation can be done
via Fourier inversion of the conditional characteristic function. Non-affine approaches to option
valuation using RV have also been pursued by Corsi et al. (2011) and Stentoft (2008).


                                                34
model implies an ARMA representation for the realized volatility, but other HAR-
RV type structures could, of course, be used instead. Note also that unlike regular
GARCH, the Realized GARCH model has two separate innovations. However, be-
cause RVt is observed, estimation of the model can still be done using bivariate max-
imum likelihood estimation techniques that closely mirror the easily-implemented
procedures available for regular GARCH models.
    The Multiplicative Error Model (MEM) of Engle (2002b) and Engle and Gallo
(2006) constitutes another framework for combining different volatility proxies (e.g.,
daily absolute returns, daily high-low ranges, RVs, IVs, or option implied volatilities)
into the estimation of a coherent multivariate model for return variances.27 It is
natural to use this same framework to extend the GARCH-X model to allow for the
construction of multi-day volatility forecasts.
    In particular, building on the MEM structure, Shephard and Sheppard (2010)
propose an extension of the basic GARCH-X model in equation (33), in which the
conditional mean of realized volatility, µRV,t ≡ Et−1 (RVt ), is defined recursively by
the equation,
                     µRV,t = ωRV + αRV RVt−1 + βRV µRV,t−1 .                       (37)

Shephard and Sheppard (2010) refer to this model as a High-frEquency bAsed Volatil-
itY model, or “HEAVY” model. Like the Realized GARCH class of models, HEAVY
models have the advantage that they adapt to new information and market con-
ditions much more quickly than the regular daily GARCH models. In contrast to
the simple GARCH(1,1) model, for which the k-period variance forecasts in equa-
tion (13) converge monotonically to their long-run run average values, the HEAVY
model defined by equations (33) and (37) also might show momentum effects, so that
the convergence of the multi-period variance forecasts to the long-run unconditional
variance is not necessarily monotonic. This point is nicely illustrated by the volatil-
ity forecasts during the recent financial crises reported in Shephard and Sheppard
(2010), which show how the model sometimes predicts rising volatility even when
  27
   This approach has also been used by Brownlees and Gallo (2011) to compare different volatility
measures and their uses in risk management.



                                               35
the current volatility is exceptionally high by historical standards.
    Risk managers, of course, typically care not only about the dynamics of volatility
but also more generally about the dynamics of the entire conditional distribution of
portfolio returns. Movement in conditional variance is a key driver of movement in
the conditional distribution, but only in the unlikely case of conditional normality is
it the entire story. Hence we next discuss how GARCH and realized variance may
be used in broader modeling of entire return distributions.


2.3    Modeling Return Distributions
We have emphasized – and continue to emphasize – the potentially seriously mislead-
ing nature of unconditional risk analyses. Here we stress the similarly potentially
seriously misleading nature of Gaussian risk analyses. There are four cases to con-
sider, corresponding to the reliance on unconditional/conditional information and
the use of Gaussian/non-Gaussian distributions.
    Risk measurement in an unconditional Gaussian framework would be doubly
defective, first because of the deficiencies of the unconditional perspective, and second
because financial returns are simply not unconditionally Gaussian, as has been well-
known at least since the classic contributions of Mandelbrot (1963) and Fama (1965).
For that reason, even crude approaches like historical HS-VaR, although maintaining
an unconditional perspective, dispense with normality by building an approximation
to the unconditional distribution from historically-observed returns.
    Figure 8 serves to illustrate the strong unconditional non-normality in returns,
as it displays a QQ plot for daily S&P500 returns from January 2, 1990 to December
31, 2010. That is, it plots quantiles of the standardized returns against quantiles
of the standard normal distribution. If the returns were unconditionally normally
distributed, the points would fall along the 45-degree line. Clearly, the daily returns
are not normally distributed.
    Now consider the conditional case. Note that in specifying the general condi-
tional variance model (7) we made no assumptions as to the conditional distribution
of returns. That is, we made no assumptions as to the distribution of returns stan-


                                           36
                                                                         15




                                                                         10




                   Quantiles of Returns Divided by Average Volatility
                                                                          5




                                                                          0




                                                                        −5




                                                                        −10




                                                                        −15
                                                                          −5   −4   −3   −2    −1         0        1      2   3   4   5
                                                                                              Standard Normal Quantiles



Figure 8: QQ Plot of S&P500 Returns. We show quantiles of daily S&P500 returns from
January 2, 1990 to December 31, 2010, against the corresponding quantiles from a standard normal
distribution.



dardized by their conditional variance; i.e., the distribution of zt in equation (7).
But in converting objects like GARCH conditional variances into GARCH-VaR, for
example, we did invoke conditional normality. At least four points are worth making.
    First, conditional normality can be, and sometimes is, an acceptable assump-
tion. Conditional normality does not imply unconditional normality, and indeed
volatility dynamics “fatten” the tails of unconditional distributions relative to their
conditional counterparts, so that conditionally-Gaussian models sometimes match
the unconditional fat tails present in the data. Put differently, distributions of re-
turns standardized by their conditional volatilities can be approximately Gaussian,
even if returns are clearly unconditionally non-Gaussian.
    Second, conditional normality is not necessarily an acceptable assumption. Some-
times, for example, the unconditional distribution of returns might be so fat-tailed
that the volatility model cannot fatten conditionally-Gaussian tails enough to match
the unconditional distribution successfully.


                                                                                                    37
    Third, beyond fat unconditional tails, there may be other unconditional distribu-
tional features, such as skewness, that could never be captured under any symmetric
conditional density assumption such as Gaussian, independent of the conditional
variance model used. Matching the unconditional density in general requires flexible
conditional variance and conditional density specifications.
    Fourth, our goal in flexibly specifying the conditional density is not merely to
replicate the unconditional density successfully. Rather, for risk measurement and
management purposes the conditional density is the object of direct and intrinsic
interest. That is, best-practice risk measurement and management often requires
an estimate of the entire conditional distribution of returns, not just insufficient
statistics like its conditional variance, conditional VaR, or conditionally expected
shortfall. Hence we need a flexibile specification of the conditional density.
    Empirical analyses typically find that, although standardization by GARCH and
related volatilities promotes normality, the standardized returns remain non-normal.
The nature of the non-normality of standardized returns, moreover, varies system-
atically across asset classes. For example, standardized returns from mature foreign
exchange markets are typically symmetric but leptokurtic, while standardized returns
on aggregate equity indexes are typically skewed.
    To illustrate we show in Figure 9 a Gaussian QQ plot for S&P500 returns stan-
dardized by the time-varying volatilities from the asymmetric NGARCH(1,1) model
previously used in calculating the VaRs in Figure 3. The QQ plot reveals that the
NGARCH-standardized returns conform more closely to normality than do the raw
returns of Figure 8. It also reveals, however, that the left tail of the return distri-
bution remains far from Gaussian. In particular, there are too many large negative
returns relative to what one would expect if the standardized returns were Gaussian.
    As the V aR itself refers to a specific quantile, this QQ plot in effect provides an
assessment of the normal NGARCH-based V aRs defined in equation (19) across all
possible coverage rates, p. In particular, judging by the coherence of the positive
quantiles, the figure suggests that the normal-NGARCH-V aR approach works rea-
sonably well at moderate coverage rates for a well diversified portfolio representing
a short position on the market index. On the other hand, for a diversified portfolio

                                          38
                                                5


                                                4


                                                3


                                                2


                   Quantiles of Input Sample    1


                                                0


                                               −1


                                               −2


                                               −3


                                               −4


                                               −5
                                                −5   −4   −3   −2    −1         0        1      2   3   4   5
                                                                    Standard Normal Quantiles



Figure 9: QQ Plot of S&P500 Returns Standardized by NGARCH Volatilities. We
show quantiles of daily S&P500 returns standardized by the dynamic volatility from a NGARCH
model against the corresponding quantiles of a standard normal distribution. The sample period is
January 2, 1990 through December 31, 2010. The units on each axis are standard deviations.



that is long the market index, the approach only works if the desired coverage rate
is relatively large, say in excess of about 15% or a value of around negative one in
the figure. Moving further into the tail, the normal approximation deteriorates quite
badly, rendering the corresponding normal-based V aRs unreliable. Of course, the
corresponding conditional expected shortfall defined in equation (2) depends on the
entire left tail, and will consequently be badly biased across all coverage rates due
to the poor tail approximation.
    Now consider standardizing the returns not by a GARCH or related model-based
conditional volatility, but rather by realized volatility. Figure 10 shows a Gaussian
QQ plot for daily S&P500 returns standardized by AvgRV . In contrast to the poor fit
for the left tail evident in the QQ plot for the GARCH-standardized returns of Figure
9, the QQ plot for the AvgRV -standardized returns in Figure 10 is remarkably close
to normality throughout the support, including in the left tail. This striking empirical
result was first systematically documented for exchange rates in Zhou (1996) and

                                                                           39
                                                  5


                                                  4


                                                  3


                                                  2


                     Quantiles of Input Sample    1


                                                  0


                                                 −1


                                                 −2


                                                 −3


                                                 −4


                                                 −5
                                                  −5   −4   −3   −2    −1         0        1      2   3   4   5
                                                                      Standard Normal Quantiles



Figure 10: QQ Plot of S&P500 Returns Standardized by realized volatilities. We show
quantiles of daily S&P500 returns standardized by AvgRV against the corresponding quantiles of
a standard normal distribution. The sample period is January 2, 1990 through December 31, 2010.
The units on each axis are standard deviations.



Andersen et al. (2000a), and extended to equity returns in Andersen et al. (2001a);
see also the recent work by Andersen et al. (2010b) and the many references therein.28
    It is worth stressing that the QQ plots in Figures 9 and 10 rely on the identical
daily S&P500 return series, but simply use two different volatility measures to stan-
dardize the raw returns: a GARCH-based estimate of σt and the realized volatility
         1/2
AvgRVt . Putting things into perspective, the conditional non-normality of daily
returns has long been seen as a key stylized fact in market risk management; see, e.g.,
Christoffersen (2003). Thus, identifying a volatility measure that produces approxi-
mately normally distributed standardized returns is both surprising and noteworthy.
Of course, the realized volatility used in the standardization in Figure 10 is based
on high-frequency data over the same daily time interval as the return, while the
GARCH volatility used in Figure 9 is a true one-day-ahead prediction.
  28
   Andersen et al. (2007c) explores the theoretical basis for this relationship and provides a detailed
examination of the empirical fit for daily S&P500 returns.


                                                                             40
    Against this background on the very different distributional properties of un-
standardized, GARCH-standardized and RV-standardized returns, in this section we
discuss how to use the different standardizations and resulting distributions to con-
struct accurate predictive return distributions. An important part of that discussion,
particularly in the GARCH-standardized case, involves specification of empirically-
realistic (i.e., non-Gaussian) conditional return distributions.

2.3.1    Procedures Based on GARCH

The GARCH dynamic directly delivers one-day ahead volatility forecasts. In order
to complete the daily predictive return distribution, one simply needs to postulate a
distribution for the zt return shock in equation (7). Although the normal assumption
may work well in certain cases, as Figure 9 makes clear, it often underestimates large
downside risks. As such, it is important to consider alternatives that allow for fat
tails and/or asymmetries in the conditional distribution. Specifically, in the case of
V aR we are looking for ways to more accurately assess the cut-off κ−1p in


                                    V aRTp+1|T ≡ σT +1 κ−1
                                                        p ,                                      (38)

instead of simply relying on Φ−1
                               p from the standard normal distribution.
                                                                         29
                                                                            Of course,
doing this for all values of p ∈ [0, 1] essentially amounts to mapping out the entire
conditional return distribution.
    Perhaps the most obvious approach is to look for a parametric distribution that is
more flexible than the normal. One example is the (standardized) Student-t distribu-
tion, which relies on only one additional degrees-of-freedom parameter in generating
symmetric fat tails. Such an approach was first pursued by Bollerslev (1987), who
showed how the likelihood function for the normal-GARCH model in equation (9)
is readily extended to the GARCH-t case, thus allowing for the estimation of the
degrees-of-freedom parameter (along with the other GARCH parameters) that best
  29
   The 1996 amendment to the 1988 Basel Accord somewhat arbitrarily recommends the use of a
multiplicative factor of at least −3.0 in the construction of a 1% V aR, relative to the Φ−1
                                                                                          0.01 = −2.33
implied by the standard normal distribution; see also the discussion in Chan et al. (2007).



                                                 41
describes the return distribution, and in turn the requisite κ−1 p for calculating the
V aR in equation (38).
    This approach works reasonably well when the conditional return distribution is
close to symmetric. However, as illustrated by the QQ plots discussed above, equity
portfolios are often severely left skewed. The Generalized Error Distribution (GED),
first employed in this context by Nelson (1991), explicitly allows for asymmetries, as
do some of the different generalizations of the Student-t distribution suggested by
Hansen (1994) and Fernandez and Steel (1998), among others. Alternatively, follow-
ing Engle and Gonzalez-Rivera (1991) the whole density for zt may be approximated
using more flexible semiparametric procedures.
    Rather than postulating a particular parametric density, one can also simply
approximate the quantiles of non-normal distributions via Cornish-Fisher type ex-
pansions. This approach was first advocated in the context of GARCH modeling
and forecasting by Baillie and Bollerslev (1992). The only inputs needed for esti-
mating κ−1p  are the unconditional sample skewness and kurtosis statistics for the
standardized returns.30
    Meanwhile, a common problem with most GARCH models, regardless of the
innovation distribution, is that the specific distribution is not preserved under tem-
poral aggregation; see, e.g., the discussion in Drost and Nijman (1993) and Meddahi
and Renault (2004). For example, even if the standardized daily returns from a
GARCH(1,1) model were normal, the implied weekly returns would not be. In turn,
this implies that the term structure of V aRs is not closed under temporal aggrega-
tion either. Instead, the multi-period V aRs need to be computed via Monte Carlo
simulations or other numerical methods, as exemplified by Guidolin and Timmer-
mann (2006).31 This also means that the Cornish-Fisher and related approxima-
tions, which only provide partial characterizations of the underlying daily return
  30
      More accurate approximations may in theory be obtained by including higher order uncondi-
tional sample moments in the Cornish-Fisher expansion, but this does not always produce satisfac-
tory results.
   31
      The affine GARCH models suggested by Heston and Nandi (2000) and Christoffersen et al.
(2006), when combined with the methods of Albanese et al. (2004), also allow for relatively easy-
to-compute term structures for VaR, but some numerical calculations are still required.



                                               42
distribution in the form of specific quantiles, generally will not suffice for answer-
ing questions regarding the distribution of temporally aggregated returns. Below,
we discuss a viable approach that effectively combines a parametric volatility model
with a data-driven conditional distribution. First, however, we discuss how realized
volatilities, if available, may be used in the calculation of even more accurate predic-
tive return distributions by effectively incorporating the intraday information into
the distributional forecasts.

2.3.2     Procedures Based on Realized Volatility

The basic idea underlying the construction of RV-based predictive return distri-
butions is to treat the time series of RVs as stochastic. Hence, in contrast to the
GARCH-based procedures, which seek to describe the predictive distribution through
an appropriately specified univariate distribution for the standardized returns, the
RV-based procedures necessitate, at a minimum, a bivariate random distribution for
the returns and the realized volatilities.
    This relatively new approach to risk measurement was first suggested by Ander-
sen et al. (2003a). The approach is directly motivated by the empirical regularities
pertaining to the RV measures highlighted above. First, as discussed in section 2.2,
simple time series models for the realized volatilities, like the HAR-RV specifica-
tion, generally result in more accurate volatility forecasts than do the conventional
GARCH models based on daily data only.32 Second, as shown in section 2.3, the
distributions of daily returns standardized by the same-day RVs typically appear
close to Gaussian. Taken together, this suggests a mixture-of-distributions type ap-
proach for characterizing the time T + 1 return distribution, in which the predictive
distribution for RVT +1 serves as the mixture variable.33
                                                                               1/2
    Specifically, assuming that the standardized return is normal, rT +1 /RVT +1 ∼
  32
      This empirical regularity may also be justified through more formal theoretical arguments, as to
why the simple reduced form RV-based procedures often work better than structural model-based
approaches in practice; see, Andersen et al. (2004), Andersen et al. (2011a), and Sizova (2011).
   33
      There is a long history, dating back to Clark (1973), of using mixture-of-distributions to describe
the unconditional distribution of returns. What is fundamentally different in the RV-based approach
is to treat the mixing variable as directly observable and predictable.


                                                   43
N (0, 1), and that the distribution of the time T + 1 realized volatility conditional on
time T information is log-normal, the resulting normal log-normal mixture distribu-
tion for the time T + 1 returns may be expressed as
                                                     (                                        )
                                    ∞
                                                      r2
                               Z
                   1                                             1
  fT (rT +1 ) =     2
                                        y −3/2   exp − T +1 −    2
                                                                       (ln (y) − µ`,T +1 )2       dy ,
                2πσ`,T +1       0                      2y     2σ`,T +1

                     2
where µ`,T +1 and σ`,T +1 denote, respectively, the time T conditional mean and vari-
ance of log(RVT +1 ). For example, postulating a HAR-RV type model for logRV with
homoskedastic errors, we obtain,

         µ`,T +1 = β0 + β1 log(RVT ) + β2 log(RVT −4:T ) + β2 log(RVT −20:T ) ,

       2        2               34
and σ`,T +1 = σv , respectively.
    The simple HAR-RV model for the conditional mean µ`,T +1 could, of course, be
extended in several directions. For instance, as noted above, when modeling large
equity portfolios, asymmetries, or “leverage effcts,” are often statistically significant.
Also, in their actual empirical implementation Andersen et al. (2003a) use a long-
memory ARFIMA model for logRV in place of the HAR-RV formulation. This
makes little difference for the maximum ten-days forecast horizons considered in
their analysis, but it could be important to do so in the calculation of longer run, say
quarterly (∼ 66 days ahead) or annual (∼ 252 days ahead), distributional forecasts.
    The mixture distribution described above treats σ`,t as constant. However, it
is natural to think about the volatility-of-volatility as being time varying with its
own GARCH dynamics. Such an approach has been pursued empirically by Ma-
heu and McCurdy (2011), who report that allowing for temporal variation in σ`,t
does not actually result in materially different predictive return distributions. Go-
ing one step further, Bollerslev et al. (2009a) develop a joint conditional density
model for the returns, the “smooth” volatility, and the variation due to jumps
  34
    Although it is not possible to express the density function in closed form, it is easy to calculate
numerically by repeated simulations from a normal distribution with a random variance drawn from
a log-normal distribution with the requisite mean and variance.



                                                      44
{rt , ln (BP Vt ) , ln (RVt /BP Vt )}. In that model the predictive distribution for the
returns is therefore obtained through a more complicated normal mixture involving
two separate mixing variables, but the basic idea remains the same.
     This continues to be an active area of research, and it is too early to say which of
the different approaches will be the “winner.” It is evident, however, that any of the
relatively simple RV-based procedures described above almost invariably generate
more accurate predictive return distributions than the traditional GARCH-based
distributional forecast, especially over relatively short one-day to one-week horizons.

2.3.3    Combining GARCH and RV

Just as the GARCH and RV concepts may be formally combined in the construction
of volatility forecasts, they may be similarly combined to produce distributional
forecasts. The procedures discussed in the previous section, of course, also utilize
the realized volatility measures in the construction of the forecasts. However, they
generally do not provide a direct link between the GARCH conditional variance σt
and the realized volatility measures.
    Forsberg and Bollerslev (2002) provides a first attempt at doing that. Their RV-
GARCH style model is based on the assumption that RV is conditionally Inverse
Gaussian distributed35

                              fT (RVT +1 ) ∼ IG σT2+1 , η ,
                                                         


together with a GARCH-style process for the conditional expectation of RV,

                     ET (RVT +1 ) = σT2+1 = ω + αrw,T
                                                  2
                                                      + β σT2 .

Further assuming that the RV-standardized returns are normally distributed, re-
sults in the predictive normal inverse Gaussian (NIG) distribution with conditional
  35
     The Inverse Gaussian distribution closely approximates the log-normal distribution for the
realized volatility depicted in Figure 5 above.




                                              45
variance σT +1 ,
                          Z
                              fT (rw,T +1 |RVT +1 ) fT (RVT +1 ) dRVT +1 ∼ N IG σT2 +1 , η .
                                                                                          
        fT (rw,T +1 ) =

Closely related RV-GARCH type models have also been developed and used in the
context of option pricing by Christoffersen et al. (2011b), Corsi et al. (2011) and
Stentoft (2008).
     The more recent Realized GARCH and HEAVY models discussed in section 2.2.3
takes this approach one step further by providing a coherent joint modeling frame-
work for {rt , σt , RVt }, where, importantly, the conditional variance of the returns,
σt2 , is not identical to the conditional expectation of RVt . These models directly de-
liver one-day volatility and return distribution forecasts. In contrast to the GARCH-
X style models and some of the RV-based procedures discussed above, multi-day
distributional forecasts may also readily be computed using numerical simulation
techniques.
     These and other related GARCH-RV forecasting approaches are still being ex-
plored in the literature. Given the significant improvements afforded by incorpo-
rating the intraday information into the GARCH volatility forecasts through the
RV measures, especially during rapidly changing market conditions, we expect these
procedures to play an increasingly important role as the field moves forward.

2.3.4     Simulation Methods

In the discussion above, we have often pointed to the use of numerical simulation
techniques as a way to calculate quantiles or distributions that are not available in
closed form. These techniques differ in terms of their underlying assumptions ranging
from fully parametric to essentially non-parametric.
    Bootstrapping, or Filtered Historical Simulation (FHS), assumes a parametric
model for the second moment dynamics, and then bootstraps from the standardized
returns to build up the required distribution. At the portfolio level this is easy to




                                                  46
do. First calculate the standardized pseudo portfolio returns as,

                             ẑw,t = rw,t / σ̂t ,    t = 1, 2, ..., T ,                        (39)

using one of the variance models discussed above. Then, in order to calculate a
one-day-ahead V aR, one simply use the order statistic for the standardized returns
combined with the volatility forecast to construct,36

                          F HS − V aRTp+1 ≡ σT +1 ẑw ((T + 1)p) .

This same idea could also be used to numerically calculate the V aR for parametric
distributions where the quantiles are not readily available, by repeatedly drawing
zw,t from the specific distribution.
    The construction of multi-day V aRs is more time consuming, but conceptually
straightforward. It requires simulating future paths from the volatility model using
the standardized returns sampled with replacement as the innovations. This ap-
proach has been exploited by Diebold et al. (1998b), Hull and White (1998) and
Barone-Adesi et al. (1998), among others, and we refer to these studies for further
details concerning its practical implementation.37
    The FHS methodology was originally developed in a GARCH setting. However,
for some of the RV-based procedures discussed above, one would naturally use RV
or its expected value to standardize the portfolio returns. In these situations the
standardized returns should be sampled from
                                            p
                          ẑw,t = rw,t /     RVt ,        t = 1, 2, ..., T .

or
                                        p
                       ẑw,t = rw,t /     Et−1 [RVt ] ,       t = 1, 2, ..., T .

Of course, if the underlying model is based on a specific distributional assumption
   36
      For the Expected Shortfall in equation (2) one would simply average over the draws that exceed
ẑw ((T + 1)p.
   37
      Pritsker (2006) also provides additional evidence on the effectiveness of the FHS approach.


                                                47
about the RV-standardized returns, that distribution should be used in lieu of the
non-parametric bootstrap. Also, for RV-based GARCH models and related proce-
dures, one might need to perform a bootstrap from the supposedly i.i.d. bivariate
innovations for RV and returns. But the basic idea remains the same.

2.3.5   Extreme Value Theory

The different parametric and non-parametric procedures discussed above for charac-
terizing the conditional return distribution, including the simulation based bootstrap
procedures, are designed to work well for center of the distribution and V aRs with
relatively large coverage rates, say in excess of 5%. In many situations, however,
one is primarily interested in the tails of the distributions and the risks associated
with extremely large price changes. Extreme Value Theory (EVT) provides a formal
statistical framework for meaningfully estimating the tails based on extrapolating
from the available observations. McNeil et al. (2005) provides an excellent survey
of these techniques and their application in quantitative risk management, and we
merely highlight some of the key ideas here; early important work in this area also
include Diebold et al. (1998b), Longin (2000) and McNeil and Frey (2000).
    Standard EVT is based on the assumption of i.i.d. observations. This may be a
good approximation for many applications in actuarial science, but financial returns
and large absolute price changes, in particular, are obviously not i.i.d. through
time. However, in parallel to the FHS approach discussed immediately above, EVT
may easily be combined with dynamic volatility models by applying the EVT-based
approximations to the estimated return shocks ẑw,t = rw,t /σ̂t rather than the returns
themselves. Since the return shocks are much closer to being i.i.d. than are the
returns, this makes the application of EVT much more reasonable. Having estimated
the tails for ẑw,t , these are easily transformed to tails or extreme quatiles of the raw
returns by scaling with σ̂t .
    EVT has the advantage that each tail of the distribution can be modeled sepa-
rately. But it has the limitation that it only describes the tails of the distribution
and not the entire distribution. It is therefore not possible to simulate data from an


                                           48
EVT distribution unless further assumptions are made. One way to proceed is to use
EVT in the tails combined with FHS for characterizing the center of the distribution.
Assume for example that EVT captures well the 2% most extreme positive shocks
and the 3% most extreme negative shocks. Return shocks can then be simulated
by first drawing a trinomial variable that comes up {−1, 0, +1} with probabilities
{.03, .95, .02}. When the trinomial comes up 0 then a shock is drawn randomly
(with replacement) from the sample of ẑw,t with the left 3% and right 2% extremes
removed. When the trinomial comes up −1 then a shock is drawn from the left-tail
EVT distribution. Similarly, a draw is made from the right-tail EVT distribution
when the trinomial comes up +1. This same idea may also be used in “stress testing”
the portfolio, by increasing the probabilities assigned to the tails, in turn generating
a disproportionate number of draws from the extreme part of the distribution.
    Portraying prices as evolving in continuous time, the extreme price increments are
naturally thought of as “jumps.” The discussion in section 2.2.2 above outlines several
ways for disentangling the jumps on an ex-post basis with the help of high-frequency
intraday data. Following the recent work of Bollerslev and Todorov (2011b), the high-
frequency filtered jumps may in turn be used in the estimation of the corresponding
jump tail distribution and the probability of observing an extreme price change.
Work long these lines is still in its infancy. However, we conjecture that in parallel
to the gains in predictive accuracy afforded by the use of realized volatility measures
relative to GARCH type models estimated with daily data only, similar gains may
be available through the proper use of the high-frequency data for more accurately
estimating the jump tails and the extremes of the return distributions.


3    Conditional Asset-Level Risk Analysis
Our discussion up until now has focused on dynamic volatility models for univariate
returns. These methods are well-suited for portfolio-level risk measures such as
aggregate V aR and ES. However, they are less well-suited for providing input into
the active risk management process. If, for example, the risk manager wants to
know the sensitivity of the portfolio V aR to a simultaneous increase in stock market

                                          49
volatility and asset correlations, as typically occurs in times of market stress, then
a multivariate model is needed. Active risk management, such as portfolio V aR
minimization, also requires a multivariate model that provides a forecast for the
entire covariance matrix.38 Bank-wide V aR is also made up of many desks with
multiple traders on each desk, and any sub-portfolio analysis is not possible with the
aggregate portfolio-based approach. Similarly, multivariate models are needed for
calculating sensitivity risk measures and answering questions such as: “If I add an
additional 1,000 shares of Apple to my portfolio, how much will my V aR increase?”
    In this section we therefore consider the specification of models for the full N -
dimensional conditional distribution of asset returns. To set out the notation, let Ωt
denote the N × N covariance matrix of the N × 1 vector of asset returns Rt . The
covariance matrix will have 21 N (N + 1) distinct elements, but structure needs to be
imposed to guarantee that the covariance matrix forecasts are positive definite (pd),
or even positive semi-definite (psd). A related, and equally important, practical issue
involves the estimation of the parameters governing the dynamics for the 12 N (N + 1)
individual elements.
    We begin with a brief discussion of models and methods based on daily data.
We then discuss how high-frequency data and realized variation measures may be
incorporated into the construction of better covariance matrix and multivariate dis-
tributional forecasts. A notable aspect of our treatment is our inclusion and emphasis
on methods that are applicable even when N is (relatively) large. This contrasts with
much of the extant literature, which focuses on relatively low-dimensional models.39
  38
      Brandt et al. (2004) provide an alternative and intriguing approach for dimension reduction by
explicitly parameterizing the portfolio weights as a function of observable state variables, thereby
sidestepping the need to estimate the full covariance matrix.
   39
      See Bauwens et al. (2006) for a survey of multivariate GARCH models, and Chib and Asai
(2009) for a survey of multivariate stochastic volatility models, involving daily data and moderate
dimensions.




                                                50
3.1     Modeling Time-Varying Covariances Using Daily Data
        and GARCH
The natural multivariate generalization of the RM variance dynamics in equation (4)
provides a particularly simple approach to modeling large dimensional covariance
matrices. It assumes that the dynamics of all the variances and covariances are
driven by a single scalar parameter λ,

                                                        0
                            Ωt = λ Ωt−1 + (1 − λ) Rt−1 Rt−1 .                                (40)

In parallel to the univariate case, the recursion may be initialized by setting Ω0 equal
to the sample average coverage matrix.40
    The simple structure of equation (40) guarantees that the estimated covariance
matrices are psd, and even pd if the initial covariance matrix, Ω0 , is pd, as the sum
of a psd and pd matrices is itself pd. Letting Ω0 equal the sample coverage matrix, it
will be pd as long as the sample size T exceeds the number of assets N and none of
the assets are trivial linear combinations of others, thus rendering the RM covariance
matrix forecasts pd as well.
    At the same time, however, the RM approach is clearly very restrictive, imposing
the same degree of smoothness on all elements of the covariance matrix. Moreover,
covariance matrix forecasts generated by the multivariate RM approach inherit the
implausible scaling properties of the univariate RM forecasts in section 2.1, and will
in general be suboptimal for the reasons discussed in the univariate context.
    This, in turn, motivates a direct extension of the univariate GARCH approach
to a multivariate setting. In particular, extending the expression in equation (6) to
a vector setting, the generic representation for a multivariate return process with
time-varying conditional first- and second-order moments becomes

                            1/2
          Rt = Mt + Ωt Zt              Zt ∼ i.i.d.,   E(Zt ) = 0 ,    V ar(Zt ) = I ,        (41)
  40
     As previously noted, empirically more realistic dependence structures have also been explored
by RM, but following standard convention, we will continue to refer to exponential smoothing as
the RM approach.


                                               51
                                                                           1/2
where I denotes the identity matrix, and the N × N matrix Ωt is one of the
“square-root” representations, e.g., the Cholesky decomposition, of the covariance
matrix Ωt . We refer to any specification in which Ωt is a non-trivial function of the
time t − 1 information set as a multivariate GARCH model. As with the univariate
models discussed above, we will assume for simplicity that the daily means are all
zero, or Mt = 0.41
   The most obvious extension of the popular univariate GARCH(1,1) model in
equation (8) then takes the form

                                                                   0
            vech (Ωt ) = vech (C) + B vech (Ωt−1 ) + A vech (Rt−1 Rt−1 ),                 (42)

where the vech, or “vector-half,”operator converts the unique upper triangular ele-
ments of a symmetric matrix into a 21 N (N + 1) × 1 column vector, and the A and B
matrices are both of dimension 21 N (N + 1) × 12 N (N + 1). In parallel to the expression
for the univariate model in equation (10), the long-run forecasts from the multivariate
GARCH(1,1) model in equation (42) converges to vech(Ω) = (I − A − B)−1 vech(C),
provided the eigenvalues of A + B are all less than unity and the inverse of the
(I − A − B)−1 vech(C) matrix exists. This model-implied unconditional covariance
matrix can be quite sensitive to small perturbations in A and B. As such, it is often
desirable to restrict the matrix C to ensure that the long-run forecasts from the
model are well behaved and converge to sensible values.
    “Variance targeting”provides a powerful tool for doing that, in effect “disci-
plining”multivariate volatility models. This idea was first suggested by Engle and
Mezrich (1996), who proposed replacing the C matrix in the multivariate GARCH(1,1)
model above with
                                                    T
                                                 1 X
                    vech(C) = (I − A − B) vech (       Rt Rt0 ) .
                                                 T t=1
  41
    This assumption is quite innocuous, and does not materially affect the inference over daily
horizons. For models defined over longer return horizons, simply replace Rt with the demeaned
returns Rt − Mt in all of the expressions below.




                                              52
This in turn ensures that the covariance matrix forecasts converge to their uncon-
ditional sample analogue. Of course, if the risk manager has other information
pertaining to some of the elements in the covariance matrix, this may be used in a
similar manner in fixing the relevant values in C.
    Variance targeting also helps in the implementation of multivariate volatility mod-
els more generally, by reducing the number of parameters to be estimated. The most
general version of the multivariate GARCH(1,1) model in equation (42), for example,
has O(N 4 ) parameters. More precisely, there are N 4 /2 + N 3 + N 2 + N/2 parameters;
hence, for example, for N = 100 there are 51, 010, 050 parameters! Estimating this
many free parameters is obviously infeasible.42 The “diagonal GARCH” parameteri-
zation, originally proposed by Bollerslev et al. (1988), helps by restricting the A and
B matrices to be diagonal. The number of parameters is still O(N 2 ), however, and
full-fledged estimation of the diagonal model is generally deemed computationally
infeasible for systems much larger than N = 5.
    Going one step farther, we obtain the most draconian version of the diagonal
GARCH(1,1) model by restricting the A and B matrices to be scalar,

                                                        0
                             Ωt = C + β Ωt−1 + α (Rt−1 Rt−1 ).                                   (43)

This, of course, closely mirrors the RM approach discussed above, with the impor-
tant difference that the long-run covariance matrix forecasts converge to the non-
degenerate matrix Ω = (1 − α − β)−1 C (provided that α + β < 1). Estimation of
this model may again be further simplified through the use of covariance targeting,
replacing the C matrix by

                                                   T
                                                1 X
                                C = (I − α − β)       Rt Rt0 ,
                                                T t=1

leaving only the two scalar parameters, α and β, to be determined.43
  42
    Without further restricting the structure of the model, there is also no guarantee that covariance
matrix forecasts produced by the model are actually psd.
 43
    This model also readily ensures that Ωt and the corresponding forecasts are psd, as long as



                                                 53
    Even so, estimation can still be very cumbersome in large dimensions due to the
need to invert the N × N covariance matrix Ωt for every day in the sample in order
to evaluate the likelihood function, which, of course, must be done numerous times
during a numerical optimization. In an effort to circumvent this problem, Engle
et al. (2008) suggested replacing the regular likelihood function in the optimization
of the model by a Composite Likelihood (CL) based on summing the log-likelihoods
of pairs of assets,

                                    T X
                                    X N X
                                        N
                    CL(α, β) =                    logf (α, β; Ri,t , Rj,t ),           (44)
                                    t=1 i=1 j>i


where logf (α, β; Ri,t , Rj,t ) denotes the bivariate normal density for asset pair Ri,t and
Rj,t . Each pair of assets yields a valid (but inefficient) likelihood for α and β, but by
summing over all pairs the resulting CL-estimator becomes “relatively efficient.”In
contrast to the standard likelihood function, the CL approach requires the inversion
of 2 × 2 matrices only, albeit a total of N (N + 1)/2 for each day in the sample, but
that, of course, is easy to do even in high-dimensional situations.
    Still, the assumption that all of the variances and covariances have the same
speed of mean reversion, as dictated by the α and β scalar parameters, is obviously
very restrictive. As such, more flexible procedures may be needed in describing the
temporal variation in Ωt in an empirically realistic fashion, especially when consider-
ing disperse types of assets or asset classes. One approach that has proven especially
useful is to focus on modeling the correlations rather than the covariances.

3.1.1   Dynamic Conditional Correlation Models

A conditional covariance matrix may always be decomposed into a conditional corre-
lation matrix pre- and post-multiplied by the diagonal matrix of conditional standard
deviations,
                                  Ωt = Dt Γt Dt .                                (45)
α > 0 and β > 0.




                                            54
Motivated by this decomposition, Bollerslev (1990) first proposed treating the con-
ditional correlations as constant, Γt = Γ, so that the dynamic dependencies in Ωt
are driven solely by the temporal variation in the conditional variances. The re-
sulting Constant Conditional Correlation (CCC) GARCH model has the advantage
that it is easy to estimate, even in large dimensions, in essence requiring only the
estimation of N univariate models. Specifically, for each of the individual assets,
one may first estimate an appropriate univariate GARCH model. These models may
differ from asset to asset, thus allowing for much richer, possibly asymmetric and
long-memory style, dependencies than in the multivariate diagonal GARCH mod-
els discussed above. Then, denoting the resulting vector of standardized returns
by êt = Rt D̂t−1 , the conditional correlation matrix Γ is efficiently estimated by the
sample mean of the outer product of these standardized returns.
    Although the CCC GARCH model is easy to estimate, and may work well over
relatively short time-spans, the underlying assumption of constant conditional cor-
relation is arguably too restrictive in many situations.44 In response to this, Engle
(2002a) and Tse and Tsui (2002) independently suggested allowing for dynamically
varying conditional correlations within a GARCH framework. Specifically, assuming
a simple scalar diagonal GARCH(1,1) structure for the correlations, the Dynamic
Conditional Correlation (DCC) GARCH model, first proposed by Engle (2002a),
may be expressed as,

                             Qt = C + β Qt−1 + α ( et−1 e0t−1 ) ,                                 (46)

where as before et = Rt Dt−1 , and the matrix of conditional correlations are defined
  44
    The literature is rife with examples of time-varying correlations. Cross-market stock-bond
return correlations, for instance, are often found to be close to zero or slightly positive during
bad economic times (recessions), but negative in good economic times (expansions); see, e.g., the
discussion in Andersen et al. (2007b). Numerous studies, including Longin and Solnik (1995),
have also demonstrated that the correlations among international equity markets change over time.
Similarly, there is ample evidence from the recent financial crisis that default correlations can change
quite dramatically over short periods of time.




                                                  55
                                                              √         √      
by the normalized elements of Qt , ρi,j,t = qi,j,t /              qi,i,t qj,j,t , or in matrix format,

                            Γt = diag{Qt }−1/2 Qt diag{Qt }−1/2 .                                  (47)

This latter normalization ensures that all of the correlations fall between −1 and 1.
   In parallel to the CCC model, estimation of the DCC model may proceed in
two steps, by first estimating univariate GARCH models for each of the assets. In
contrast to the CCC model, however, the second step estimation in the DCC model,
involving the dynamics of the Γt matrix, requires the use of numerical optimization
techniques. To help facilitate this step, and at the same time ensure that the forecasts
from the model are well-behaved, it is often desirable to rely on correlation targeting.
The parametrization in equation (46) does not immediately lend itself to that, as the
unconditional expectation of Qt differs from the unconditional expectation of et e0t .
Instead, following Aielli (2006) and re-parameterizing the dynamics for Qt as

                      Qt = (1 − α − β) C ∗ + βQt−1 + α e∗t−1 e∗0
                                                                 
                                                              t−1 ,                                (48)

where e∗t = diag{Qt }1/2 et , it follows that E(Qt ) = E(e∗t e∗0 t ). Correlation targeting
is therefore readily implemented by replacing C ∗ with the sample mean of the e∗t e∗t 0
matrix, or some other hypothesized value. This corrected DCC (cDCC) model is
relatively easy to estimate in high dimensions when combined with the composite
likelihood idea discussed earlier.45
    Another easy-to-implement DCC type model has recently been proposed by Engle
and Kelly (2008). In this model, instead of assuming the same dynamic dependencies
for all of the correlations, the time-varying correlations are assumed to be the same
across all pairs of assets. Hence the name dynamic equicorrelation, or DECO, model.
The assumption of identical correlations, of course, is only applicable when modeling
similar types of assets, such as, e.g., a large cross-section of stock returns.46 Following
  45
      The original DCC model defined by (46) and (47), and the cDCC version in (48), also both
guarantee that Γt is psd, provided that α > 0 and β > 0.
   46
      If this assumption is valid, imposing identical correlations will also generally enhance estimation
efficiency relative to a model that treats the pairwise correlations as unrelated.



                                                   56
Engle and Kelly (2008), the DECO model may be conveniently expressed as

                                   Γt = (1 − ρt ) I + ρt J ,                                     (49)

where I denotes the N dimensional identity matrix, and J refers to the N × N
matrix of ones. This representation for Γt has the advantage that the inverse is
available in closed form,47
                                                                         
                                   1                       ρt
                        Γ−1
                         t    =                  I −               J          ,
                                (1 − ρt )            1 + (N − 1)ρt

thus rendering the likelihood function easy to evaluate. Implementation of the DECO
model, of course, still requires an assumption about the dynamic dependencies in the
common conditional correlation. In particular, assuming a GARCH(1,1) structure,

                                 ρt = ωρ + αρ ut + βρ ρt−1 ,

with the updating rule naturally given by the average conditional correlation of the
standardized returns,
                                  2 N
                                    P     PN
                                      i=1   j>i ei,t ej,t
                           ut =           PN 2            ,
                                      N i=1 ei,t
the model has only three parameters, ωρ , αρ and βρ , to be estimated.
    To convey a feel for the importance of allowing for time-varying conditional cor-
relation, we plot in Figure 11 the estimated equicorrelations from a DECO model
for the aggregate equity index returns for 16 different developed markets from 1973
through 2009.48 As the figure shows, there has been a clear low-frequency upward
fluctuation in the cross-country correlations, from a typical value of approximately
0.25 in the late 70’s to around 0.70 toward the end of the sample. The movement
has not been entirely monotone, however, thus highlighting the flexibility of the
  47
     The inverse exists if and only if ρt 6= 1 and ρt 6= −1/(n − 1), while Γt is psd for ρt ∈ (−1/(n −
1), 1).
  48
     Similar figures are displayed by Christoffersen et al. (2011a), and we refer to their study for
additional details concerning the data and the methods of estimation.



                                                  57
                                        DECO Correlation, 1973−2009




           0.8




           0.6




           0.4




           0.2




            0
                 75      80        85           90           95       00   05     10




Figure 11: Time-Varying International Equity Correlations. The figure shows the esti-
mated equicorrelations from a DECO model for the aggregate equity index returns for 16 different
developed markets from 1973 through 2009.



DECO modeling approach also to account for important short-run fluctuations in
the 1/2 × 16 × 15 = 120 pairwise correlations.
    The scalar DCC model defined by equations (46) and (47), the modified DCC
model in equation (48), and the DECO model in equation (11) are all extremely par-
simonious and readily implemented for N large. They do, however, impose severe
restrictions on the correlations, and may thus be seen as overly simplistic in applica-
tions involving only a few assets. More elaborate DCC models, including asymmetric
formulations (e.g., Cappiello et al. (2006)) and regime switching type representations
(e.g., Pelletier (2006)), have been proposed to allow for more nuanced modeling when
N is small, say N ≤ 5. We will not discuss these models here, but refer to the recent


                                                     58
book by Engle (2009a) for a comprehensive survey of DCC models. Instead, we turn
to an alternative way of disciplining the covariance matrix, namely factor structures.

3.1.2     Factor Structures and Base Assets

Factor structures are, of course, ubiquitous in finance. However, we will keep our
discussion short and focussed on their explicit use in simplifying the modeling and
forecasting of large dimensional dynamic daily covariance matrices, as required for
risk measurement and management purposes. More detailed discussions of the use
of traditional factor models in the construction of V aRs and risk management more
generally are available in Jorion (2007) and Connor et al. (2010).
    Market risk management systems for portfolios of thousands of assets often work
from a set of smaller, say 30, observed base assets believed to be the key drivers of
the underlying risks. The accuracy of the resulting risk management system, in turn,
depends on the distributional assumptions for the base assets and the mapping from
the base assets to the full set of assets. The specific choice of base assets depends
importantly on the portfolio at hand but may, for example, consist of equity market
indices, FX rates, benchmark interest rates, and so on, believed to capture the main
sources of uncertainty. These base assets will typically also be among the most
liquid assets in the market. Such an approach is, of course, easier to contemplate for
a relatively specialized application with readily identifiable risk factors, such as a U.S.
equity portfolio, than a very large diversified entity, such as a major international
bank or conglomerate.
    Specifically, let RF,t denote the NF × 1 vector of de-meaned returns on the base
assets, or systematic risk factors. The distribution of the factors may then generally
be expressed as,

                  1/2
        RF,t = ΩF,t ZF,t ,    ZF,t ∼ i.i.d. ,        E(ZF,t ) = 0 ,   V ar(ZF,t ) = I ,   (50)

where the notation corresponds directly to the one in equation (41) above for the
N × 1 vector of returns Rt . The number of base assets may be considerably higher
than usual for traditional factor models employed in finance, but the basic idea is to

                                                59
keep their number much lower than the total number of assets.
    The mapping from the NF base assets to the full set of N assets typically consists
of a linear factor structure,

                             Rt = B0 + B RF,t + νt ,                                (51)

where νt denotes a N × 1 vector of idiosyncratic risks, B0 is an N × 1 vector, and the
factor loadings are contained in the N × NF matrix B. The factor loadings may be
obtained from regression, if sufficient historical data exists for the full cross-section
of assets. Alternatively, one may exploit the implications from a specific pricing
model, if such a model exists. Sometimes, the loadings are also determined in more
of an ad hoc fashion, by matching a security without a factor loading to another
similar security with a well-defined loading. Importantly, however, both B0 and B
are assumed to be constant.
    Now, combining the distributional assumptions in (50) with the basic factor struc-
ture in (51), the resulting covariance matrix for Rt may be expressed as,

                               Ωt = B 0 ΩF,t B + Ων,t ,                             (52)

where Ων,t denotes the N × N covariance matrix for νt . Since Ωt and Ων,t are both of
the same dimension, this expression does not directly translate into any simplification
in the estimation of the covariance matrix for the full set of N returns. However,
assuming that the idiosyncratic risks are uncorrelated across assets and that their
variances are constant, the expression for Ωt simplifies to

                               Ωt = B 0 ΩF,t B + Dν ,                               (53)

where Dν = Ων,t is a time-invariant diagonal matrix. Moreover, the elements in Dν
are readily estimated from the variances of the residuals in the factor model (51).
This, of course, still leaves ΩF,t to be determined. But, by keeping NF moderately
low, ΩF,t is much easier to estimate than Ωt . In fact, in addition to any of the
techniques discussed in this section, some of the more advanced multivariate GARCH

                                           60
procedures alluded to above could be applied for estimating ΩF,t when the number
of base assets, or NF , is kept sufficiently low.49
    Although convenient from a modeling perspective, the key assumption that Ων,t
is diagonal and constant over time often appears at odds with the data. Just as vari-
ances (and covariances) of raw returns are clearly time-varying, so are the variances
(and covariances) of idiosyncratic risks. Related to this, the risk exposures of many
assets, as encapsulated in the factor loadings, are also likely to change over time,
rendering the key covariance matrix representation in equation (53) with B constant
a poor approximation over long time periods. However, for applications exploiting
high-frequency intraday data, it is often feasible to alleviate these drawbacks and, as
we shall see below, factor structures are often invoked in such settings.


3.2     Intraday Data and Realized Covariances
Thus far our discussion has focused on models tailored toward capturing the dynam-
ics in daily covariances based on daily data. As discussed in section 2.2, however, for
many assets intraday price data are now readily available, and just as this informa-
tion is useful for the estimation of daily variances, it should be equally, if not more,
useful for the estimation of daily asset covariances.
    Generalizing the univariate setting in equation (20), and providing a continuous-
time analogue to the discrete-time representation in (41), we assume that the N × 1
log-price vector, P (t), is governed by the following multivariate diffusion process,

                           dP (t) = M (t) dt + Ω(t)1/2 dW (t) ,                             (54)

where M (t) and Ω(t)1/2 denote the N × 1 instantaneous drift vector and the N × N
positive definite “square-root” of the covariance matrix, respectively, while W (t) de-
notes a N -dimensional vector of independent Brownian motions. As before, without
much loss of generality, we assume that M (t) = 0, although non-zero drifts, as rel-
  49
    This basic idea was pioneered by Diebold and Nerlove (1989) in their construction of a multi-
variate ARCH factor model, in which the latent time-varying volatility factors may be viewed as
the base assets; see also Engle et al. (1990) and Alexander (2001).


                                               61
evant over longer return horizons, easily can be incorporated into the analysis by
considering de-meaned returns. We also assume that the asset returns are linearly
independent, i.e., no redundant asset is included in the basic set of returns, implying
that the covariance matrix Ω(t) is pd.50
   The natural multivariate extension of the realized variation measure, defined in
equation (21), to the notion of a daily realized covariance matrix is simply

                                             N (∆)
                                              X
                                                                0
                          RCovt (∆) ≡                Rt−1+j∆,∆ Rt−1+j∆,∆ ,                         (55)
                                              j=1


where, as before, N (∆) = 1/∆. If, ideally, the price vector process in equation
(54) is continuously observable, then letting ∆ go to zero enables us to compute the
realized covariance matrix in equation (55) at ever finer sampling intervals. In this
scenario, the RCovt estimator converges to the integrated covariance matrix of the
continuous-time stochastic volatility process on day t, given as,
                                                    Z   t
                                     ICovt =                Ω (τ ) dτ .                            (56)
                                                     t−1


This expression, and the underlying limiting arguments, represent a direct extension
of the notion of the integrated variance for N = 1 in equation (22).51
    Hence, as for the univariate case, the true ex-post covariance matrix becomes
directly observable in this ideal setting, even in the absence of a model for Ω(t). The
upshot is that, as before, variances and covariances no longer have to be extracted
from a nonlinear model estimated via treacherous likelihood procedures, along the
lines of the multivariate GARCH models discussed above. Instead, by treating the
realized covariance matrices as realizations of the true underlying series of interest,
we may apply standard time series techniques for their modeling and forecasting.
    Of course, the idealized frictionless setting motivating the recipe for RCovt in
  50
     As we discuss at length later, when the cross-section, N , is large, it can be difficult to generate
unbiased estimates of the realized covariance matrix that satisfy this important constraint.
  51
     For more formal development of the associated asymptotic distribution theory, see, e.g., An-
dersen et al. (2003a) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004a).


                                                     62
equation (55), and its limit in equation (56), provide only an approximate description
of reality. For instance, as discussed in section 2.2, trades are not consummated con-
tinuously, imposing a strict upper bound on the highest possible sampling frequency.
This presents important new implementation challenges compared to the univariate
case, especially if the number of assets is large and the trading intensities of some
assets are relatively low. In particular, while some of the techniques discussed earlier
may be adapted for consistently estimating the individual elements of the covariance
matrix in the presence of market microstructure noise, none of these generally guar-
antee that the estimated covariance matrix is positive definite (pd), or even positive
semi-definite (psd).
    Along these lines, Andersen et al. (2003a) first noted that the simple realized
covariance matrix in (55) will be pd by construction, as long as the asset returns are
linearly independent and the trading (or quoting) activity is sufficiently high. The
specific requirement is that price updates are available for the full cross-section of
assets over small enough time increments, ∆, to ensure that the number of intraday
observations, N (∆) = 1/∆, exceeds the number of assets, N . For example, if we
sample individual U.S. stocks every five minutes across the official trading day, the
RCovt matrix is trivially singular if the number of stocks exceeds 78.
    For a set of very actively traded securities, the above conditions may not appear
unduly restrictive. After all, many assets trade multiple times each minute on aver-
age, often generating thousands of new trade prices per day. Unfortunately, this is
deceptive. The key point is that all assets must have traded within each sampling
interval. If not, this will generally result in a downward bias in the covariance esti-
mates due to the presence of zero returns induced purely by the absence of trades
(or quote changes) – a feature commonly labeled the Epps effect following the early
characterization in Epps (1979). Since many assets periodically experience a trading
lull, there will often be extended periods of no-trading for some of the assets, so
that this can be a major concern. Hence, when using the basic realized covariance
matrix estimator in equation (55), it is critical to sample fairly sparsely to alleviate
this bias.52 Of course, this then restricts the size of the cross-section that can be
 52
      It is generally also advantageous to follow the subsampling strategy previously outlined in


                                                63
analyzed quite dramatically.
    More generally, the price synchronicity requirement implies that the realized
covariance matrix cannot be estimated consistently unless the sampling scheme is
adapted to the trading intensity of the least active asset at any given time. This idea
is encapsulated in the “refresh time” sampling procedure advocated by Barndorff-
Nielsen et al. (2011) as part of their multivariate realized kernel approach to covari-
ance matrix estimation. The kernel consists of the inclusion of a suitably chosen
weight function for the lead and lag returns in the computation of the covariance
matrix. This ensures consistency in the presence of general classes of microstructure
noise, while also guaranteeing that the estimate of the covariance matrix is psd.
    Direct application of this approach is eminently feasible for a limited number of
actively traded assets. However, when the number of assets is large, refresh time
sampling results in a dramatic loss of data as intermediary prices for active assets
are discarded until the last asset trades. For example, Hautsch et al. (2011) assess
that, with realistic intra-stock differences in trade arrival rates, more than 90% of
the data are discarded for a system of twenty actively traded assets, and the pro-
portion continues to rise as the cross-section of assets increases. This implies that,
for N rising, the effective sampling frequency, 1/∆, drops quite dramatically, in turn
rendering it difficult to satisfy the positive definiteness bound. Equally problematic
is the loss in estimation precision as each pairwise covariance term is computed from
fewer and fewer intraday observations, ultimately producing a poorly estimated over-
all covariance matrix with many zeros among the eigenvalues. In sum, this strategy
fails for very large cross-sections of assets.
    Two main approaches have hitherto been proposed in the literature to accom-
modate large cross-sections, while avoiding dramatic Epps style biases. One avenue
is to initially ignore the requirement of positive definiteness and apply the refresh
sampling scheme on smaller blocks of assets, thus mitigating the problems associated
section 2.2, where one generates multiple subsamples of the intraday return series by initiating the
sampling at the given frequency at different offsets relative to the opening trade, and then average
the resulting covariance measures across the subsamples. For example, by initiating sampling at
each of the first five-minute marks during the trading day, one could secure five distinct five-minute
return series for each asset.


                                                 64
with the loss of data, and then to apply a regularization procedure to restore the
psd property. The second approach is to exploit covariance matrix factor structure
to reduce the effective dimension of the problem, thereby allowing for more reliable
estimates from a given set of intraday observations. We now discuss these techniques.

3.2.1   Regularizing Techniques for RCov Estimation

The simplest method for converting a “vast” N × N positive semi-definite covariance
matrix estimator RCovt (∆) of less than full rank and possibly containing multiple
zero eigenvalues, into a strictly positive definite matrix is shrinkage. The idea is
to combine RCovt (∆) with an N × N shrinkage target matrix, Υt , which is posi-
tive definite and well-conditioned. Ideally, the target should also provide a sensible
benchmark covariance matrix to minimize the resulting bias. Formally,

                         Ω̂St = κ RCovt (∆) + (1 − κ) Υt ,                         (57)

where the weight assigned to the realized covariance matrix satisfies 0 < κ < 1, so
the shrinkage estimator is a convex linear combination of a positive semi-definite and
a positive definite matrix, implying it will be positive definite.
    As an extraordinarily simple illustration of this basic principle, in a setting with
daily data and time-varying covariance matrices, Ledoit and Wolf (2004) propose
shrinkage towards the identity matrix, i.e., Υt = I, with the weight, κ, determined
optimally according to an asymptotic quadratic loss function. While this will reduce
the variance, it may, of course, induce a rather severe bias, as asset returns generally
are highly correlated.
    To counteract this bias, Ledoit and Wolf (2003) suggest shrinkage towards the
covariance structure implied by a simple one-factor market model. Specifically, fol-
lowing the discussion in section 3.1.2 above,

                                       2       0
                                Υ t = σM b b + Dν ,                                (58)

       2
where σM refers to the variance of the market return, b denotes the N × 1 vector of


                                          65
factor loadings for each of the assets with respect to the market portfolio, and Dν is a
diagonal matrix composed of the corresponding idiosyncratic variances. Importantly,
all of these parameters are easy to estimate from simple time series regressions.
    In contrast to Υt = I, this procedure allows for non-trivial positive return cor-
relation across assets, thus providing a more suitable shrinkage target for covariance
estimation. However, it assumes that the relevant second order return moments are
time-invariant, so that a long time series of daily returns can be used for estimating
b, along with the other parameters. This is counter to the spirit of high-frequency
return based estimation, where we seek to determine the time variation in the co-
variance matrix and, as an implication, the fluctuations in systematic market risk
exposures, or factor loadings.53 The extreme dichotomy between the realized co-
variance matrix, estimated without bias but with poor precision, and the shrinkage
target, which may be strongly biased but is estimated with better precision, naturally
suggest alternative approaches that better balance the two effects.
    In this regard, Hautsch et al. (2011) have recently suggested breaking the covari-
ance matrix into blocks according to the trading intensity of the underlying assets,
thus minimizing the loss of data from refresh time sampling when using the multi-
variate realized kernels to estimate the different blocks. Of course, simply piecing
the covariance matrix together from separate blocks generally produces an indefinite
matrix with negative as well as positive eigenvalues. To circumvent this problem,
Hautsch et al. (2011) adopt so-called eigenvalue cleaning to “regularize” the covari-
ance matrix in a second step, by separating the set of large and significant eigenvalues
from those that are statistically insignificant and may have been generated by ran-
dom noise.54
    Specifically, denote the first stage realized kernel blocking estimator for the inte-
grated covariance matrix on day t by Ω̂t . Eigenvalue cleaning then consists of the
  53
      Again, Ledoit and Wolf (2003) envision their estimator to be applied for daily data but, as
mentioned previously, there are recent attempts to adapt similar procedures to the high-frequency
setting.
   54
      This approach is motivated by random matrix theory; see, e.g., Mehta (1990) for an introduc-
tion to the theory and Tola et al. (2008) for a recent application to portfolio choice.




                                               66
following steps. First, define the realized correlation matrix by,

                                    Γ̂t = D̂t−1 Ω̂t D̂t−1 .                              (59)

where, as for equation (45), D̂t = diag(Ω̂t )1/2 denotes the diagonal matrix of realized
standard deviations. Using the conventional spectral decomposition, rewrite the
correlation matrix as,
                                                    0
                                   Γ̂t = P̂t Λ̂t P̂t ,                              (60)

where Λ̂t is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues, λ̂i , i = 1, . . . , N , sorted in descending
order so that λ̂1 ≥ λ̂2 . . . λ̂N −1 ≥ λ̂N , and P̂t denotes the orthonormal matrix of cor-
responding eigenvectors. Now, letting λ indicate the appropriate (positive) threshold
for the significant eigenvalues, separate the first, say, k eigenvalues which exceed λ
into one group. Next, equate all negative eigenvalues to zero and compute the aver-
             B
age value, λt , of the positive and (modified) zero eigenvalues that are less than λ.
The regularized covariance matrix is then constructed from the “cleaned” matrix of
eigenvalues Λ̂Bt , with the original k eigenvalues as the first k diagonal elements and
                                                              B
the remaining N − k diagonal elements replaced by λt , according to the formula

                                                         0
                                 Ω̂RnB
                                   t   = D̂t P̂t Λ̂B
                                                   t P̂t D̂t .                           (61)

    Pursuing a similar approach, but taking the decomposition of the covariance ma-
trix to a logical extreme, Lunde et al. (2011) suggest estimating all covariance terms
using only the corresponding bivariate realized kernel estimator. This minimizes the
loss of information due to refresh time sampling, while permitting an optimal choice
of kernel bandwidth for each pairwise return series. The first stage estimator is then
obtained by assembling all the elements into a “composite realized kernel” covariance
estimator. This heightens the quality of the estimate for each individual term, but it
sacrifices the coherence of the overall matrix by not imposing the pd (or psd) prop-
erty beyond the bivariate systems. Since the resulting composite covariance matrix
typically will be “far” from pd, it requires a more substantial transformation of the
entries in the covariance matrix to obtain a pd matrix than is the case for the RnB


                                              67
estimator of Hautsch et al. (2011), which usually operates with only 3-5 blocks.55
     Another closely related approach to the estimation of RCov, inspired by the idea
of dimension reduction through the imposition of a factor structure, has also been
suggested by Lunde et al. (2011). The idea is to let the correlation structure be
determined only by the eigenvectors associated with the largest and most significant
eigenvalues. Again, the significant eigenvalues are identified day-by-day using the
“i.i.d. noise threshold” prescribed by random matrix theory.56 Formally, let

                                                          0
                                         Γ̃t = P̃t Λ̃t P̃t ,                                    (62)

where Λ̃t denotes the k×k diagonal matrix containing the upper left k×k sub-matrix
of Λ̂t , while P̃t denotes the N ×k matrix containing the first k columns of eigenvectors
from P̂t associated with the largest k eigenvalues. The resulting N × N matrix, Γ̃t ,
is of rank k and thus not strictly positive definite. It is also not a proper correlation
matrix, as it generally fails to have unit entries along the diagonal. Nonetheless, it
embodies the correlation structure implied by the k most important eigenvectors,
or the first k principal components of the intraday returns. Hence, it is natural to
modify this matrix to construct a proper correlation matrix,57
                                    h           0
                                                                  0
                                                                     i
                        Γ̃Pt C = I + P̃t Λ̃t P̃t − diag P̃t Λ̃t P̃t     .                       (63)

The resulting principal component regularized realized covariance matrix estimator
is then obtained by simply scaling up Γ̃Pt C ,

                                      Ω̂Pt C = D̂t Γ̃Pt C D̂t .                                 (64)
  55
     The notion of a distance between covariance matrices requires the adoption of a matrix norm.
Since our discussion is heuristic, we abstain from any detailed account; see, e.g., Fan et al. (2008)
for a discussion of alternative norms in the context of covariance matrix estimation.
  56
     Alternatively, one may exploit an initial procedure to help decide on an appropriate fixed num-
ber of eigenvectors, or “factors”, in order to maintain a constant dimensionality of the correlation
structure across days.
  57
     Notice that for any square matrix A, the operation A − diag(A) leaves the off-diagonal entries
in A unchanged, while producing zeros along the diagonal. Hence, I + [A − diag(A)] yields a matrix
with unit entries on the diagonal and off-diagonal entries inherited from A.


                                                 68
as in equation (61).
    It remains a matter for future work to systematically characterize the performance
of these approaches to RCovt estimation based on the spectral decomposition in
equation (60) for empirically realistic situations involving different scenarios for the
number of included assets and the trading (quoting) intensities.
    Rather than extracting principal components day-by-day to obtain a factor struc-
ture for the realized covariance matrix, a number of authors propose using pre-
specified observable factors, or returns on factor mimicking portfolios, as a way to
reduce the dimensionality of the problem and the associated estimation errors.58
    Recall the basic linear factor structure in equation (51), where the parameters
are assumed to be constant across days. Extending the corresponding expression for
the discrete-time returns on the factors in equation (50) to a continuous-time setting,
maintaining the same diffusion representation for the logarithmic factor price process
as for the returns in equation (54), we may write,

                                dPF (t) = ΩF (t)1/2 dWF (t) ,                                (65)

where ΩF (t)1/2 denotes the NF × NF positive definite “square-root” of the instan-
taneous covariance matrix, and WF (t) is a NF -dimensional vector of independent
Brownian motions. Denoting the resulting day t realized covariance matrix for the
factors by Ω̂F,t , an implied day-by-day realized covariance matrix estimator for the
N -dimensional vector of returns may then be constructed as,

                                                     0
                                  Ω̂Ft = B̂ Ω̂F,t B̂ + D̂ν ,                                 (66)

where B̂ and D̂ν refer to estimates of the factor loadings and the (diagonal) covariance
matrix for the idiosyncratic variances, respectively.
    This approach has been successfully implemented by Bannouh et al. (2010) for the
estimation of large dimensional daily covariance matrices for hundreds of individual
stocks. Bannouh et al. (2010) rely on a set of highly liquid exchange traded funds
  58
    Fan et al. (2008) provide a formal theoretical analysis of the impact of dimensionality on the
estimation of covariance matrices in the context of factor models.


                                               69
(ETFs) as factors. Prices for these contracts are essentially free of microstructure
noise at relatively high frequencies, allowing for accurate estimation of Ω̂F,t . In
contrast, they estimate the factor loadings from daily data to avoid biases due to
microstructure and Epps type effects. An even simpler approach would be to rely
on the market model, effectively setting κ = 0 in the earlier equations (57) and (58)
for the shrinkage estimator, thereby only exploiting the realized return variation
of the market index as the single dynamic factor driving the covariance matrix in
accordance with equation (66).
    Of course, as already noted in section 3.1.2, the restriction that the covariance
matrix of the idiosyncratic returns is diagonal is rather strong. For example, it
precludes sector specific effects. In an effort to relax this assumption, Fan et al.
(2011) allow for some correlation in the error covariance matrix by imposing the
weaker requirement that the matrix is “sparse.” Their estimation procedure exploits
random matrix theory as they achieve the requisite parsimony, or sparcity, in the
idiosyncratic covariance matrix via so-called thresholding techniques.59
    The assumption that the factor loadings are constant may, of course, also be
problematic in some situations. Just as high-frequency data for the factors may be
used in accurately estimating Ω̂F,t , high-frequency data for the factors and the returns
could similarly be used in the estimation of day-by-day realized factor loadings, or
“betas.” This idea for the estimation of daily realized factor loadings from intraday
data was first pursued empirically by Bollerslev and Zhang (2003) and Andersen
et al. (2006b) for the three Fama-French portfolios and the market, respectively.60
    From a practical perspective, however, the estimation of the loadings runs into
the exact same market microstructure problems that plague the original RCovt es-
timator: it is difficult to implement with illiquid assets and the large dimensions
typically required for asset level risk analysis. These difficulties may, of course,
be partly overcome by resorting to some of the techniques already outlined above.
This mainly involves suitably combining the different procedures, and we abstain
  59
     Related banding and thresholding procedures for estimating daily realized covariance matrices
are discussed in Wang and Zou (2010).
  60
     Estimation and forecasting of betas based on high-frequency data have also been explored more
recently within the Realized GARCH framework by Hansen et al. (2010b).


                                               70
from fleshing out the details. Hence, instead of further discussion of techniques for
measuring the current realized covariance matrix, we now turn to different dynamic
models for forecasting realized covariance matrices.

3.2.2    Dynamic Modeling of Realized Covariance Matrices

All of the different procedures discussed in the preceding section for estimating the
realized covariance matrix may in principle be applied as short term daily forecasts
as well, when augmented with a martingale assumption for the realized covariance
matrix, e.g., tomorrow’s expected covariance matrix equals today’s realization.61 Of
course, the martingale hypothesis is at best a short term approximation, as both vari-
ances and covariances generally display mean reversion. Hence, for longer horizons
explicit time series models must be developed as a basis for sensible forecasts.
    Building on the univariate procedures discussed earlier, this section outlines var-
ious strategies for modeling and forecasting integrated covariance matrices, treating
the realized covariance matrix as directly observable, albeit with some measurement
error. Since the literature on the estimation of large realized covariance matrices is
recent and remains limited, there are still no authoritative studies of the relative per-
formance of different approaches.62 Consequently, our review of existing techniques
is invariably somewhat speculative. However, we anticipate this to be an area where
substantial progress will be made over the coming years, and therefore summarize
what we see as some of the more promising new directions.
    In parallel to the notation for the variance forecasts discussed earlier, we denote
the N × N point forecast of the integrated return covariance matrix for period t + k
based on information through period t, by Ω̂t+k|t , while the corresponding measures
for the realized covariance matrix in period t is generically labeled Ω̂t .63 Just as many
  61
     Both Hautsch et al. (2011) and Lunde et al. (2011) base their exploration of one-day-ahead
covariance matrix forecasts on this hypothesis.
  62
     The set of potential applications is literally unlimited, thus making it hard to settle on a simple
metric for assessing the economic value of improved forecasts, even if one focuses on practical risk
measurement and management problems. An early study inspiring this literature is Fleming et al.
(2003), who suggest dramatic improvements vis-a-vis the RM and multivariate GARCH frameworks
for standard mean-variance efficient asset allocation problems.
  63
     Of course, as discussed in the previous section, there are many alternative proposals for esti-


                                                  71
of the forecasting models for the realized volatilities discussed in section 2.2 were
directly inspired by existing techniques for forecasting with daily or lower frequency
data, so are many of the procedures for dynamic realized covariance matrix modeling.
    In particular, directly emulating the Risk Metrics approach in equation (40), it
is natural to postulate,

                               Ω̂t+1|t = λ Ω̂t|t−1 + (1 − λ) Ω̂t ,                               (67)

where 0 < λ < 1. Thus, the integrated covariance matrix forecast is generated as an
exponentially weighted average of past realized covariance matrix measures with λ
controlling the relative weight ascribed to the more recent realizations.64 Intuitively,
this allows for persistent time-variation in the realized covariance matrices, while
implicitly acknowledging that each realization is measured with error. Of course,
this approach also inherits all of the problems with the conventional RM approach,
including the lack of mean-reversion, and as such may not be appropriate for longer
forecast horizons.
    Alternatively, mimicking the scalar diagonal GARCH model in equation (43)
suggests the following multivariate regression specification,

                      vech (Ω̂t+1 ) = vech (C) + β vech (Ω̂t ) + ξt+1 ,                          (68)

where the N (N + 1)/2 × 1 vector ξt denotes an error term. This system requires
nothing but OLS to implement, and conditional on the estimated parameters, Ĉ and
β̂,, the forecast for the integrated covariance matrix is readily obtained from,

                          vech (Ω̂t+1|t ) = vech (Ĉ) + β̂ vech (Ω̂t ) .                         (69)

mating Ωt and associated procedures for forecasting it, so Ω̂t and Ω̂t+k|t merely serve as generic
indicators for the realized covariance measure and forecast being entertained at a given point in the
exposition. We reserve the more specific notation, RCovt (∆), for the standard realized covariance
estimator based on the cross-product of returns sampled at fixed frequency ∆. Also, as in the
univariate case, the models will typically stipulate a specific dynamic evolution for Ωt , whereas any
empirical analysis will be based on the time series of observed Ω̂t .
  64
     This particular procedure is among the set of dynamic specifications explored by, e.g., Fleming
et al. (2003), Liu (2009), Bannouh et al. (2010) and Varneskov and Voev (2010).


                                                 72
Strict positive definiteness of the covariance matrix forecast in equation (69) is guar-
anteed for any pd matrix Ĉ and positive values of β̂, as long as Ω̂t is psd.
    Even though the above procedure generalizes the “martingale” hypothesis, cor-
responding to C = 0 and β = 1, it still assumes a common degree of mean rever-
sion across all variances and covariances. As noted previously, this is likely overly
restrictive, especially when considering a diverse set of assets, so it is worthwhile
contemplating suitable generalizations.
    Pushing the above approach one step further, any of the other procedures dis-
cussed in section 3.1 could be similarly adapted to modeling realized covariances,
keeping in mind the restrictions required for positive definiteness. For example, the
DCC-type framework naturally suggests first modeling the realized standard devia-
tions asset-by-asset using any of the procedures discussed in section 2.2, and the cor-
responding realized correlations in a second step. Specifically, maintaining a simple
dynamic structure as in equation (68), the correlation dynamics for the standardized
returns could be modeled as,

                    vech(Qt ) = vech(C) + β vech(Qt−1 ) + ξt ,                     (70)

where we have extended the notation for the conventional DCC model in the obvious
way. Again, simple OLS is all that is required for estimation. As for the conventional
DCC model, an additional normalization along the lines of equation (47) is needed
to ensure that the resulting correlation matrix is well defined, with ones along the
diagonal and all of the off-diagonal elements falling between -1 and 1.
    The advantages of these approaches are twofold. First, high-frequency informa-
tion is used to obtain more precise estimates of current variances and covariances,
in turn resulting in better “initial conditions” for forecast calculations. Second, by
treating the covariance matrices as directly observable no numerical optimization is
needed for the estimation of the models.
    Even though we have focussed on simple first-order models and corresponding
one-day-ahead forecasts, all the procedures discussed above could easily be iterated
forward to generate multi-period forecasts Ω̂t+k|t . More complicated long-memory


                                          73
dynamics, regime-switching, or asymmetries, could also be incorporated into the
models, provided the dimensionality of the estimation problem is kept in check.
    A major obstacle for adopting more realistic and complex representations for
the realized covariance matrix dynamics than offered by, e.g., equation (68) is, as
discussed at length previously, the requirement for positive definiteness. A possible
solution consists of first applying a nonlinear transform to the RCovt matrix with the
property that the inverse transform will ensure positive definiteness. One may then
specify and estimate the dynamics of the transformed system without imposing any
constraints. Once the future expected value of the transformed system is determined,
the inversion back into a covariance representation automatically produces a pd
matrix forecast. A popular example of this approach within the univariate setting
is the specification of dynamic models for log volatility, as in the EGARCH and
log-HAR-RV models discussed in sections 2.1 and 2.2, respectively.
    In this regard, Andersen et al. (2003a) proposed modeling the Cholesky decompo-
sition of RCov rather than the matrix itself. The Cholesky decomposition provides
one possible definition of a unique square-root of a positive definite realized covari-
ance matrix estimator,
                                       Ω̂t = Lt Lt0 ,                             (71)

where Lt is a unique lower triangular matrix. The data vector subjected to dynamic
modeling is then vech (Lt ), and one simply substitute the forecast of vech(Lt+k ) back
into equation (71) to construct a forecast of Ωt+k,∆ .65 One drawback to the use of
Cholesky decompositions, and other non-linear transformations, is that the estimated
parameters can be difficult to interpret in terms of the marginal impacts of shocks
to specific elements in the covariance matrix. Related to this, the dynamic Cholesky
modeling strategy inevitable involves a bias, arising from modeling and forecasting
a nonlinear transformation and then mapping the resulting point forecasts back into
  65
    Building on this framework, Chiriac and Voev (2011) explore various dynamic specifications
of the realized covariance matrix for six liquid U.S. stocks, and find that a long-memory vector
ARFIMA model performs well. The reliance on approximate maximum likelihood estimation ren-
ders their approach problematic for large scale systems, but it should be feasible to adopt simpler
specifications that would enable estimation when N is large.



                                                74
the covariance matrix.66
   Another strategy, proposed by Bauer and Vorkink (2011), is to exploit the matrix
logarithmic function.67 Specifically, provided that Ω̂t is positive definite, then the
N × N symmetric matrix,                       
                                At = logm Ω̂t ,                                   (72)

is implicitly defined by the inverse of the matrix exponential function,
                                              ∞
                                             X   1 n
                                       Ω̂t =        At .                                         (73)
                                             n=0
                                                 n!

One may then proceed as before by specifying the dynamics of vech(At ), estimating
the system and constructing the implied Ω̂t+k|t forecasts. Of course, the dynamic
specification for vech(At ) must be kept relatively simple to remain tractable in large
dimensions.68 Also, the same general problems arising from the use of a non-linear
transformation in the Cholesky decomposition discussed above remain for the At to
Ω̂t transformation.
    In summary, while the literature on modeling the covariance matrix dynamics is
progressing rapidly along many different directions, there is still no consensus on the
relative merits of the approaches. It is clear, however, that the use of high-frequency
intraday data and realized covariance measures hold the promise of substantially
improving the accuracy of covariance matrix forecasting. Going one step further,
in direct parallel to the approach taken in the univariate setting of section 2.2.3,
the realized covariance forecasts discussed above may also be embedded within a
multivariate GARCH setting to provide a vehicle for combining the realized covari-
ance matrices with a multivariate distribution for the return innovations. We briefly
discuss some recent ideas for implementing this next.
  66
      The aforementioned study by Chiriac and Voev (2011) also provides approximate bias correction
terms for this, but deem the extent of the bias to be relatively minor in their empirical application.
   67
      A related multivariate matrix Exponential GARCH model was proposed by Kawakatsu (2006).
   68
      The actual application in Bauer and Vorkink (2011) is relatively modest in terms of dimension-
ality, and too highly parameterized to be be practical for high-dimensional applications.




                                                 75
3.2.3   Combining GARCH and RCov

As with the univariate setting, it is tempting to combine the precision of high-
frequency realized volatility based measures with the powerful and flexible economet-
ric tools provided by (quasi) likelihood estimation of GARCH models in extracting
the volatility dynamics for multivariate systems. This can be done in a variety of
ways, especially if one breaks the approach down into multiple steps. Nonetheless,
the literature dealing with this approach remains nascent and we have little evidence
regarding the relative performance of alternative procedures, so we only briefly il-
lustrate how these methods may be combined to construct candidate models with
non-trivial dynamic covariance structures through a couple of examples.
    First, it is natural to exploit the various techniques for estimation of the realized
correlation matrix, discussed in the initial parts of section 3, with the flexible dynamic
modeling of the individual conditional variances afforded by GARCH style models.
Recall the decomposition in equation (45), Ωt = Dt Γt Dt . The diagonal condi-
tional standard deviation matrix, Dt , may be obtained from univariate models, each
estimated in isolation using flexible dynamic specifications. When high-frequency
data are available, the candidate univariate volatility models include the GARCH-X
and Realized GARCH techniques reviewed in section 2.3.3. These approaches en-
sure volatility dynamics that quickly respond to changes in the underlying realized
volatility measures and provide a great deal of freedom in adapting the estimation to
accommodate critical features of each specific series, including asymmetric return-
volatility relations, long memory dynamic dependencies, calendar effects, and the
degree of heavy tails in the return distributions.
    The conditional correlation matrix, Γt , also changes over time, but it is likely to
evolve more slowly than the conditional variances. As such, one may exploit wider
estimation windows to enhance the precision of estimation. Technically, one may sim-
ply stipulate a constant correlation matrix, Γt = Γ , for a period of one week or one
month, say, but allow this constant matrix to be estimated over a rolling window so
that it does evolve slowly over time. The longer time series allows for additional flex-
ibility in estimating the realized correlation matrix, even for a very large set of assets,


                                            76
using the various techniques discussed in the previous sections. The candidate proce-
dures for estimating Γ , include the basic RCovt estimator using appropriately sparse
sampling frequencies, the shrinkage estimators, or the various techniques exploiting
regularization via principal components, observable factor structures, thresholding
and blocking.69 Clearly, the potential for developing alternative approaches along
these lines is vast and we currently have only limited knowledge about the relevant
empirical tradeoffs that will govern the success of the different techniques.
    Second, we briefly discuss a proposal that directly combines realized covariance
measures with GARCH style dynamics, namely the multivariate HEAVY model of
Noureldin et al. (2011), which extends the univariate specification in equation (37).
In the general form, the model inherits the curse of dimensionality from multivariate
GARCH representations, so the empirical work focuses on parsimonious, and restric-
tive, representations. The model is explicitly designed for the low-frequency (daily)
realized return cross-product, but the information set is given by corresponding high-
frequency observations. Denoting the realized daily return cross-product by Ut , the
model may be defined as follows,

                                      0
                                                                 0
                                                   1/2        1/2
                          Ut = Rt Rt = Ht                Ξ t Ht      ,               (74)

where the N × N matrix Ht denotes the covariance matrix of the daily return vector
conditional on an information set including the high-frequency returns up to day t,
while Ξ t is a N × N symmetric innovation matrix with Et−1 [ Ξ t ] = I.
    Forecasting the covariance matrix requires a dynamic model for Ht . One tractable
option is the scalar HEAVY parametrization, which is well defined subject to regu-
larity conditions resembling those from the scalar multivariate GARCH model,

                                          0
                          Ht+1 = CH CH + bH Ht + aH Vt .                             (75)

Here, aH and bH are positive scalars, CH is a N × N matrix of constants, which may
be fixed by covariance targeting, and Vt denotes a realized covariance measure, such
 69
    One example of applying such procedures is Rosenow (2008) although he only applies the
procedures for daily data.

                                              77
as, e.g., the realized covariance matrix based on 5-minute sampling.
    Equation (75) allows for one-step-ahead forecasting, but multi-step forecasting
requires an explicit representation of the dynamics for Vt as well. Letting Mt =
Et−1 [ Vt ], the evolution for Vt is stipulated to follow,

                                              1/2        1/2
                                  V t = Mt          Ψ t Mt     ,                       (76)

where the Ψt is a N × N symmetric innovation matrix with Et−1 [ Ψt ] = I. The
associated dynamic representation for Mt is analogous to the scalar GARCH style
specification of equation (75), and directly generalizes equation (37),

                                          0
                         Mt+1 = CM CM + bM Mt + aM Vt .                                (77)

With covariance matrix targeting, the scalar HEAVY system may be estimated by
standard likelihood techniques once we provide a conditional distribution for the
stochastic shocks to the system. In particular, if the return innovations are i.i.d.
Gaussian, the innovation matrix, Ξ t , in equation (74) will be Wishart distributed.
Likewise, one may assume Ψt in equation (76) to be Wishart distributed.
     In parallel to the univariate literature, Noureldin et al. (2011) find the inclusion of
the high-frequency return information to provide significant improvements over cor-
responding GARCH models utilizing only daily return observations. The upshot is
that generalizations of multivariate GARCH models into settings that accommodate
the inclusion of high-frequency data appear to provide a similar boost to the pre-
dictive performance that was observed in the univariate case. Obviously, the models
still impose quite unsatisfactory constraints on the dynamic evolution of the system
as well as the conditional return innovations, rendering further tractable extensions
to the framework important objectives for future work.
     In summary, the opportunities for combining factor structures, multiple com-
ponents, GARCH modeling approaches and realized covariance measures in distinct
ways are nearly unlimited. The literature is progressing in different directions, but we
lack consensus on how to assess and rank the performance of alternative procedures.


                                              78
Moreover, it is evident that the focus on the covariance matrix fails to explicitly
incorporate features of the return distribution beyond the second moments, which
are potentially critical for active risk management. We now turn to such issues.


3.3    Modeling Multivariate Return Distributions
Just as a fully specified and realistic univariate distribution is needed for risk mea-
surement, so too is a fully specified and realistic multivariate (non-Gaussian) dis-
tribution needed for risk management. For example, a fully specified multivariate
distribution allows for the computation of VaR sensitivities and VaR minimizing
portfolio weights.
    The results of Andersen et al. (2000a) suggest that, at least in the FX market, the
multivariate distribution of returns standardized by the realized covariance matrix
is again closely approximated by a normal distribution. As long as the realized
volatilities are available, a multivariate version of the log-normal mixture model
discussed in section 2.3.2 could therefore be developed.
    As discussed at length above, however, construction and use of realized covariance
matrices may be problematic in situations when liquidity is not high. In that situa-
tion one of the more traditional parametric GARCH type models discussed in section
3.1 may be used for modeling the temporal dependencies in the conditional covari-
ance matrix and then combined with an explicit (and by assumption time-invariant)
multivariate distribution for the standardized returns.
    Specifically, assuming the mean to be zero, or Mt = 0, we have from equation
(41),
                    −1/2
            Zt = Ωt      Rt ,  Zt ∼ i.i.d., Et−1 (Zt ) = 0 V art−1 (Zt ) = I,      (78)

Alternatively, recalling the decomposition in equation (45), it is sometimes more
convenient to consider the vector of standardized, but correlated asset shocks

                et = Dt−1 Rt ,    Et−1 (et ) = 0,   V art−1 (et ) = Γt ,          (79)

where Dt denotes the diagonal matrix of conditional standard deviations for each


                                          79
of the assets, and Γt refers to the potentially time-varying conditional correlation
matrix.
     For concreteness, we focus on the DCC type decomposition in equation (79) and
express the return distributions below in terms of et . As discussed in section 3.1.1,
this is often more convenient in large dimensions, but the same general ideas apply
for the basic decomposition in equation (78) and distributions expressed in terms of
Zt .

3.3.1   Multivariate Parametric Distributions

The normal distribution is convenient and tempting (but dangerous) to use. It
implies that aggregate portfolio returns are also conditionally normally distributed.
The multivariate normal density has the simple form

                         f (et ) = C (Γt ) exp − 12 e0t Γ−1
                                                             
                                                         t et ,                   (80)

where the C (Γt ) normalization factor ensures that the density integrates to one.
The multivariate normal distribution, however, typically does not provide an accu-
rate picture of tail risk. In parallel to our earlier discussion of univariate return
distributions, several multivariate distributions have been proposed to remedy this
deficiency.
    Especially prominent among these is the multivariate Student’s t-distribution first
employed in this context by Harvey et al. (1992); see also the more recent work by
Glasserman et al. (2002). The multivariate standardized symmetric t-distribution
with correlation matrix Γt has the following density
                                                              −(d+N )/2
                                                  e0 Γ−1 et
                                            
                     f (et ) = C (d, Γt )       1+ t t                     ,      (81)
                                                  (d − 2)

where C (d, Γt ) again ensures that the density integrates to one. The d > 2 scalar
parameter determines the degree of leptokurtosis in the distribution. When d goes
to infinity the power-form of the t-distribution converges to an exponential function
and the multivariate normal distribution emerges in the limit. Unlike the normal

                                                80
distribution, the multivariate t-distribution allows for nonlinear tail dependence be-
tween assets. It does so in a symmetric fashion, however. It cannot accommodate
two assets having a higher probability of a large joint down move than a joint up
move of the same magnitude.
    The asymmetric t-distribution employed by Demarta and McNeil (2005) allows
for more flexibility. Let ξ denote an N × 1 vector of “asymmetry parameters.” The
density for the standardized asymmetric t-distribution may then be expressed as
                                    r                                                                 
                                                            0
              C d, Γ̇t K d+N                    d + (et − µ̇)   Γ̇−1
                                                                  t (et   − µ̇) ξ Γ̇t ξ exp (et − µ̇)0 Γ̇−1
                                                                                 0  −1
                                                                                                         t ξ
                                 2
  f (et ) =                                                                                                      (d+N )
                                                 (d+N ) r                                                −
                                                                                                                   2
                       (et −µ̇)0 Γ̇−1
                                                                                                
                                   t (et −µ̇)      2                          0
                  1+               d                            d + (et − µ̇)     Γ̇−1
                                                                                    t (et
                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                            − µ̇) ξ 0 Γ̇t ξ
                                                                                                                     (82)
where K d+N (·) denotes the modified Bessel function of the third kind,
              2



                                                                                2d 2
                                                                                                     
                          d                             d−2
                  µ̇ = −     ξ,                   Γ̇t =              Γt −        2        ξ ξ0            ,
                         d−2                             d                (d − 2) (d − 4)
            
and C d, Γ̇t is another normalization factor. The definitions of µ̇ and Γ̇ ensure that
the vector of standardized return shocks, et , has mean zero and correlation matrix
Γt . Note that for ξ = 0 and the absence of any asymmetries, we have µ̇ = 0 and
Γ̇t = Γt . The asymmetric t-distribution therefore nests the symmetric t-distribution
as a special case.
    While the asymmetric t-distribution is more flexible than the symmetric t, it
requires that the N asymmetry parameters in ξ be estimated simultaneously with the
other parameters of the model. This becomes quite challenging in large dimensions.
Instead copula methods sometimes provide a more flexible approach by allowing the
univariate and distinctly multivariate distributional aspects to be specified in two
separate steps.




                                                            81
3.3.2    Copula Methods

Much attention in risk management has focused on the construction of multivariate
densities from the marginal densities via copulas, as in, for example, Li (2000), Jon-
deau and Rockinger (2006), Patton (2006), Rosenberg and Schuermann (2006), Creal
et al. (2011), and Hafner and Manner (2011). We will not attempt an exhaustive
review of this extensive literature here, referring instead to the in-depth treatment
in McNeil et al. (2005).
    The central result in copula theory is Sklar’s theorem. The theorem states
that for a very general class of multivariate distribution functions, say F (e), with
marginal distribtions F1 (e1 ), . . . , FN (eN ), there exists a unique copula G(·) linking
the marginals to the joint distribution

              F (e) = G( F1 (e1 ), ..., FN (eN ) ) ≡ G( u1 , ..., uN ) ≡ G(u) ,                (83)

where the N × 1 u vector is defined via the N marginals. In turn, this implies that
the multivariate density may be expressed as
                                                                       N
                           ∂ N G(F1 (e1 ), ..., FN (eN ))           Y
                   f (e) =                                = g (u) ×   fi (ei ) .               (84)
                                  ∂e1 ...∂eN
                                                                      i=1


 The resulting log likelihood function for a sample of size T therefore naturally
decomposes into two separate sums

                                  T
                                  X                    T X
                                                       X N
                      log L =           log g(ut ) +             log fi (ei,t ) .              (85)
                                  t=1                  t=1 i=1


This offers a potentially powerful framework for risk model builders by allowing the
modeling of the marginal densities, corresponding to the second double summation,
to be separated from the modeling of the copula function appearing in the first
summation.70
  70
     Note, this implicitly assumes that the copula function g(·) is constant through time. Although
fundamentally different, this parallels the assumption of a time-invariant multivariate distribution
f (·) for the standardized returns underlying the discussion in section 3.3.1.


                                                82
   Of course, in order to actually implement this approach, we need to specify the
copula function g(·). The most commonly employed copula is constructed from the
multivariate normal distribution. It may be succinctly expressed as
                                                                           
                                           1        1 −1
                g(ut ; Γ∗t )   =   |Γ∗t |− 2                0  ∗−1    −1
                                               exp − Φ (ut ) (Γt − I)Φ (ut ) ,               (86)
                                                    2

where Φ−1 (ut ) refers to the N × 1 vector of standard inverse univariate normals, and
the correlation matrix Γ∗t pertains to the N × 1 vector e∗t with typical element,

                                   e∗i,t = Φ−1 (ui,t ) = Φ−1 (Fi (ei,t )).                   (87)

The normal copula has the advantage that it is relatively easy to work with. However,
even though it is more flexible than the standard multivariate normal distribution, for
many financial risk applications it does not allow for sufficient dependence between
tail events.
    To remedy this an alternative copula model can be built from the multivari-
ate t-distribution. The resulting t-copula allows for tail dependence between the
marginal probabilities ui,t but only in a symmetric fashion. Going one step fur-
ther, an asymmetric t-copula may also be developed from the asymmetric multivari-
ate t-distribution discussed above. From a practical modeling perspective, t-copula
models have the potential to break the curse of dimensionality, which is otherwise
unavoidable in multivariate t-distributions when N is large. In particular, while
the asymmetric t distribution in (82) requires the simultaneous estimation of ξ and
d, amounting to a total of N + 1 parameters, when using the asymmetric t-copula
instead, it is possible to separately estimate each of the N marginal distributions
allowing for asset specific distributional features.71 The marginal distributions may
then be “tied” together using an asymmetric t-copula with only two parameters: a
scalar copula dG and a scalar copula asymmetry parameter ξG . This approach has
successfully been implemented by Christoffersen et al. (2011a).
  71
    Of course, the need to estimate the N ×N correlation matrix Γt further confound the estimation
problem.



                                                      83
    Many other classes of copula functions exist as well. Most of these, however,
including the popular Gumbel and Clayton classes, are not yet operational in high
dimensions. An intriguing approach to overcoming this general dimensionality prob-
lem has recently been suggested by Oh and Patton (2011), who recommend relying
on a latent factor structure for the copula. Fully efficient estimation of this new
class of models is complicated by the lack of closed-form expression for the likelihood
function but it is relatively easy to do via simulation-based procedures that match
appropriate rank statistics. Oh and Patton (2011) find that this new approach works
well in an application involving one hundred individual stocks.72 It is too early to
tell how widely applicable this copula-factor structure is.

3.3.3    Combining GARCH and RCov

Another approach for obtaining full-fledged multivariate conditional return distri-
butions is to combine the realized covariance measures and GARCH style dynamic
specifications with specific distributional assumptions, along the lines of the pro-
cedures discussed in section 3.2.3 where the innovation distributions were specified
mostly to ensure tractable (quasi-likelihood) estimation of the underlying dynamic
model parameters.
    For example, if the distributions adopted for each of the univariate return innova-
tion series in the GARCH specifications for the individual components of Dt in the
DCC-style decomposition in equation (45) are taken as exact representations of the
data generating process, this in principle defines a conditional one-step-ahead return
distribution given the estimated (and assumed to be constant) realized correlation
matrix. However, this is only tractable if simple, and restrictive, distributional as-
sumptions are imposed. Typically, this implies resorting to a multivariate normal
or student t-distribution for the return innovation vector. This severely limits the
complexity and realism in modeling the individual return innovations and volatili-
ties. Short-term multi-horizon forecasts may be similarly obtained, if one stipulates
  72
    Their actual estimation results also suggest significant tail dependencies for most of the indi-
vidual stocks in their sample, with the degree of tail dependence being stronger in crashes than
booms.


                                                84
that the correlation matrix remains constant. For longer horizons, however, the dy-
namics of the realized correlation matrix would need to be modeled separately. In
that situation the system quickly becomes analytically untractable, and simulation
techniques are required for obtaining the multi-horizon density forecasts.
    Another possible route involves the HEAVY model introduced in equations (74)-
(77). Assuming both multivariate innovation distributions are truly Wishart, as
discussed in section 3.2.3, the model naturally delivers a complete characterization
of the one-step-ahead joint return distribution. The multi-horizon density forecasts
must again rely on Monte Carlo procedures.
    As an alternative to these GARCH representations, there has recently been an
upsurge in work on related multivariate stochastic volatility models. These specifi-
cations generalize GARCH models in the sense that the dynamics of the volatility
process is governed by independent random shocks rather than a deterministic func-
tion of the return innovations. The models tend to be heavily parametric but they
may, under appropriate simplifying assumptions, be combined with realized covari-
ance matrix measures.73 These models typically exploit Gaussian assumptions for
the return and volatility (square-root covariance matrix) innovations as they produce
“squares” that are Wishart distributed and thus known in closed form.74
    The additive component Wishart-RCOV-A(K) model in Jin and Maheu (2010)
provides an interesting example of combining such stochastic volatility representa-
tions with realized measures, by exploiting features akin to a multivariate HAR-RV
model for the individual components of the realized covariance matrix. Although the
empirical results appear promising, the parametric assumptions remain somewhat re-
strictive and estimation must be performed via Bayesian techniques using Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedures that are tractable only for moderately sized
  73
      Among the initial contributions in this area are Philipov and Glickman (2006), who specify a
standard Wishart transition density for the inverse covariance matrix of daily returns, as well as
Gourieroux et al. (2009) who introduce the Wishart autoregressive model for daily data. Extensions
of these models that involve realized covariance measures have been developed by, e.g., Bonato et al.
(2009), Golosnoy et al. (2010), and Asai and So (2010).
   74
      The Wishart distribution provides the matrix generalization of a “squared” normal distribution,
i.e., just as the sum of squared i.i.d. normal variates are χ2 distributed, the sampling distribution
of the sample covariance matrix for draws from the multivariate normal distribution is Wishart.


                                                 85
systems.
     To summarize, the work on incorporating time-varying realized covariance mea-
sures within the multivariate GARCH and related stochastic volatility model setting
is in its infancy. Given the need for tractability, the existing procedures invoke overly
simplistic distributional assumptions, rendering the multi-horizon density forecasts
unable to fully account for critical features such as pronounced return-volatility asym-
metries, the possibility of jumps, long memory style volatility dynamics, and extreme
correlations in down markets. For the time being, such features are more readily por-
trayed through the design of appropriate simulation methods.

3.3.4   Multivariate Simulation Methods

The multivariate normal distribution implies normally distributed portfolio returns
so that the V aR, ES and most other risk measures are easily computed analytically.
When using non-normal distributions, or any kind of copula, portfolio V aR and ES
must instead be computed via Monte Carlo simulation, rendering purely simulation-
based methods relatively more attractive.
    In the general multivariate case, we can in principle use the Filtered Historical
Simulation (FHS) approach discussed in section 2.3.4, but a multivariate standard-
ization is needed. Using for example the Cholesky or the spectral decomposition we
first create vectors of standardized returns as in equation (78); i.e.,

                                  −1/2
                         Ẑt = Ω̂t       Rt ,        t = 1, 2, . . . , T ,

        −1/2
where Ω̂t    denotes the relevant decomposition of the estimated covariance matrix.75
Now, resampling with replacement vector-wise from the standardized returns will en-
sure that the marginal distributions, as well as particular features of the multivariate
distribution, as for example, the contemporaneous cross-sectional dependencies sug-
gested by Longin and Solnik (2001), will be preserved in the simulated data.
    The dimensionality of the system may render the general multivariate standard-
 75
   Patton and Sheppard (2009) recommend the spectral decomposition because unlike the
Cholesky, it is invariant to a reordering of the variables.


                                                86
ization above practically infeasible. However, the same FHS approach can be applied
with the base asset setup discussed in section 3.1.2, resampling from the factor in-
novations,
                                 −1/2
                      ẐF,t = Ω̂F,t RF,t , t = 1, 2, . . . ... , T ,

where we again rely on the spectral or Cholesky decomposition to build up the
distribution of the factor returns. Given the specification in section 3.1.2, the corre-
sponding idiosyncratic asset innovations may then be constructed from,

                      ν̂t = Rt − B̂ RF,t ,     t = 1, 2, . . . ... , T .

Thus, by resampling sequentially from Ẑt and ν̂t , we can easily build up the required
distribution of the individual asset returns. This, of course, assumes that the base
asset model provides a good description of the joint dependencies.
    Alternatively, if one is willing to assume constant conditional correlations, as
in equation (45) with Γt = Γ, then the standardization can simply be done on an
individual asset-by-asset basis using the univariate GARCH or RV-based predictive
volatilities. Resampling vector-wise from the standardized returns will naturally
preserve the cross-sectional dependencies in the historical data.

3.3.5   Multivariate Extreme Value Theory

The simulation procedures discussed above work well for numerically describing cor-
relations and related “central” features of the joint return distributions. Multivariate
Extreme Value Theory (EVT) offers a tool for exploring cross-asset dependencies in
the “tails” of distributions, which are not well-captured by standard parametric dis-
tributions or correlation measures.
    For example, Longin and Solnik (2001) define and compute extreme correlations
between monthly U.S. index returns and a number of foreign country indexes. In
the case of the bivariate normal distribution, correlations between extremes taper off
to zero as the thresholds defining the extremes get larger in absolute value. Actual
financial returns, however, behave quite differently. In particular, the correlation


                                          87
between the large (in an absolute sense) negative returns reported in Longin and
Solnik (2001) tend to be much larger than the normal distribution would suggest
(while interestingly, the correlations of large positive returns appear to approach
zero in accordance with the normal distribution).76 Such strong correlation between
negative extremes is clearly a key risk management concern.77
    To illustrate the important deviations from multivariate normality commonly
found in financial markets, consider the threshold plots in Figure 12. The solid
lines in Figure 12 show the empirical equity index threshold correlations averaged
across the 120 possible pairs of correlations based on the same 16 developed market
returns used in the estimation of the DECO model in Figure 11. For comparison, the
dashed lines indicate the threshold correlations implied by a multivariate standard
normal distribution with constant correlation, while the lines with square markers are
the threshold correlations computed via simulations from the previously estimated
DECO model.
    As the figure clearly shows, the down-market threshold correlations are much
stronger than the up-market correlations. The multivariate normal distribution with
constant correlation captures quite closely the up-market correlations but it cannot
simultaneously account for the much larger, and increasing with the threshold, down-
market correlations. The dynamic normal distribution driven by the basic Gaussian
DECO model generates larger threshold correlations overall, but the model does
not explain the strong multivariate asymmetry that actually exists in the returns.
The specification of dynamic multivariate models and distributions to satisfactorily
account for these important non-linear asymmetric extreme dependencies is challeng-
ing. It remains the focus of much ongoing work, much of which rely on the use of
copulas and/or EVT type approximations.
    A full treatment of this literature, and the extensive literature on multivariate
  76
     See also Ang and Bekaert (2002), Ang and Chen (2002) and Ang et al. (2006), among many
others, for additional empirical evidence on similar nonlinear dependencies in equity returns.
  77
     It is generally unclear where these increased dependencies in the “tails” are coming from. Poon
et al. (2004), for instance, report that “devolatilizing” the daily returns for a set of international
stock markets significantly reduces the joint tail dependence, while Bae et al. (2003) find that time-
varying volatility and GARCH effects can not fully explain the counts of coincident “extreme” daily
price moves observed across international equity markets.


                                                 88
                                                               16 Developed Markets, 1973−2009
                                             0.5




                                                                                                       Empirical
                                                                                                       Gaussian
                                             0.4                                                       DECO




                                             0.3


                     Threshold Correlation




                                             0.2




                                             0.1




                                              0
                                                   −1   −0.5                  0                  0.5               1
                                                                      Standard Deviation




Figure 12: Average Threshold Correlations for Sixteen Developed Equity Markets.
The solid line shows the average empirical threshold correlation for GARCH residuals across sixteen
developed equity markets. The dashed line shows the threshold correlations implied by a multivari-
ate standard normal distribution with constant correlation. The line with square markers shows
the threshold correlations from a DECO model estimated on the GARCH residuals from the 16
equity markets. The figure is based on weekly returns from 1973 to 2009.



EVT more generally, is well beyond the scope of the present chapter. Instead we
refer to the books by Embrechts et al. (2002) and McNeil et al. (2005), along with
the recent discussion in Embrechts (2009). Unfortunately, it is not yet clear whether
multivariate EVT distributions will be operational in large-dimensional systems. Is-
sues of scalability, as well as cross-sectional and temporal aggregation problems in
parametric approaches, all present formidable challenges. Meanwhile, just as the
newly available high-frequency data may be used in the construction of more accu-
rate realized volatility measurements, and in turn covariance matrix forecasts, we
conjecture that the intraday data may be constructively used in a similar manner for
better measuring the “tails” of the return distributions, and in turn the joint extreme
dependencies. The recent theoretical results in Bollerslev and Todorov (2011a) and
related empirical findings in Bollerslev et al. (2011b) are suggestive.




                                                                        89
3.4     Systemic Risk and Measurement
We have emphasized using the univariate portfolio-level and multivariate asset-level
risk models discussed in sections 2 and 3, respectively, to construct real-time portfolio
risk measures, such as V aR and ES, conditional on the history of returns. It is
sometimes informative also to consider risk measures that condition not only on
historical returns, but also on assumed scenarios for particular risk factors. We
might, for example, be interested in the firm-specific effects of a market-wide shock,
or the market-wide effects of a firm-specific shock.
    Such scenario-based conditional risk measures are intrinsically related to mea-
surement of systemic risk. There is no single definition of systemic risk, and we
will shortly introduce several, but the defining characteristic is that systemic risk
– one way or another – involves market-wide movements. Systemic risk measures
can help firms to develop richer and more informative risk reports internally. They
can also be used by supervisory authorities to measure and monitor the firm-specific
effects of market-wide shocks, the market-wide effects of firm-specific shocks, and
the corresponding totals across all firms. Those measurements may then impact pol-
icy decisions, such as which banks to support during crises, which bank mergers to
approve, and so on.

3.4.1   Marginal Expected Shortfall and Expected Capital Shortfall

Marginal expected shortfall (M ES) for firm j is

                              j|mkt
                        M EST +1|T = ET [rj,T +1 |C (rmkt,T +1 )] ,                 (88)

where rmkt,T +1 denotes the overall market return, and C (rmkt,T +1 ) denotes a systemic
event, such as the market return falling below some threshold C. M ES j|mkt tracks
the sensitivity of firm j’s return to a market-wide extreme event, thereby providing
a simple market-based measure of firm j’s fragility.
    Ultimately, however, we are interested in assessing the likelihood of firm distress,
and the fact that a firm’s expected return is sensitive to market-wide extreme events


                                            90
– that is, the fact that its M ES is large – does not necessarily mean that market-
wide extreme events are likely to place it in financial distress. Instead, the distress
likelihood should depend not only on M ES, but also on how much capital the firm
has on hand to buffer the effects of adverse market moves.
    These distress considerations raise the idea of expected capital shortfall (ECS),
which is closely related to, but distinct from, M ES. ECS is the expected additional
capital needed by firm j in case of a systemic market event. Clearly ECS should be
related to M ES, and Acharya et al. (2010) indeed show that in a simple model the
two are linearly related,

                                 j|mkt                  j|mkt
                            ECST +1|T = a0j + a1j M EST +1|T ,                     (89)

where a0j depends on firm j’s “prudential ratio” of asset value to equity as well as
its debt composition, and a1j depends on firm j’s prudential ratio and initial capital.
Note that the conditioning in ECS is closely related to the idea of stress tests popular
in both best-practice private-sector and regulatory risk management. Indeed the
thought experiment embodied in ECS is a stress test, with a very important and
natural stress (a large market event ) being tested.
    Building on the theory of Acharya et al. (2010), Brownlees and Engle (2011)
                                              j|mkt
propose and empirically implement ECST +1|T as a measure of firm j’s systemic
risk exposure to the market at time T , with overall systemic risk then given by
PN          j|mkt
   j=1 ECST +1|T . Implementation of M ES (and hence ECS) requires specification
of the systemic market event C (rmkt,T +1 ), or more simply a market return threshold
C. Values of C = 2% and C = 40% have, for example, been suggested for one-
day and six-month returns, respectively. In addition, and of crucial importance,
implementation of M ES also requires a multivariate volatility model. That is, the
                                                                       j|mkt
conditioning on C (rj,T +1 ) in all of the measures above, from M EST +1|T through to
PN          j|mkt
   j=1 ECST +1|T , requires at least a bivariate volatility model for firm and market
returns, and more generally a high-dimensional volatility model for all firms’ returns.
The models introduced in sections 3.1-3.3 satisfy that need.78
 78
      Brownlees and Engle (2011), for example, use the daily GARCH-DCC modeling approach


                                            91
3.4.2    CoVaR and ∆CoVaR

In the previous section we introduced M ES and ECS, which measure firm sys-
temic risk exposure by conditioning firm events on market events. Here we introduce
CoV aR, which works in the opposite direction, measuring firm systemic risk contri-
bution by conditioning market events on firm events.
    In equation (1) we defined firm j’s 1-step-ahead V aR at level p as the value of
V aRTp,j+1|T that solves
                                                            
                              p = PrT rj,T +1 < −V aRTp,j+1|T .

Similarly, following Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011), one may define firm j’s 1-
step-ahead “CoV aR” at level p conditional on a particular outcome for firm i, say
                                    j|i
C (ri,T +1 ), as the value of CoV aRT +1|T that solves
                                                                  
                                              j|i
                     p = PrT rj,T +1 < −CoV aRT +1|T | C (ri,T +1 ) .                         (90)

Because C (ri,T +1 ) is not in the time-T information set, CoV aR will be different from
the regular time-T conditional V aR. The leading choice of conditioning outcome,
C (ri,T +1 ), is that firm i exceeds its V aR, or more precisely that ri,T +1 < −V aRTp,i+1|T .
As such, CoV aR is well-suited to measure tail-event linkages between financial in-
stitutions.
                                             j|i
    A closely-related measure, ∆CoV aRT +1|T (read “Delta CoV aR”), is of particular
interest. It measures the difference between firm-j V aR when firm-i is “heavily”
stressed and firm-j V aR when firm i experiences “normal” times. More precisely,

                               j|i                j|V aR(i)            j|M ed(i)
                    ∆CoV aRT +1|T = CoV aRT +1|T              − CoV aRT +1|T ,                (91)

                j|V aR(i)
where CoV aRT +1|T denotes firm-j V aR when firm i’s return breaches its V aR, and
       j|M ed(i)
CoV aRT +1|T denotes firm-j V aR when firm i’s return equals its median.

described in section 3.1.1. Interestingly, they find that aggregate M ES increased sharply starting
in mid-2007, and that even by mid-2010 it was still much higher than in the pre-crisis period.


                                                92
    A direct extension lets us progress to the more interesting case of firm i’s overall
systemic risk contribution, as opposed to just firm i’s contribution to firm j. We
                                             mkt|i
simply set j = mkt, so that ∆CoV aRT +1|T then measures the difference between
market V aR conditional on firm i experiencing an extreme return, and market V aR
                                                                         mkt|i
conditional on firm i experiencing a normal return.79 Hence ∆CoV aRT +1|T measures
                                                        PN           mkt|i
the contribution of firm i to overall systemic risk, i=1 ∆CoV aRT +1|T .80
                                                                                      j|i
    The conditioning on C (ri,T +1 ) in all of the CoV aR measures above, from CoV aRT +1|T
            PN              mkt|i
through to i=1 ∆CoV aRT +1|T , requires at least a bivariate volatility model for the
returns on firms i and j, or i and mkt, and more generally a high-dimensional volatil-
ity model for all firms’ returns. The models introduced in sections 3.1-3.3 are again
relevant.81

3.4.3    Network Perspectives

Interestingly, modern network theory provides a powerful unifying framework for sys-
temic risk measures, including measures like ECS and CoV aR introduced above.82
The simplest network is composed of N nodes, where any given pair of nodes may or
may not be linked. We represent the network algebraically by an N × N symmetric
adjacency matrix A of zeros and ones, A = [aij ], where aij = 1 if nodes i and j
are linked, and aij = 0 otherwise. Because all network properties are embedded in
A, any sensible connectedness measure must be based on A. The most important
and popular, by far, are based on the idea of a node’s degree, given by the number
                                 P
of its links to other nodes δi =    j aij , as well as aspects of the degree distribu-
tion across nodes. The total degree Σi δi (or mean degree N1 Σi δi ) is the key network
connectedness measure.
  79
     Alternatively we might set j = sys, where sys denotes the financial system, as measured by
the return on a portfolio of major financial institutions.
  80
     The concept of CoV aR also has interesting parallels to the conditioning of V aR in Garcia et al.
(2007), who show that proper conditioning in V aR can eliminate the subadditivity problems raised
by Artzner et al. (1999).
  81
     Multivariate quantile models, such as those recently developed by White et al. (2010), could
also be used in this context.
  82
     Here we provide a brief overview of key ideas. Extended discussion, references, and systemic risk
measures based directly on network topology are contained in Diebold and Yilmaz (2009, 2011a,b).


                                                 93
     The network structure sketched above is, however, rather too simple to describe
the network connections of relevance in financial risk management. Generalization
in two key directions is necessary. First, links may be of varying strength, not just
0-1. Second, links may be of different strength in different directions (e.g., firm i
may impact firm j more than firm j impacts firm i). Note, for example, that the
systemic risk measures introduced above are weighted and directional. For example,
           j|i                                            i|j
CoV aRT +1|T tracks effects from i to j, whereas CoV aRT +1|T tracks effects from j to
                            j|i               i|j
i, and in general CoV aRT +1|T 6= CoV aRT +1|T .
     It is a simple matter, however, to characterize directed, weighted networks in a
parallel fashion. To allow for directionality, we allow the adjacency matrix A to be
non-symmetric, and to allow for different relationship strengths we allow A to contain
weights aij ∈ [0, 1] rather than simply 0-1 entries. Node degrees are now obtained
by summing weights in [0, 1] rather than simply zeros and ones. In addition, and
importantly, there are now “to-degrees” and “from-degrees,” corresponding to row
sums and column sums, which generally differ since A is generally non-symmetric.
The from-degree of node i is δif rom = j aij , and the to-degree of node j is δjto =
                                             P
                                       f rom
                                             = Σj δjto .
P
   i aij . The total degree is δ = Σi δi
     Crucially, the from- and to-degrees (and of course the total degree) measure
aspects of systemic risk. The from- and to-degrees measure systemic risk with respect
to particular firms. From-degrees measure exposures of individual firms to systemic
                                                              j|mkt
shocks from the network, in a fashion analogous to ECST +1|T . To-degrees measure
contributions of individual firms to systemic network events, in a fashion analogous to
               mkt|i
∆CoV aRT +1|T . The total degree aggregates firm-specific systemic risk across firms,
providing a measure of total system-wide systemic risk.
     A key insight is that many approaches to systemic risk measurement fit naturally
into the network framework. Consider, for example, ∆CoV aR measure. One can
                      j|i
view the ∆CoV aRT +1|T , i, j = 1, ..., N (suitably scaled) as elements of an N × N
adjacency matrix for a weighted directed network of firms. Then, for example, the
                                       sys|i
systemic risk of firm i, ∆CoV aRT +1|T , is the network to-degree of firm i, δito =
                 j|i                                           P           sys|i
Σj ∆CoV aRT +1|T . And finally, the total systemic risk,         i ∆CoV aRT +1|T , is the
network total degree δ.

                                           94
4      Conditioning on Macroeconomic Fundamentals
The risk models that we have discussed thus far are inherently “reduced form,”
in nature. They explain risk in an autoregressive fashion, as exemplified by the
canonical GARCH family. Fortunately, even if the models fail to provide a deep
structural understanding of volatility movements, they are nevertheless powerful and
useful in a variety of contexts. We have obviously emphasized risk measurement and
management, but other successful areas of application include portfolio allocation,
spot and derivative asset pricing, active trading, and dynamic hedging.
    Ultimately, however, we aspire to a deeper structural understanding. That is, we
aspire to understand the connections between returns (especially, for our purposes,
return volatilities) and macroeconomic fundamentals, say r ↔ f . Asset prices are
risk-adjusted discounted claims on fundamental streams, so prices and their proper-
ties should ultimately depend on expected fundamentals and associated fundamental
risks. Here we sketch emerging empirical aspects of those connections, through the
lens of return and fundamental first and second moments, denoted µr , σr , µf , and σf ,
respectively.83 Figure 13 provides a simple schematic diagram for all of the possible
connections among σr , µr , σf , and µf . Each of the six connections represents a po-
tentially important link, and a correspondingly important line of research inquiry.84
    Historically, however, it is well-known that σr , µr , σf , and µf have often ap-
peared only weakly connected, or even disconnected. This observation is memorably
enshrined in equity markets in the “excess volatility” puzzle of Shiller (1981), in
foreign exchange markets in the “exchange rate disconnect” puzzle of Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2000), in bond markets in Alan Greenspan’s long-maturity yield “conun-
drum,” and so on.85
  83
     In parallel to the models for returns emphasized so far in this chapter, we will content ourselves
with means and variances, but one could, of course, also consider higher-order moments.
  84
     Note that the links in Figure 13 are “undirected,” or “non-causal,” and as such more about
correlation than causation. One could go even farther and consider directed, or causal, links, but
that would require replacing each bi-directional arrow in Figure 13 with a pair of uni-directional
arrows, thus doubling the number of links to be addressed.
  85
     On the conundrum: “ ... the broadly unanticipated behavior of world bond markets remains
a conundrum. Bond price movements may be a short-term aberration, but it will be some time
before we are able to better judge the forces underlying recent experience” [Alan Greenspan, U.S.


                                                  95
                                    µr                 - σr
                                      6                    6




                                           



                                                    -
                                                    -
                                          
                                      ?                    ?
                                    µf                 - σf



Figure 13: Return and Fundamental Mean and Volatility Linkages. Each link represents
a distinct line of inquiry.


    In contrast, we shall present and interpret a variety of accumulating evidence
showing how returns – return volatilities in particular – are connected to fundamen-
tals. Of course many of the links in Figure 13 remain incompletely understood, but
they are receiving increased attention, and volatility features prominently through-
out this emerging research. Given the theme of the chapter, we will focus largely on
three links directly involving σr and/or σf , namely µf ↔ σr , µf ↔ σf , and σf ↔ σr .
We now address them in turn.


4.1      The Macroeconomy and Return Volatility
To begin, consider the link between macroeconomic fundamentals and return volatil-
ity, µf ↔ σr . Officer (1973) was among the first to document and emphasize the
very high stock market volatility during the very severe recession of the 1930s. The
U.S. stock market crash of 1987 spurred additional research into the fundamental
determinants of volatility. In a well-known and exhaustive study in the wake of the
1987 crash, for example, Schwert (1989) went farther, showing that, surprisingly, the
oft-suspected fundamentals (leverage, corporate profitability, etc.) have negligible
impact on market volatility, while recessions do. In particular, return volatility is
significantly higher in recessions, so that high volatility during bad times is not just
congressional testimony, February 16, 2005]; see also Backus and Wright (2007).



                                               96
                                      Mean Recession         Standard        Sample
                                     Volatility Increase       Error         Period
           Aggregate Returns                43.5%               3.8%       63Q1-09Q3
           Firm-Level Returns               28.6%               6.7%       69Q1-09Q2


Table 1: Stock Return Volatility During Recessions. Aggregate stock-return volatility is
quarterly realized standard deviation based on daily return data. Firm-level stock-return volatility
is the cross-sectional inter-quartile range of quarterly returns. Source: Adapted from Bloom et al.
(2009).


a one-off Great Depression phenomenon, but rather a regularly-recurring business
cycle phenomenon.
    These findings regarding the link between financial market volatility and the busi-
ness cycle have since been echoed repeatedly. Hamilton and Lin (1996), for example,
provide strong and sophisticated confirmation using regime-switching models of real
growth and equity returns, allowing for both high and low real growth states and
high and low equity return volatility states. Their estimated regime transition prob-
abilities indicate high positive steady-state coherence between low (high) real growth
and high (low) equity return volatility.
    More recent work, in particular Bloom et al. (2009) as summarized in Table 1,
also confirms and significantly amplifies Schwert’s earlier result, showing, among
other things, that it holds not only for stock returns at the aggregate level, but
also for the cross section of returns at the firm level. Table 1 makes clear not only
the statistical significance of the “recession effect” on volatility, but also its sizable
economic importance.
    Although we have emphasized the links between macroeconomic fundamentals
and equity market risk, one would expect related links in other market risk contexts.
To take one example, consider foreign exchange. The expected real streams that
underlie exchange rate determination are similar to those that underlie broad equity-
market price determination, except that for exchange rates there are two streams,
for two countries.
    A second example is credit risk. In defaultable bond markets, for example, the

                                                97
                                      Mean Recession         Standard        Sample
                                     Volatility Increase       Error         Period
           Aggregate Growth                 37.5%               7.3%       62Q1-09Q2
           Firm-Level Growth                23.1%               3.5%       67Q1-08Q3


Table 2: Real Growth Volatility During Recessions. Aggregate real-growth volatility is
quarterly conditional standard deviation. Firm-level real-growth volatility is the cross-sectional
inter-quartile range of quarterly real sales growth. Source: Adapted from Bloom et al. (2009).


celebrated Merton (1974) model directly links credit spreads to equity volatility, pre-
dicting that higher equity volatility should widen spreads, as emphasized empirically
by Campbell and Tacksler (2003). Hence the business cycle effects in equity volatility
imply parallel business cycle effects in credit spreads, via the Merton model.


4.2     The Macroeconomy and Fundamental Volatility
The next link that we consider pertains to µf ↔ σf ; that is, real activity and its
relationship to real (fundamental) volatility. It transpires that real fundamentals
affect real volatility not only at business-cycle frequencies, but also at lower growth
frequencies. Hence we treat both.
    First consider fundamental volatility σf at business-cycle frequencies. Bloom
et al. (2009) show that σf is much higher in recessions (just as with σr ), at both
the aggregate level and at the cross-sectional firm level. We summarize their results
in Table 2. Just as with the recession effect in stock return volatility, the recession
effect in real growth volatility is notable not only for its statistical significance, but
also for its sizable economic importance.86
    Observed links at business-cycle frequencies between real growth µf and real
volatility σf are also well-grounded in theory. Recent research, for example, explores
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models with heteroskedastic shocks (technol-
ogy, preferences, policy, ...), as in Bloom (2009), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011)
  86
    Note that if stock return volatility and real growth volatility both increase during recessions,
then they themselves must, of course, be positively related. We will return to this point below.


                                                98
and Basu and Bundick (2011).87
    Now consider fundamental volatility σf at growth frequencies. Many have com-
mented on the large reduction (roughly fifty percent) in U.S. real GDP volatility
beginning around 1985. Dubbed the “Great Moderation” by Stock and Watson
(2002), it was originally documented by Kim and Nelson (1999) and McConnell and
Perez-Quiros (2000).
    Perhaps the “Great Moderation” was just a long string of good luck, or perhaps
it was a structural shift due to improved policy. In any event it seems likely that it
is over, as the recession of 2007-2009 was very long and very deep. That is, even if
a structural shift toward lower real volatility occurred in the mid-1980s, so too did
a shift back around 2008. Hence it may be useful to think of the Great Moderation
not as a one-off structural shift, but rather as a manifestation of a low-frequency
real volatility dynamic driven by macroeconomic factors potentially very different
from those that drive the earlier-discussed real volatility dynamics at business-cycle
frequencies.
    In intriguing recent work, Carvalho and Gabaix (2010) do precisely that, arguing
that the Great Moderation was neither good policy nor good luck, but rather the
natural outcome of the evolution of sectoral shares, which during the post-1984
period produced a better-diversified (and hence less volatile) GDP. In related work
from an explicit network perspective, Acemoglu et al. (2010) make clear that the
dynamic workings of “better diversification” are subtle and nuanced, depending not
only on first-order connections among sectors, but also crucially on higher-ordered
connections.


4.3       Fundamental Volatility and Return Volatility
Now consider the links between fundamental volatility and return volatility, σf ↔ σr .
Even with no additional work, our earlier discussion of µf ↔ σr and µf ↔ σf
immediately implies that σr and σf must be positively related. This is so because
σr and σf both covary negatively with the business cycle (µf ), and hence they must
 87
      See also the insightful survey of Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2011).


                                                 99
covary positively with each other. Hence the case is closed as soon as it is opened;
return volatility and real fundamental volatility are clearly related.
    But one might want to go farther. First, one might want to complement our
deduction of a σf ↔ σr link with a direct exploration. Engle et al. (2006) do just
that, directly documenting the links between σf and σr after effectively removing
high-frequency variation in returns and fundamentals using a persistent/transitory
component model.
    Second, one might want to explore cross-section and panel aspects. That can
be useful because the precision with which relationships can be inferred depends on
the amount of variation in the data, and there may be more variation over a broad
cross section of countries than for a single country over time. Diebold and Yilmaz
(2010) do this, showing that countries with higher fundamental volatility tend to have
higher broad stock market volatility, even controlling for initial development level. In
the most thorough study to date, Engle and Rangel (2008) explore time-series, cross-
sections and panels, clearly finding that the “long-term volatilities of macroeconomic
fundamentals ... are primary causes of low-frequency market volatility.”
    In closing this section we note that we have largely interpreted “market risk and
macro fundamentals” as “market volatility and macro fundamentals.” As we have
emphasized earlier in our discussion of portfolio-level risk measurement, however,
one may naturally approach market volatility from a top-down (portfolio-level) or
bottom-up (asset-level) perspective. In a bottom-up approach, not only conditional
variances but also conditional correlations among individual returns are of central
importance as they obviously impact portfolio (i.e., market) volatility. Hence the
fundamental determinants of conditional correlations have also recently begun to
receive attention, as in Engle and Rangel (2011).


4.4    Other Links
The links between volatility and fundamentals that we have discussed thus far do not
involve µr . There are two main reasons. First, the horizons emphasized throughout
most of the chapter tend to be fairly short – typically less than a month – and at such


                                          100
short horizons µr is small and arguably almost constant.88 Second, at longer horizons
for which µr is larger and likely time-varying in interesting ways, we can interpret
µr as an excess return (“the equity premium”), which, of course, is the subject of an
enormous and distinguished literature that is treated extensively elsewhere in this
volume. Hence we provide here only brief glimpses of aspects of the links µr ↔ σr ,
µr ↔ µf and µr ↔ σf as they relate most directly to our present concerns.
    First, consider the equity premium and return-volatility relationship, µr ↔ σr .
Stimulated by the pioneering work of Markowitz (1959), an enormous amount of asset
pricing research has focused on quantifying various aspects of this financial market
“risk-return tradeoff.” Financial econometric research has followed suit, as exempli-
fied by the GARCH-M model of Engle et al. (1987), defined by equations (7) and (8)
above with µt = x0t β + δσt . In this model the conditional standard deviation enters
directly as an explanatory variable for the conditional mean – together with other
possible explanatory variables xt – thus providing an econometric approximation to
a time-varying risk premium.89
    Although intuitively appealing, a number of subtleties have emerged in both the-
ory and empirics. Modern general equilibrium theory reveals that, in principle, pos-
itive contemporaneous risk-return correlation is not guaranteed, as subtle dynamic
interactions may be operative; see, e.g., Abel (1988), Backus and Gregory (1993),
Whitelaw (2000), and Bollerslev et al. (2011a) among others. In parallel, a wealth
of recent empirical work reveals that, in practice, the contemporaneous risk-return
correlation is often found to be negative; see, e.g., Bollerslev et al. (2006), Lettau and
Ludvigson (2010) and Brandt and Wang (2010). Hence, rather ironically, we now
realize that we know less than we thought about the most-researched connection,
µ r ↔ σr .
    Second, consider the relationship between the equity premium and the business
cycle, µr ↔ µf . Fama and French (1989) and Fama (1990) emphasize expected busi-
ness conditions as a likely key driver of expected excess returns, with expected excess
  88
      Indeed that is why we typically fix µr at zero in previous sections.
  89
      The conditional standard deviation is sometimes replaced by the conditional variance, µt =
x0t β + δσt2 , or other monotone transformations of σt , in the estimation of the GARCH-M model.



                                              101
returns negative near business cycle peaks and positive near troughs. However, they,
and the huge ensuing literature, use mostly proxies for expected business conditions,
typically the dividend yield, the term premium, and the default premium; see, e.g.,
Campbell and Thompson (2008) and the literature cited therein.90
    Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) began a movement toward explicit incorporation of
expected business condition variables with their celebrated generalized consumption-
wealth ratio cay, or more precisely, the cointegrating residual between log consump-
tion and log wealth. Campbell and Diebold (2009), and subsequently Goetzman
et al. (2009), extended the movement with direct inclusion of expected real growth,
or more precisely, Livingston survey expectations of real growth.91 The results sug-
gest that expected growth is indeed a central determinant of expected excess returns,
with the Livingston expectations generally the most stable and significant predictor
across numerous competing specifications, including ones involving the “standard”
financial predictor variables.
    Having discussed a number of links involving fundamental volatility, we are now
in a position to consider the final link, which also involves fundamental volatility,
namely µr ↔ σf . Modern asset-pricing theory emphasizes not only fundamental
expectations, but also fundamental volatilities in the determination of the equity
premium. An obvious example is the “long-run risk” model by Bansal and Yaron
(2004), and its extension explicitly incorporating time-varying economic uncertainty
in Bollerslev et al. (2009b). In this new class of models, which features Epstein
and Zin (1989) preferences, variation in both consumption’s conditional mean and
conditional variance contribute importantly to variation in the equity premium. Sup-
porting empirical evidence is provided in Bansal et al. (2005) and Bollerslev et al.
(2011a), among others.
 90
      Note that, ironically, the standard proxies are financial rather than real.
 91
      For details on the Livingston survey, see Croushore (1997).




                                                  102
4.5    Factors as Fundamentals
In our discussion of the the links between market risk and macro fundamentals we
have sometimes been casual in distinguishing returns from excess returns, realized
from expected returns, realized from expected volatility, and related, in our treatment
of timing. This is to some extent unavoidable, reflecting different conventions both
within and among different and evolving literatures, as well as our desire to convey
wide-ranging ideas in this broad survey. Nevertheless, a clearly-emergent theme
is that financial markets, as summarized by µr and σr , are very much linked to the
business cycle, as summarized by µf and σf . Indeed it is not an exaggeration to claim
that business cycle risk may be the key driver of expected excess equity returns and
return volatilities. Here we expand on that insight.
    Although the business cycle may be a key risk factor, a long tradition, dating at
least to Burns and Mitchell (1946) and actively extending to the present, recognizes
that no single observed variable is “the business cycle” or “real activity.” Instead, we
observe literally dozens of indicators (employment, industrial production, GDP, per-
sonal income, etc.), all of which contain information about the business cycle, which
is not directly observable. Hence the key business cycle real activity fundamental
underlying risk may be appropriately and productively viewed as a common factor
to be extracted from many individual real activity indicators.
    Expanding on this “factors as fundamentals” perspective, another likely-relevant
additional factor candidate is price/wage pressure, which may of course interact with
real activity, as emphasized in Aruoba and Diebold (2010). In any event, the point is
simply that, although we see hundreds of macroeconomic fundamentals, a drastically
smaller set of underlying macroeconomic factors is likely relevant for tracking market
risk. This is useful not only for best-practice firm-level risk management, but also
for regulators. In particular, the factors-as-fundamentals perspective has important
implications for the design of stress tests that simulate financial market responses to
fundamental shocks, suggesting that only a few key fundamentals (factors) need be
stressed.
    Not surprisingly, then, we advocate that risk managers pay closer attention to


                                          103
macroeconomic factors, as they are the ultimate drivers of market risk. We hasten to
add, however, that due to the frequent “disconnect” problems mentioned earlier, we
would never advocate conditioning risk assessments only on macroeconomic factors.
Rather, macroeconomic factors complement, rather than substitute, for the meth-
ods discussed in earlier sections, by broadening the conditioning information set to
include fundamentals in addition to past returns.
    One might reasonably question the usefulness of conditioning on macroeconomic
data for daily risk assessment, because macroeconomic data are typically available
only quarterly (e.g., GDP and its components), or sometimes monthly (e.g., indus-
trial production and the CPI). Recent developments that exploit state space methods
and optimal filtering, however, facilitate high-frequency (e.g., daily) monitoring of la-
tent macroeconomic fundamental factors. In particular, based on the high-frequency
real activity monitoring approach of Aruoba et al. (2009), the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia produces the “ADS index” of real activity, updated and written to
the web in real time as new indicator data, released at different frequencies, are
released or revised.92
    We have emphasized macroeconomic fundamentals for equity market risk, but the
bond market is also closely linked to macroeconomic fundamentals. In particular,
government bond yield curves are driven by just a few factors (level, slope, curvature),
with the level factor closely linked to price/wage activity and the slope factor closely
linked to real activity.93 The same is true for yield curves of defaultable bonds, except
that there is the additional complication of default risk, but that too is linked to the
business cycle. Hence despite data on dozens of government bond yields, and dozens
of macroeconomic indicators, the interesting reality is their much lower-dimensional
“state vectors” – the level and slope factors beneath the yield curve, and the real
and price/wage activity factors beneath the macroeconomy. One can easily imagine
the usefulness for daily market and credit risk management (say) of systems linking
yield curve factors (level, slope, curvature, ...), equity factors (market, HML, SMB,
  92
     The index and a variety of related materials are available at http://www.philadelphiafed.
org/research-and-data/real-time-center/business-conditions-index.
  93
     For background and references, see Diebold and Rudebusch (2012).



                                             104
momentum, liquidity, ...), and macroeconomic factors (real, price/wage, ...). All of
those factors are now readily available at daily frequency.


5      Concluding Remarks
We have attempted to demonstrate the power and potential of dynamic financial
econometric methods for practical financial risk measurement and management. We
have surveyed the large literature on high-frequency volatility modeling, interpreting
and unifying the most important and intriguing results of practical relevance.94 Our
discussion has many implications for practical financial risk management; some point
toward desirable extensions of existing approaches, and some suggest new directions.
Key points include:

    1. Standard “model-free” methods, such as historical simulation, rely on false
       assumptions of independent returns. Reliable risk measurement requires a
       conditional density model that allows for time-varying volatility.

    2. Successful risk measurement may be achieved through the use of univariate
       density models directly for portfolio returns. GARCH volatility models offer a
       convenient and parsimonious framework for modeling key dynamic features of
       such portfolio returns, including volatility mean-reversion, long-memory, and
       asymmetries.

    3. Successful risk management, in contrast, requires a fully-specified multivariate
       density model. In that regard, standard multivariate models are too heavily
       parameterized to be useful in realistic medium- and large-scale financial market
       contexts. In medium-scale financial contexts, recently-developed multivariate
       GARCH models are likely to be useful. In very large-scale financial contexts,
  94
    We hasten to add that this chapter is a complement, not a substitute, for the more general and
technical survey of volatility and covariance forecasting of Andersen et al. (2006a). In addition,
space constraints and other considerations have invariably limited our choice of included topics.
For instance, we have largely neglected stochastic volatility and other parameter-driven approaches
to volatility modeling, as well as option-implied volatility.


                                               105
   more structure must be imposed, such as decoupling variance and correlation
   dynamics. In all cases, resampling methods applied to standardized returns is
   an attractive strategy for accommodating conditionally non-normal returns.

4. Volatility measures based on high-frequency return data hold great promise for
   practical risk management, as realized volatility and correlation measures pro-
   duce more accurate risk assessments and forecasts than their conventional com-
   petitors. Because high-frequency information is only available for highly liquid
   assets, a base-asset factor approach may sometimes be useful. In addition, the
   near log-normality of realized volatility, together with the near-normality of
   returns standardized by realized volatility, holds promise for relatively simple-
   to-implement log-normal/normal mixture models in financial risk management.

5. The business cycle emerges as a key macroeconomic fundamental driving risk in
   a variety of markets, including equities and bond yields. Among other things,
   this means that our emphasis on conditioning applies not only at the short
   horizons (typically daily) stressed in sections 2 and 3, but also at much longer
   horizons, once the information set is appropriately broadened to include macro
   fundamentals as opposed to just past returns.




                                      106
References
Abel, A. (1988), “Stock Prices Under Time-Varying Dividend Risk,” Journal of Monetary
   Economics, 35, 375–393.

Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2010), “Cascades in Networks and
   Aggregate Volatility,” Manuscript, MIT.

Acharya, V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2010), “Measuring Systemic
   Risk,” Manuscript, NYU.

Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier (2011), “CoVaR,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of
   New York.

Aielli, G.P. (2006), “Consistent Estimation of Large Scale Dynamic Conditional Correla-
   tions,” Manuscript, University of Florence.

Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., P.A. Mykland, and L. Zhang (2011), “Ultra High Frequency Volatility
   Estimation with Dependent Microstructure Noise,” Journal of Econometrics, 160,
   190–203.

Albanese, C., K. Jackson, and P. Wiberg (2004), “A New Fourier Transform Algorithm for
   Value-at-Risk,” Quantitative Finance, 4, 328–338.

Alexander, C. (2001), Market Models: A Guide to Financial Data Analysis, John Wiley
   and Sons.

Alizadeh, S., M.W. Brandt, and F.X. Diebold (2002), “Range-Based Estimation of Stochas-
   tic Volatility Models,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1047–1091.

Andersen, T. G. and T. Bollerslev (1997), “Heterogeneous Information Arrivals and Return
   Volatility Dynamics: Uncovering the Long-Run in High-Frequency Returns,” Journal
   of Finance, 52, 975–1005.

Andersen, T. G. and T. Bollerslev (1998a), “Answering the Skeptics: Yes, Standard Volatil-
   ity Models do Provide Accurate Forecasts,” International Economic Review , 39, 885–
   905.



                                           107
Andersen, T. G. and T. Bollerslev (1998b), “DM-Dollar Volatility: Intraday Activity Pat-
   terns, Macroeconomic Announcements, and Longer-Run Dependencies,” Journal of
   Finance, 53, 219–265.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, P.F. Christoffersen, and F.X. Diebold (2006a), “Volatility
   and Correlation Forecasting,” In G. Elliot, C.W.J. Granger and A. Timmermann (eds.),
   Handbook of Economic Forecasting, North-Holland, 777-878.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2003a), “Modeling and
   Forecasting Realized Volatility,” Econometrica, 71, 579–625.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and F.X Diebold (2007a), “Roughing It Up: Including
   Jump Components in the Measurement, Modeling and Forecasting of Return Volatil-
   ity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 701–720.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and F.X. Diebold (2010a), “Parametric and Nonparamet-
   ric Volatility Measurement,” In L.P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of
   Financial Econometrics, North-Holland, 67-138.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2000a), “Exchange Rate
   Returns Standardized by Realized Volatility are (Nearly) Gaussian,” Multinational Fi-
   nance Journal , 4, 159–179.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003b), “Micro Effects of
   Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American
   Economic Review , 93, 38–62.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2007b), “Real-Time Price Dis-
   covery in Global Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,” Journal of International
   Economics, 73, 251–277.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and G. Wu (2006b), “Realized Beta: Persis-
   tence and Predictability,” In T.B. Fomby and D. Terrell (eds.), Advances in Economet-
   rics: Econometric Analysis of Economic and Financial Time Series, Elsevier, 1-40.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and D. Dobrev (2007c), “No-Arbitrage Semi-Martingale
   Restrictions for Continuous-Time Volatility Models subject to Leverage Effects, Jumps


                                           108
   and i.i.d. Noise: Theory and Testable Distributional Assumptions,” Journal of Econo-
   metrics, 138, 125–180.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, P.H. Frederiksen, and M. Nielsen (2010b), “Continuous-
   Time Models, Realized Volatilities, and Testable Distributional Implications for Daily
   Stock Returns,” Journal of Applied Econometrcs, 25, 233–261.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and S. Lange (1999), “Forecasting Financial Market Volatil-
   ity: Sample Frequency vis-à-vis Forecast Horizon,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 6,
   457–477.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and N. Meddahi (2004), “Analytical Evaluation of Volatility
   Forecasts,” International Economic Review , 45, 1079–1110.

Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and N. Meddahi (2011a), “Market Microstructure Noise
   and Realized Volatility Forecasting,” Journal of Econometrics, 160, 220–234.

Andersen, T. G., D. Dobrev, and E. Schaumburg (2010c), “Jump-Robust Volatility Esti-
   mation Using Nearest Neighbor Truncation,” Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Andersen, T. G., D. Dobrev, and E. Schaumburg (2011b), “A Functional Filtering and
   Neighborhood Truncation Approach to Integrated Quarticity Estimation,” Manuscript,
   Northwestern University.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Heiko Ebens (2001a), “The
   Distribution of Realized Stock Return Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 61,
   43–76.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys (2000b), “Great
   realizations,” Risk , 13, 105–108.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys (2001b), “The
   Distribution of Realized Exchange Rate Volatility,” Journal of the American Statistical
   Association, 96, 42–55.

Ang, A. and G. Bekaert (2002), “International Asset Allocation with Regime Shifts,” Re-
   view of Financial Studies, 15, 1137–1187.



                                           109
Ang, A. and J. Chen (2002), “Asymmetric Correlations of Equity Portfolios,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 63, 443–494.

Ang, A., J. Chen, and Y. Xing (2006), “Downside Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 19,
   1191–1239.

Artzner, P., F. Delbaen, J.-M. Eber, and D. Heath (1999), “Coherent Measures of Risk,”
   Mathematical Finance, 9, 203–228.

Aruoba, S.B. and F.X. Diebold (2010), “Real-Time Macroeconomic Monitoring: Real Ac-
   tivity, Inflation, and Interactions,” American Economic Review , 100, 20–24.

Aruoba, S.B., F.X. Diebold, and C. Scotti (2009), “Real Time Measurement of Business
   Conditions,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 27, 417–427.

Asai, M. and M.K.P. So (2010), “Stochastic Covariance Models,” Manuscript, Hong Kong
   University of Science and Technology.

Backus, D. and A. Gregory (1993), “The Relations Between Risk Premia and Conditional
   Variances,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 11, 177–185.

Backus, D. and J. Wright (2007), “Cracking the Conundrum,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
   nomic Activity, 38, 293–329.

Bae, K.H., G.A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz (2003), “A New Approach to Measuring Financial
   Contagion,” Review of Financial Studies, 16, 717–763.

Baillie, R.T. and T. Bollerslev (1992), “Prediction in Dynamic Models with Time-
   Dependent Conditional Variances,” Journal of Econometrics, 52, 91–113.

Baillie, R.T., T. Bollerslev, and H.O. Mikkelsen (1996), “Fractional Integrated Generalized
   Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity,” Journal of Econometrics, 74, 3–30.

Bakshi, G. and G. Panayotov (2010), “First-Passage Probability, Jump Models, and Intra-
   Horizon Risk,” Journal of Financial Economics, 95, 20–40.

Bannouh, K., Martens M., R. Oomen, and D. van Dijk (2010), “Realized Mixed-Frequency
   Factor Models for Vast Dimensional Covariance Estimation,” Manuscript, Erasmus
   University Rotterdam.

                                           110
Bansal, R., V. Khatacharian, and A. Yaron (2005), “Interpretable Asset Markets?” Euro-
   pean Economic Review , 49, 531–560.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004), “Risks For the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
   Pricing Puzzles ,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481–1509.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E., P.R. Hansen, A. Lunde, and N. Shephard (2008), “Designing
   Realised Kernels to Measure the Ex-Post Variation of Equity Prices in the Presence of
   Noise,” Econometrica, 76, 1481–1536.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E., P.R. Hansen, A. Lunde, and N. Shephard (2011), “Multivariate
   Realised Kernels: Consistent Positive Semi-Definite Estimators of the Covariation of
   Equity Prices With Noise and Non-Synchronous Trading,” Journal of Econometrics,
   162, 149–169.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E. and N. Shephard (2001), “Non-Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck-
   Based Models and Some of Their Uses in Financial Economics,” Journal of the Royal
   Statistical Society B , 63, 167–241.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E. and N. Shephard (2002), “Econometric Analysis of Realized
   Volatility and its use in Estimating Stochastic Volatility Models,” Journal of the Royal
   Statistical Society B , 64, 253–280.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E. and N. Shephard (2004a), “Econometric Analysis of Realized Co-
   variation: High Frequency Based Covariance, Regression and Correlation in Financial
   Economics,” Econometrica, 72, 885–925.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E. and N. Shephard (2004b), “Power and Bipower Variation with
   Stochastic Volatility and Jumps,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 2, 1–48.

Barone-Adesi, G., F. Bourgoin, and K. Giannopoulos (1998), “Don’t Look Back,” Risk ,
   11, 100–104.

Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2011), “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand,”
   Manuscript, Boston College.

Bauer, G.H. and K. Vorkink (2011), “Forecasting Multivariate Realized Stock Market
   Volatility,” Journal of Econometrics, 160, 93–101.

                                           111
Bauwens, L., S. Laurent, and J.V.K. Rombouts (2006), “Multivariate GARCH Models: A
   Survey,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21, 79–109.

Berkowitz, J. and J. O’Brien (2002), “How Accurate are Value-at-Risk Models at Com-
   mercial Banks?” Journal of Finance, 57, 1093–1111.

Bloom, N. (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623–685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, and N. Jaimovich (2009), “Really Uncertain Business Cycles,”
   Manuscript, Stanford University.

Bollerslev, T. (1986), “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity,” Jour-
   nal of Econometrics, 31, 307–327.

Bollerslev, T. (1987), “A Conditionally Heteroskedastic Time Series Model for Speculative
   Prices and Rates of Return,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, 542–547.

Bollerslev, T. (1990), “Modelling the Coherence in Short-run Nominal Exchange Rates:
   A Multivariate Generalized ARCH Model,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72,
   498–505.

Bollerslev, T. (2010), “Glossary to ARCH (GARCH),” In T. Bollerslev, J.R. Russell and
   M.W. Watson (eds.), Volatility and Time Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of
   Robert F. Engle, Oxford University Press, 137-163.

Bollerslev, T., R.F. Engle, and J.M. Wooldridge (1988), “A Capital Asset Pricing Model
   with Time-Varying Covariances,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 116–131.

Bollerslev, T., U. Kretschmer, C. Pigorsch, and G. Tauchen (2009a), “A Discrete-Time
   Model for Daily S&P 500 Returns and Realized Variations: Jumps and Leverage Ef-
   fects,” Journal of Econometrics, 150, 151–166.

Bollerslev, T., J. Litvinova, and G. Tauchen (2006), “Leverage and Volatility Feedback
   Effects in High-frequency Data,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4, 353–384.

Bollerslev, T. and H.O. Mikkelsen (1999), “Long-Term Equity Anticipation Securities and
   Stock Market Volatility Dynamics,” Journal of Econometrics, 92, 75–99.



                                          112
Bollerslev, T., N. Sizova, and G. Tauchen (2011a), “Volatility in Equilibrium: Asymmetries
   and Dynamic Dependencies,” Review of Finance, forthcoming.

Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and Z. Hao (2009b), “Expected Stock Returns and Variance
   Risk Premia,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4463–4492.

Bollerslev, T and V. Todorov (2011a), “Estimation of Jump Tails,” Econometrica, 79,
   1727–1783.

Bollerslev, T. and V. Todorov (2011b), “Tails, Fears and Risk Premia,” Journal of Finance,
   forthcoming.

Bollerslev, T, V. Todorov, and S.Z. Li (2011b), “Jump Tails, Extreme Dependencies, and
   the Distribution of Stock Returns,” Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Bollerslev, T. and J.M. Wooldridge (1992), “Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimation and
   Inference in Dynamic Models with Time-Varying Covariances,” Econometric Reviews,
   11, 143–172.

Bollerslev, T. and Y.B. Zhang (2003), “Measuring and Modeling Systematic Risk in Factor
   Pricing Models using High-Frequiency Data,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 10, 533–
   558.

Bonato, M., M. Caporin, and A. Ranaldo (2009), “Forecasting Realized (Co)Variances with
   a Block Structure Wishart Autoregressive Model,” Manuscript, Swiss National Bank.

Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson, and R. Whitelaw (1998), “The Best of Both Worlds,” Risk ,
   11, 64–67.

Brandt, M., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov (2004), “Optimal Portfolios with Parametric
   Weights,” Manuscript, Duke University.

Brandt, M. and L. Wang (2010), “Measuring the Time-Varying Risk-Return Relation from
   the Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” Manuscript, Duke University.

Brownlees, C. and R.F. Engle (2011), “Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk
   Measurement,” Manuscript, NYU.



                                           113
Brownlees, C.T. and G.M. Gallo (2006), “Financial Econometric Analysis at Ultra-High
   Frequency: Data Handling Concerns,” Computational Statistics and Data Analysis,
   51, 2232–2245.

Brownlees, C.T. and G.M. Gallo (2011), “Comparison of Volatility Measures: A Risk
   Management Perspective,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 8, 29–56.

Burns, A.F. and W.C. Mitchell (1946), Measuring Business Cycles, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

Campbell, J.Y. and G.B. Tacksler (2003), “Equity Volatility and Corporate Bond Yields,”
   Journal of Finance, 58, 2321–2350.

Campbell, J.Y. and S.B. Thompson (2008), “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of
   Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?” Review of Financial Studies,
   21, 1509–1531.

Campbell, S.D. and F.X. Diebold (2009), “Stock Returns and Expected Business Condi-
   tions: Half a Century of Direct Evidence,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
   27, 266–278.

Cappiello, L., R.F. Engle, and K. Sheppard (2006), “Asymmetric Dynamics in the Corre-
   lations of Global Equity and Bond Returns,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4,
   537–572.

Carvalho, V.M. and X. Gabaix (2010), “The Great Diversification and its Undoing,”
   Manuscript, NYU.

Chan, N.H., S.J. Deng, L. Peng, and Z. Xia (2007), “Interval Estimation for the Conditional
   Value-at-Risk based on GARCH Models with Heavy Tailed Innovations,” Journal of
   Econometrics, 137, 556–576.

Chib, Y., S.and Omori and M. Asai (2009), “Multivariate Stochastic Volatility,” In T.G.
   Andersen, R.A. Davis, J.-P. Kreiss and T. Mikosch (eds.), Handbook of Financial Time
   Series, Springer Verlag, 365-400.

Chiriac, R. and V. Voev (2011), “Modeling and Forecasting Multivariate Realized Volatil-
   ity,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 922–947.

                                           114
Christoffersen, P.F. (2003), Elements of Financial Risk Management, Academic Press.

Christoffersen, P.F., V. Errunza, K. Jacobs, and H. Langlois (2011a), “Is the Potential for
   International Diversification Disappearing?” Manuscript, University of Toronto.

Christoffersen, P.F., B. Feunou, K. Jacobs, and N. Meddahi (2011b), “The Economic Value
   of Realized Volatility,” Manuscript, University of Toronto.

Christoffersen, P.F., S. Heston, and K. Jacobs (2006), “Option Valuation with Conditional
   Skewness,” Journal of Econometrics, 131, 253–284.

Christoffersen, P.F., K. Jacobs, C. Ornthanalai, and Y. Wang (2008), “Option Valuation
   with Long-run and Short-run Volatility Components,” Journal of Financial Economics,
   90, 272–297.

Clark, Peter K. (1973), “A Subordinated Stochastic Process Model with Finite Variance
   for Speculative Prices,” Econometrica, 41, 135–155.

Connor, G., L.R. Goldberg, and R.A. Korajczyk (2010), Portfolio Risk Analysis, Princeton
   University Press.

Corsi, F. (2009), “A Simple Approximate Long-Memory Model of Realized Volatility,”
   Journal of Financial Econometrics, 7, 174–196.

Corsi, F., N. Fusari, and D. LaVecchia (2011), “Realizing Smiles: Options Pricing with
   Realized Volatility,” Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 10-05.

Corsi, F. and R. Reno (2010), “Discrete-time Volatility Forecasting with Persistent Lever-
   age Effect and the Link with Continuous-time Volatility Modeling,” Manuscript, Uni-
   versity of Lugano.

Cox, D.R. (1981), “Statistical Analysis of Time Series: Some Recent Developments,” Scan-
   dinavian Journal of Statistics, 8, 93–115.

Creal, D., S. Koopman, and A. Lucas (2011), “A Dynamic Multivariate Heavy-Tailed
   Model for Time-Varying Volatilities and Correlations,” Journal of Business and Eco-
   nomic Statistics, 29, forthcoming.



                                           115
Croushore, D. (1997), “The Livingston Survey: Still Useful After All These Years,” Federal
   Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review , March/April, 1–12.

Demarta, S. and A. McNeil (2005), “The t Copula and Related Copulas,” International
   Statistical Review , 73, 111–129.

Diebold, F.X. (2012), “An Historical Perspective on Financial Risk Measurement and Man-
   agement,” In F.X. Diebold (ed.), Financial Risk Measurement and Management (In-
   ternational Library of Critical Writings in Economics Series), forthcoming, Edward
   Elgar.

Diebold, F.X., A. Hickman, A. Inoue, and T. Schuermann (1998a), “Scale Models,” Risk ,
   11, 104–107.

Diebold, F.X. and M. Nerlove (1989), “The Dynamics of Exchange Rate Volatility: A
   Multivariate Latent-Factor ARCH Model,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 4, 1–22.

Diebold, F.X. and G.D. Rudebusch (2012), The Dynamic Nelson-Siegel Approach to Yield
   Curve Modeling and Forecasting, Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Diebold, F.X., T. Schuermann, and J.D. Stroughair (1998b), “Pitfalls and Opportunities
   in the use of Extreme Value Theory in Risk Management,” In A.-P. N. Refenes, A.N.
   Burgess and J.D. Moody (eds.), Decision Technologies for Computational Finance,
   Kluwer Academic Publishers, 3–12.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2009), “Measuring Financial Asset Return and Volatility
   Spillovers, with Application to Global Equity Markets,” Economic Journal , 119, 158–
   171.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2010), “Macroeconomic Volatility and Stock Market Volatil-
   ity, Worldwide,” In T. Bollerslev and J. Russell and M. Watson (eds.), Volatility and
   Time Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert F. Engle, Oxford University
   Press, 97-116.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2011a), “Better to Give than to Receive: Predictive Mea-
   surement of Volatility Spillovers,” International Journal of Forecasting, Forthcoming,
   with discussion.


                                           116
Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2011b), “On the Network Topology of Variance Decompo-
   sitions: Measuring the Connectedness of Financial Firms,” Manuscript, University of
   Pennsylvania.

Drost, F.C. and T.E. Nijman (1993), “Temporal Aggregation of GARCH Processes,”
   Econometrica, 61, 909–927.

Embrechts, P. (2009), “Linear Correlation and EVT: Properties and Caveats,” Journal of
   Financial Econometrics, 7, 30–39.

Embrechts, P., C. Kluppelberg, and T. Mikosch (2002), Modelling Extremal Events,
   Springer-Verlag.

Engle, R.F. (2001), “GARCH 101: The Use of ARCH/GARCH Models in Applied Econo-
   metrics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 157–168.

Engle, R.F. (2002a), “Dynamic Conditional Correlation: A Simple Class of Multivariate
   Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity Models,” Journal of Busi-
   ness and Economic Statistics, 20, 339–350.

Engle, R.F. (2002b), “New Frontiers in ARCH Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
   17, 425–446.

Engle, R.F. (2004), “Risk and Volatility: Econometric Models and Financial Practice,”
   American Economic Review , 94, 405–420.

Engle, R.F. (2009a), Anticipating Correlations: A New Paradigm for Risk Management,
   Princeton University Press.

Engle, R.F. (2009b), “The Risk that Risk will Change,” Journal of Investment Manage-
   ment, 7, 24–28.

Engle, R.F. (2011), “Long-Term Skewness and Systemic Risk,” Journal of Financial Econo-
   metrics, 9, 437–468.

Engle, R.F. and G.M. Gallo (2006), “A Multiple Indicators Model for Volatility Using
   Intra-Daily Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 131, 3–27.



                                         117
Engle, R.F., E. Ghysels, and B. Sohn (2006), “On the Economic Sources of Stock Market
   Volatility,” Manuscript, NYU.

Engle, R.F. and G. Gonzalez-Rivera (1991), “Semiparametric ARCH Models,” Journal of
   Business and Economic Statistics, 9, 345–360.

Engle, R.F. and B. Kelly (2008), “Dynamic Equicorrelation,” Manuscript, NYU.

Engle, R.F. and G.G.J. Lee (1999), “A Permanent and Transitory Component Model of
   Stock Return Volatility,” In R.F. Engle and H. White (eds.), Cointegration, Causality,
   and Forecasting: A Festschrift in Honor of Clive W.J. Granger. Oxford University
   Press, 475-497.

Engle, R.F., D.M. Lilien, and R.P. Robbins (1987), “Estimating Time-Varying Risk Premia
   in the Term Structure: The ARCH-M Model,” Econometrica, 55, 391–407.

Engle, R.F. and J. Mezrich (1996), “GARCH for Groups,” Risk , 9, 36–40.

Engle, R.F. and V.K. Ng (1993), “Measuring and Testing the Impact of News on Volatility,”
   Journal of Finance, 48, 1749–1778.

Engle, R.F., V.K. Ng, and M. Rothschild (1990), “Asset Pricing with a Factor-ARCH
   Covariance Structure,” Journal of Econometrics, 45, 213–238.

Engle, R.F. and J.G. Rangel (2008), “The Spline GARCH Model for Unconditional Volatil-
   ity and Its Global Macroeconomic Causes,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1187–
   1222.

Engle, R.F. and J.G. Rangel (2011), “The Factor-Spline-GARCH Model for High and Low
   Frequency Correlations,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29, in press.

Engle, R.F., N. Shephard, and K. Sheppard (2008), “Fitting Vast Dimensional Time-
   Varying Covariance Models,” Manuscript, NYU.

Epps, T.W. (1979), “Comovement in Stock Prices in the Very Short Run,” Journal of the
   American Statistical Association, 74, 291–298.

Epstein, L. and S.E. Zin (1989), “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior
   of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57,
   937–969.

                                          118
Fama, E.F. (1965), “The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices,” Journal of Business, 38,
   34–105.

Fama, E.F. (1990), “Stock Returns, Expected Returns, and Real Activity,” Journal of
   Finance, 45, 1089–1108.

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (1989), “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks
   and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23–49.

Fan, J., Y. Fan, and J. Lv (2008), “High Dimensional Covariance Matrix Estimation Using
   a Factor Model,” Journal of Econometrics, 147, 186–197.

Fan, J., Y. Liao, and M. Mincheva (2011), “High Dimensional Covariance Matrix Estima-
   tion in Approximate Factor Models,” Manuscript, Princeton University.

Fernandez, C. and M.F.J. Steel (1998), “On Bayesian Modeling of Fat Tails and Skewness.”
   Journal of the American Statistical Association, 93, 359–371.

Fernández-Villaverde, J., P.A. Guerrón-Quintana, J. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and M. Uribe (2011),
   “Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” American Economic Review,
   forthcoming.

Fernández-Villaverde, J. and J.F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2011), “Macroeconomics and Volatility:
   Data, Models, and Estimation,” In D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano and E. Deckel (eds.),
   Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Tenth World
   Congress of the Econometric Society, Cambridge University Press, Forthcoming.

Fleming, J., C. Kirby, and B. Ostdiek (2003), “The Economic Value of Volatility Timing
   using Realized Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 473–509.

Föllmer, H. and A. Schied (2002), “Convex Measures of Risk and Trading Constraints,”
   Finance and Stochastics, 6, 429–447.

Forsberg, L. and T. Bollerslev (2002), “Bridging the Gap Between the Distribution of Re-
   alized (ECU) Volatility and ARCH Modeling (of the Euro): The GARCH-NIG Model,”
   Journal Applied Econometrics, 17, 535–548.




                                           119
Gallant, A.R., C.T. Hsu, and G. Tauchen (1999), “Using Daily Range Data to Calibrate
   Volatility Diffusions and Extract the Forward Integrated Variance,” Review of Eco-
   nomics and Statistics, 81, 617–631.

Garcia, R., E. Renault, and G. Tsafack (2007), “Proper Conditioning for Coherent VaR in
   Portfolio Management,” Management Science, 53, 483–494.

Glasserman, P., P. Heidelberger, and P. Shahabuddin (2002), “Portfolio Value-at-Risk with
   Heavy-Tailed Risk Factors,” Mathematical Finance, 12, 239–269.

Glosten, L.R., R. Jagannathan, and D.E. Runkle (1993), “On the Relation Between the
   Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks,” Journal
   of Finance, 48, 1779–1801.

Goetzman, W.N., A. Watanabe, and M. Watanabe (2009), “Investor Expectations, Busi-
   ness Conditions, and the Pricing of Beta-Instability Risk,” Manuscript, Yale University.

Golosnoy, V., B. Glibisch, and R. Liesenfeld (2010), “The Conditional Autoregressive
   Wishart Model for Multivariate Stock Market Volatility,” Manuscript, Christian-
   Albrechts-University of Kiel.

Gourieroux, C., J. Jasiak, and R. Sufana (2009), “The Wishart Autoregressive Process of
   Multivariate Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of Econometrics, 150, 167–181.

Granger, C. W. J. (1980), “Long Memory Relationships and the Aggregation of Dynamic
   Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 14, 227–238.

Guidolin, M. and A. Timmermann (2006), “Term Structure of Risk Under Alternative
   Econometric Specifications,” Journal of Econometrics, 131, 285–308.

Hafner, C. and H. Manner (2011), “Dynamic Stochastic Copula Models: Estimation, In-
   ference and Applications,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.

Hamilton, J.D. and G. Lin (1996), “Stock Market Volatility and the Business Cycle,”
   Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11, 573–593.

Hansen, B.E. (1994), “Autoregressive Conditional Density Estimation,” International Eco-
   nomic Review , 35, 705–730.


                                           120
Hansen, P.R., Z. Huang, and H. Shek (2010a), “Realized GARCH: A Complete Model
   of Returns and Realized Measures of Volatility,” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
   forthcoming.

Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde (2005), “A Realized Variance for the Whole Day Based on
   Intermittent High-Frequency Data,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 3, 525–554.

Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde (2006), “Realized Variance and Market Microstructure Noise,”
   Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 24, 127–161.

Hansen, P.R., A. Lunde, and V. Voev (2010b), “Realized Beta GARCH: A Multivariate
   GARCH Model with Realized Measures of Volatility and CoVolatility,” Manuscript,
   University of Aarhus.

Harvey, A., E. Ruiz, and E. Sentana (1992), “Unobserved Component Time Series Models
   with ARCH Disturbances,” Journal of Econometrics, 52, 129–157.

Harvey, A.C. (1989), Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter,
   Cambridge University Press.

Hautsch, N., L.M. Kyj, and R.C.A. Oomen (2011), “A Blocking and Regularization Ap-
   proach to High Dimensional Realized Covariance Estimation,” Journal of Applied
   Econometrics, forthcoming.

Heston, S.L. and S. Nandi (2000), “A Closed-Form GARCH Option Valuation Model,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 13, 585–625.

Hull, J. and A. White (1998), “Incorporating Volatility Updating into the Historical Sim-
   ulation Method for Value-at-Risk,” Journal of Risk , 1, 5–19.

Jacod, J., Y. Li, P. Mykland, M. Podolskij, and M. Vetter (2009), “Microstructure Noise
   in the Continuous Case: The Pre-Averaging Approach,” Stochastic Processes and their
   Applications, 119, 2249–2276.

Jin, X. and J.M. Maheu (2010), “Modeling Realized Covariances and Returns,”
   Manuscript, University of Toronto.




                                          121
Jondeau, E. and M. Rockinger (2006), “The Copula-GARCH Model of Conditional Depen-
   dencies: An International Stock Market Application,” Journal of International Money
   and Finance, 25, 827–853.

Jorion, P. (2007), Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk,
   McGraw-Hill, third edition.

Kawakatsu, H. (2006), “Matrix Exponential GARCH,” Journal of Econometrics, 134,
   95–128.

Kim, C.-J. and C.R. Nelson (1999), “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable? A
   Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,” Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 81, 608–616.

Ledoit, O. and M. Wolf (2003), “Improved estimation of the covariance matrix of stock
   returns with an application to portfolio selection,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 10,
   603–621.

Ledoit, O. and M. Wolf (2004), “A Well-Conditioned Estimator for Large-Dimensional
   Covariance Matrices,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 68, 365–411.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson (2001), “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected
   Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56, 815–849.

Lettau, M. and S.C. Ludvigson (2010), “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-
   Return Tradeoff,” In L.P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of Financial
   Econometrics, Elsevier, 617-690.

Li, David X. (2000), “On Default Correlation: A Copula Function Approach,” Journal of
   Fixed Income, 9, 43–54.

Liu, Q. (2009), “On Portfolio Optimization: How and When Do We Benefit from High-
   Frequency Data,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24, 560–582.

Longin, F. and B. Solnik (1995), “Is the Correlation in International Equity Returns Con-
   stant: 1960-1990?” Journal of International Money and Finance, 14, 3–26.

Longin, F. and B. Solnik (2001), “Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets,”
   Journal of Finance, 56, 649–676.

                                          122
Longin, F.M. (2000), “From Value at Risk to Stress Testing: The Extreme Value Ap-
   proach,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 24, 1097–1130.

Lu, Y. (2005), “Modeling and Forecasting Daily Stock Return Volatility with Intraday
   Price Fluctuations Information,” Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Economics, University
   of Pennsylvania.

Lunde, A., N. Shephard, and K. Sheppard (2011), “Econometric Analysis of Vast Covari-
   ance Matrices Using Composite Realized Kernels,” Manuscript, University of Aarhus.

Maheu, J.M. and T. McCurdy (2011), “Do High-Frequency Measures of Volatility Improve
   Forecasts of Return Distributions?” Journal of Econometrics, 160, 69–76.

Mancini, C. (2001), “Disentangling the Jumps of the Diffusion in a Geometric Brownian
   Motion,” Giornale dell’Istituto Italiano degi Attuari , 64, 19–47.

Mandelbrot, B. (1963), “The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices,” Journal of Business,
   36, 394–419.

Markowitz, H.M. (1959), Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments, John
   Wiley.

McConnell, M.M and G. Perez-Quiros (2000), “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
   What has Changed Since the Early 1980s,” American Economic Review , 90, 1464–
   1476.

McNeil, A.J. and R. Frey (2000), “Estimation of Tail-Related Risk Measures for Het-
   eroscedastic Financial Time Series: An Extreme Value Approach,” Journal of Empiri-
   cal Finance, 7, 271–300.

McNeil, A.J., R. Frey, and P. Embrechts (2005), Quantitative Risk Management: Concepts,
   Techniques, Tools, Princeton University Press.

Meddahi, N. and E. Renault (2004), “Temporal Aggreation of Volatility Models,” Journal
   of Econometrcs, 119, 355–379.

Mehta, M.L. (1990), Random Matrices, Academic Press.



                                           123
Merton, R.C. (1980), “On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Exploratory
   Investigation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323–361.

Merton, Robert C. (1974), “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of
   Interest Rates,” Journal of Finance, 29, 449–470.

Nelson, D.B. (1991), “Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,”
   Econometrica, 59, 347–370.

Nelson, D.B. (1992), “Filtering and Forecasting with Misspecified ARCH Models I: Getting
   the Right Variance with the Wrong Model,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 61–
   90.

Nerlove, M. and S. Wage (1964), “On the Optimality of Adaptive Forecasting,” Manage-
   ment Science, 10, 207–224.

Noureldin, D., N. Shephard, and K. Sheppard (2011), “Multivariate High-Frequency-Based
   Volatility (HEAVY) Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeco-
   nomics: Is There a Common Cause?” In B. Bernanke, and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual 2000, MIT Press, 339-390.

Officer, R.R. (1973), “The Variability of the Market Factor of the New York Stock Ex-
   change,” Journal of Business, 46, 434–53.

Oh, D.H. and A. Patton (2011), “Modelling Dependence in High Dimensions with Factor
   Copulas,” Manuscript, Duke University.

Patton, A. and K. Sheppard (2009), “Evaluating Volatility and Correlation Forecasts,” In
   Andersen, T. G., Davis, R., Kreiss, J.-P. and Mikosch, T. (eds.), Handbook of Financial
   Time Series, Springer Verlag, 801-838.

Patton, A.J. (2006), “Modelling Asymmetric Exchange Rate Dependence,” International
   Economic Review , 47, 527–556.

Pelletier, D. (2006), “Regime Switching for Dynamic Correlations,” Journal of Economet-
   rics, 131, 445–473.


                                            124
Perignon, C., Z.Y. Deng, and Z.J. Wang (2008), “Do Banks Overstate their Value-at-risk?”
   Journal of Banking and Finance, 32, 783–794.

Perignon, C. and D.R. Smith (2010a), “Diversification and Value-at-Risk,” Journal of
   Banking and Finance, 34, 55–66.

Perignon, C. and D.R. Smith (2010b), “The Level and Quality of Value-at-Risk Disclosure
   by Commercial Banks,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 34, 362–377.

Philipov, A. and M.E. Glickman (2006), “Multivariate Stochastic Volatility via Wishart
   Processes,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 24, 313–328.

Poon, S.H., M. Rockinger, and J. Tawn (2004), “Extreme Value Dependence in Finan-
   cial Markets: Diagnostics, Models, and Financial Implications,” Review of Financial
   Studies, 17, 581–610.

Pritsker, M. (2006), “The Hidden Dangers of Historical Simulation,” Journal of Banking
   and Finance, 30, 561–582.

Rosenberg, J. V. and T. Schuermann (2006), “A General Approach to Integrated Risk
   Management with Skewed, Fat-Tailed Risks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79,
   569–614.

Rosenow, B. (2008), “Determining the Optimal Dimensionality of Multivariate Volatility
   Models with Tools from Random Matrix Theory,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
   Control , 32, 279–302.

Schwert, G.W. (1989), “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?” Journal
   of Finance, 44, 1115–1153.

Shephard, N. and K. Sheppard (2010), “Realising the Future: Forecasting with High-
   Frequency-Based Volatility (HEAVY) Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25,
   197–231.

Shiller, R.J. (1981), “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent
   Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review , 71, 421–436.

Sizova, N. (2011), “Integrated Variance Forecasting: Model Based vs. Reduced Form,”
   Journal of Econometrics, 162, 294–311.

                                          125
Stentoft, L. (2008), “Option Pricing Using Realized Volatility,” Manuscript, University of
   Aarhus.

Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (2002), “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” In
   M. Gertler and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 159-218.

Stulz, R.M. (2002), “Risk Management and Derivatives,” South-Western.

Stulz, R.M. (2008), “Risk Management Failures: What are They and When do They
   Happen?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 20, 58–67.

Tola, V., F. Lillo, M. Gallegati, and R.N. Mantegna (2008), “Cluster Analysis for Portfolio
   Optimization,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 32, 235–258.

Tse, Y.K. and A.K.C. Tsui (2002), “A Multivariate Generalized Autoreressive Conditional
   Heteroskedasticity Model with Time-varying Correlations,” Journal of Business and
   Economic Statistics, 20, 351–362.

Varneskov, R.T. and V. Voev (2010), “The Role of Realized Ex-Post Covariance Measures
   and Dynamic Model Choice on the Quality of Covariance Forecasts,” Manuscript, Uni-
   versity of Aarhus.

Visser, M.P. (2011), “GARCH Parameter Estimation Using High-Frequency Data,” Jour-
   nal of Financial Econometrics, 9, 162–197.

Wang, Y. and J. Zou (2010), “Vast Volatility Matrix Estimation for High-Frequency Fi-
   nancial Data,” Annals of Statistics, 38, 943–978.

White, H., T.-H. Kim, and S. Manganelli (2010), “VAR for VaR: Measuring Systemic Risk
   Using Multivariate Regression Quantiles,” Manuscript, UCSD.

Whitelaw, R.F. (2000), “Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 13, 521–547.

Zhou, B. (1996), “High-Frequency Data and Volatility in Foreign-Exchange Rates,” Journal
   of Business and Economic Statistics, 14, 45–52.

Zumbach, G. (2006), “A Gentle Introduction to the RM 2006 Methodology,” Mannscript,
   RiskMetrics Group.


                                           126
