                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN DID THE DOLLAR OVERTAKE STERLING AS THE LEADING INTERNATIONAL
            CURRENCY? EVIDENCE FROM THE BOND MARKETS

                                             Livia Chitu
                                          Barry Eichengreen
                                           Arnaud J. Mehl

                                        Working Paper 18097
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18097


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




The authors are grateful to Thierry Bracke, Marc Flandreau, Kristin Forbes, Norbert Gaillard, Christopher
Meissner, Angela Redish and Roland Straub for helpful discussions. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB or the Eurosystem. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Livia Chitu, Barry Eichengreen, and Arnaud J. Mehl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When did the dollar overtake sterling as the leading international currency? Evidence from
the bond markets
Livia Chitu, Barry Eichengreen, and Arnaud J. Mehl
NBER Working Paper No. 18097
May 2012
JEL No. F30,N20

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper offers new evidence on the emergence of the dollar as the leading international currency,
focusing on its role as currency of denomination in global bond markets. We show that the dollar overtook
sterling much earlier than commonly supposed, as early as in 1929. Financial market development
appears to have been the main factor helping the dollar to surmount sterling’s head start. The finding
that a shift from a unipolar to a multipolar international monetary and financial system has happened
before suggests that it can happen again. That the shift occurred earlier than commonly believed suggests
that the advantages of incumbency are not all they are cracked up to be. And that financial deepening
was a key determinant of the dollar’s emergence points to the challenges facing currencies aspiring
to international status.


Livia Chitu                                         Arnaud J. Mehl
European Central Bank                               European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29                                    Kaiserstrasse 29
60311 Frankfurt am Main                             60311 Frankfurt
Germany                                             Germany
livia.chitu@ecb.europa.eu                           Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

The global economic and financial crisis has lent new impetus to discussions of the
future of the international monetary and financial system. Policy makers in countries
like China and Russia have openly questioned the viability of the current dollar-
based global system. Some advocate moving to a multipolar system in which the
dollar shares its international currency role with the euro, the Chinese yuan and/or
the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights. At the Cannes Summit of November 2011, G20
Leaders committed to taking “concrete steps” to ensure that the international
monetary system reflects “the changing equilibrium and the emergence of new
international currencies”.1

        Others expect this change to develop more spontaneously; they see it as a
natural result of the declining economic and financial dominance of the United States
and the increasingly multipolar nature of the global economy, together with the
advent of the euro and rapid internationalization of the yuan (e.g. Angeloni et al.,
2011; Bini Smaghi, 2011a and 2011b; Constâncio, 2011; Dorrucci and McKay,
2011; Eichengreen, 2011; Fratzscher and Mehl, 2011; Subramanian, 2011).

        Sceptics object that prospect of a shift to a multipolar monetary and financial
system is in fact remote; if it occurs, such a transition will take many decades to
complete (Kenen, 2011; Frankel, 2011). The view that a shift to a multipolar system
is unlikely to occur rapidly is rooted in theoretical models where international
currency status is characterized by network externalities giving rise to lock-in and
inertia, which benefit the incumbent (see e.g. Krugman, 1980; Krugman, 1984;
Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui, 1993; Zhou, 1997; Hartmann, 1998; and Rey,
2001).

        These models rest, in turn, on a conventional historical narrative, epitomized
by Triffin (1960), according to which it took between 30 to 70 years, depending on
the aspects of economic and international currency status considered, from when the
United States overtook Britain as the leading economic and commercial power and
when the dollar overtook sterling as the dominant international currency. The US, it
is observed, surpassed Britain in terms of absolute economic size already in the
1870s. It became the leading commercial power, gauged by the value of foreign
trade, already in 1913. It was the leading creditor nation by the conclusion of World
War I. And yet sterling remained the dominant international currency not simply
during this period but also throughout the interwar years, according to the
conventional narrative, and even for a brief period after World War II.

       Recent studies, referred to by Frankel (2011) as the “new view,” have
challenged this conventional account. Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009), relying on
new data on the currency composition of global foreign exchange reserves, show that
the dollar in fact overtook sterling as leading reserve currency already in the mid-
1920s – that is to say, more than two decades prior to the date assumed by previous
scholars.



1
    See the G20 Leaders’ Final declaration at the Cannes Summit, 3-4 November 2011.

                                                                                      1
         Eichengreen and Flandreau’s “new view” also challenges broader
implications of the conventional narrative. First, it suggests that inertia and the
advantages of incumbency are not all they are cracked up to be. Second, it challenges
the notion that there is room for only one international currency in the global system.
Eichengreen and Flandreau show, to the contrary, that sterling and the dollar
accounted for roughly equal shares of global foreign exchange reserves throughout
the 1920s. Third, the new view challenges the presumption that dominance, once
lost, is gone forever. Eichengreen and Flandreau’s data indicate that sterling re-took
the lead from the dollar for a brief period after 1931. This reinforces the point that
the advantages of incumbency in the competition for reserve currency status may be
less than commonly supposed.

        In a companion piece, Eichengreen and Flandreau (2010) show that what was
true of reserve currencies was true also of the use of currencies for financing
international trade. The dollar overtook sterling as the leading form of trade credit (as
the currency of denomination for what were known as “trade acceptances” or
“bankers’ acceptances”) already in the mid-1920s, not only after World War II. The
US achieved this from a standing start – that is to say, despite the fact that dollar-
denominated trade credits had been virtually unknown as recently as 1914. Both
market forces (financial market development) and policy support (with the Federal
Reserve System as a market maker in the New York market for bankers’
acceptances) were instrumental in helping the dollar rival and overtake sterling. That
said, both New York and London, and both the dollar and sterling, remained
consequential sources of trade credit in the 1920s. This again challenges the notion of
international currency competition as a winner-take-all game.

        Some critics have questioned the new view. Ghosh, Ostry and Tsangarides
(2011) suggest that the interwar gold standard was special in that gold, not foreign
exchange, was the dominant reserve asset, accounting for some two thirds of
international reserves. The fact that gold played a large monetary role then but plays
only a small one today may limit the inferences about prospective changes in
international currency status that can be drawn from this earlier experience, in other
words. Forbes (2012) suggests that, compared to the past, international financial
transactions may play a larger role in driving the decision of which unit or units to
use internationally, while merchandise transactions and the importance of a currency
and market as a source of trade credit play a correspondingly smaller one. Thus,
inferences about the future are less convincing insofar as they are drawn from the
past behaviour of trade credits and not from the use of currencies in international
financial transactions.

        In this paper we address these objections and complete the story. We provide
new evidence from the interwar years on the use of the leading international
currencies, sterling and the dollar, in international financial transactions. This sheds
light on a third dimension of international currency status, along with the use of a
currency for trade-related transactions and as international reserves, namely the use
of currencies as vehicles for international financing. We focus on the international
bond market, bonds being the principal instrument for foreign lending and borrowing
in this earlier era prior to the advent of syndicated bank lending.2 Looking at yet an

2
    As explained in inter alia Eichengreen and Portes (1989).

                                                                                       2
additional aspect of international currency competition is useful for establishing the
generality (or otherwise) of the so-called “new view.” In addition, because
international bonds were typically denominated in national currencies and not gold,
the objection that competition between gold and currencies complicates the effort to
draw inferences for the future is less telling in this context.3

        We employ data on the currency denomination of foreign public debt for 33
countries in the period 1914-1946. We focus on bonds issued in foreign markets
(“international bonds”) because these were only rarely denominated in the issuer’s
own currency; they were denominated in international currencies so as to appeal to
international investors. It is thus the denomination of these foreign bonds that shed
light on international currency use.4

        Our analysis supports the new view in that the dollar had a share almost equal
to that of sterling as a currency of denomination for international bonds already in the
interwar years. When excluding the Commonwealth countries, which were heavily
inclined towards sterling issuance due to their dominion status, the dollar overtook
sterling as early as 1929.

         Our results further call into question two other tenets of the conventional
narrative. While sterling lost its pre-eminence in 1929 (again, abstracting from the
Commonwealth countries), it subsequently ran neck and neck with the dollar as the
dominant currency of denomination for international bonds at least for a brief period.
This is at odds with the conventional view that dominance, once lost, is gone forever.
It is, however, consistent with the findings of Eichengreen and Flandreau for foreign
exchange reserves and merchandise: they find that with the liquidation of central
bank holdings of dollars starting in 1931 sterling regained its lead as a reserve
currency for at least a brief period; they similarly find that the market in dollar trade
acceptances collapsed and that the dollar gave back ground to sterling with the
financial crisis in the United States in 1931-33.

        Second, much of the 1920s and the 1930s saw the use of both sterling and the
dollar as currencies of denomination in international debt markets. This was a bipolar
rather than a unipolar currency system. This finding is at odds with the presumption
that there is room for only one dominant international currency in the market.

        Finally, our results point to financial development as the main factor enabling
the dollar to overcome sterling’s incumbency advantage. Its impact dwarfed those of
country size and the monetary policy-cum-exchange rate regime. We allow also for
incumbency effects and show how these were swiftly overcome by financial
development.

      These findings are relevant to discussions of the future of the international
monetary system. They suggest that a shift from a dollar-based system to a

3
  There were some so-called gold bonds (gold-indexed bonds or bonds containing clauses specifying
that they were to be redeemed in national currencies of constant gold content). We discuss these
further below.
4
  The reluctance of foreign investors to purchase bonds denominated in the currency of the issuer in
more recent periods has similarly been emphasized in the literature on “original sin” (Eichengreen and
Hausmann, 2005).

                                                                                                    3
multipolar system is not impossible; that this could occur sooner than commonly
believed; and that financial deepening will be a key determinant of how and when
additional units strengthen their international currency status.

        Contemporary data on the currency of denomination of international bonds is
further consistent with the existence of this kind of shift. The share of the euro in the
stock of international debt securities increased to some 30% in the 2000s from
approximately 20% in the 1990s (proxied by the share of legacy currencies prior to
1999, net of intra-euro area issuance).5 Again, this is inconsistent with the
presumption that there is room for only one international currency in the financial
domain.

        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our dataset
and section 3 some stylised facts. Section 4 describes our empirical methodology,
while section 5 presents the baseline empirical results. Following a discussion of
robustness in section 6, section 7 concludes and draws implications for policy and
future research.


2. Data

For data on the currency composition of foreign debt we draw on United Nations
(1948).6 The data it contains were gathered by statisticians employed by the League
of Nations, the UN’s predecessor, and by the UN itself, drawing on official national
sources including national accounts and/or budgetary accounts prepared by
ministries of finance, annual or special reports of central banks or national statistical
institutes, national statistical yearbooks, and so forth. An overview of these primary
sources is in Appendix I.

        As is also the case with modern debt data, there is always the possibility that
the UN data are not strictly comparable across countries.7 Some debt floated in
foreign financial centers may in fact be purchased by domestic residents. Some
national statistical agencies may include with foreign debt domestically issued
securities purchased by foreign investors. The authors of the UN compendium
attempted to adjust for these problems insofar as possible.8 But what is key for our

5
  See Appendix III as well as ECB (various issues) and Detken and Hartmann (2000) and (2002).
6
  It also contains data on outstanding amounts of domestic public debt in some 50 countries during the
interwar period, compiled from national sources, data that have been used by Reinhart and Rogoff
(2008a, 2008b, 2009a, 2009b, 2010) and Reinhart (2010) and in subsequent work on public debt
developments in the very long run (e.g. Ali Abbas et al. 2011; Fratzscher, Mehl and Vansteenkiste,
2011). Data on domestic public debt were not broken down by currency, which is why we focus in the
paper on foreign public debt.
7
  For an example of a modern debt-data compendium, see World Bank (various dates).
8
  As the authors of the volume observed (p. 8) “The division of the debt into domestic and foreign is
not always based on the same criteria. In a number of countries, the distinction between domestic and
foreign debt is made according to the currency in which the debt is expressed; in others, according to
the place where the debt was contracted – i.e., abroad or at home; in others still, according to the
residence of the creditor: in the latter case, foreign bonds repurchased by residents of the home
country are considered domestic debt, as in Sweden.” Similarly, in the case of Norway, it is specified
that (United Nations, 1948, p. 107): “According to an estimate by the Bank of Norway, the following
amounts of loans raised abroad were owned by Norwegians at the end of 1940...” Similarly, in the
case of Uruguay, it is reported that (ibid., p. 154) “Domestic debt includes also the so-called

                                                                                                    4
purpose, which is to gauge the importance of sterling, the dollar and other currencies
as vehicles for international financial transactions, is that the public debt categorized
as foreign by the UN is distinguished by currency of denomination.9 Evidently, the
UN applied consistent criteria when categorizing countries’ foreign debts by their
currency of denomination. Each foreign debt issue was categorized by “the original
currencies in which it was raised.” The authors distinguish the currency of issuance
from the currency of the country in which the bonds were issued. They account for
the fact that not every foreign bond issued in London was denominated in sterling,
that the currency in which the bond was issued was not always the same as the
currency in which it was redeemed, and that both the currency of issuance and
currency of redemption could differ from the currency of the country where it was
issued (for instance, a bond issued in French francs in London might be payable in
dollars).10

        We digitized the UN data on foreign public debt for 33 countries (including
five Commonwealth countries) in three continents (Asia, Europe and America):
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Japan, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Siam, South Africa, Switzerland, Turkey and Uruguay.
A few countries (e.g. Italy) that provide data on their overall stock of foreign debt but
not on its currency composition were necessarily excluded from the sample. A
detailed description of the data is in Appendix II.11

        Data are annual and available from 1914 to 1946.12 Some 14-24 countries
report data between 1914 and 1927 (see Figure 1); approximately 30 countries report
data between 1928 and 1939; and 19-27 countries report data between 1940 and
1945.



‘International Debt’ consisting of two Brazilian issues, but which are payable in Uruguayan pesos and
are held in Uruguay”.
9
   In addition, since we exclusively consider non-US and non-UK debt, it is always the international
financing role of sterling or the dollar that is captured by our data.
10
    An example of this awareness is their discussion of Norway. As the UN authors explain (p. 107),
“The loans raised [by Norway] in France were originally issued in francs [i.e. the currency of the
country in which the bond was issued as well as its currency of issuance], but are also payable in
several currencies at fixed rates of exchange, including sterling at 25.25 francs = 1 sterling [i.e.
currency in which the bond was redeemed]. After the devaluation of the French Franc in 1928, these
bonds were paid, beginning with 1933, in sterling in Paris, rather than in French francs.” The UN
authors take these differences into account and adjust the data correspondingly: “The outstanding
amounts have therefore, up to 1932 inclusive, been converted at par rates of exchange, but beginning
with 1933 the francs have been converted in sterling at 25.25.” In cases where currency of
denomination was not specified as e.g. Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, for which
we could gather from the UN volume security-by-security information as to whether debt was
“payable”, “redeemable” or “due” in London or in New York, we determined this from other sources.
Where it was not possible to determine this on the basis of other sources, we excluded the country.
11
    Data on commercial (i.e. private) debt (denominated in gold francs) are also available for France.
Such private debt accounts for approximately 15% of France’s total foreign debt. Since we do not
have comparable private debt data for the other countries in our sample, we exclude France’s
commercial debt from our analysis.
12
    Subject to missing observations (typically during World War I and its immediate aftermath and
during World War II).

                                                                                                    5
        Alongside sterling, the dollar, the French franc, the Swiss franc and the
German mark, foreign public debt was issued in 16 other currencies. These include
the Austrian schilling, Belgian franc, Canadian dollar, Czechoslovak crown, Danish
crown, Dutch florin, Dutch gulden, Italian lira, Norwegian crown, Scandinavian
crown, Spanish peseta, Swedish crown, Argentinean peso, Romanian lei.13 While
around one-third of the countries in our sample (e.g. Cuba, Dominican Republic,
Haiti, India, New Zealand, Panama, Portugal, South Africa, Switzerland and Siam)
had foreign debt in only one currency (either sterling or dollars), others had foreign
debt in ten or more currencies. Romania had foreign debt in 14.

        Debt denominated in some of these minor currencies was occasionally
denominated in currency units of constant gold content. Thus, the data set includes
foreign debt denominated in Argentine gold pesos, Austrian gold crowns, Austrian
gold florins, French gold francs, Italian gold lire and Romanian gold lei. Argentina,
Austria, France and Romania had been off the gold standard for extended periods
and/or suffered high inflations, helping us to understand the practice.14 However, the
value of foreign bonds denominated in currencies of constant gold content was
relatively small, namely in the order of 3% of the global total stock. There appear to
have been almost no dollar or sterling loans of constant gold content.15 Turkey issued
such bonds between 1933-1934 and 1938-1939 but in negligible amounts (some $6-9
million).

        We take the book value of outstanding amounts in different currencies and
convert them to US dollars using end-of-year market exchange rates.16 Debt in gold
currency is converted to US dollars using the exchange rate under the gold standard
that is nearest to the year when such debt was issued. For instance, Brazil’s debt in
gold francs (issued in 1914) is converted to its equivalent US dollar amount using the
Franc Germinal 1914 parity (5.095 gold francs per US dollar).17

        Following standard practice in the literature, we use currency shares at
current exchange rates in our empirical model. This allows us to compare our results
with those of earlier studies. However, to take into account the impact of
devaluations (like that of sterling in 1931 and the dollar in 1933) and valuation
effects, we also calculate currency shares at constant exchange rates, which we
consider in robustness checks.18



13
   Names could change over time. For instance, the Austro-Hungarian “gulden” was replaced by the
crown (“krone”) in 1892 as part of the introduction of the gold standard. However, the name “florin”
was used on Austrian coins, while “forint” was used on post-1867 Hungarian banknotes and coins.
14
   Borchard (1951) describes this in more detail.
15
   There were, however, gold clauses specifying payment in dollars of constant gold content in U.S.
treasury liabilities issued domestically in this period. Those gold clauses were famously thrown out by
the U.S. Supreme Court following the 1933 devaluation of the dollar (Kroszner, 1999).
16
   Taken from the UN volume, Global Financial Data (GFD) and the Measuring Worth database.
17
   There is no need to exclude from the aggregate share of debt issued in gold the amount of debt
issued in dollars or sterling of constant gold content to correct for potential downward biases in the
aggregate dollar and sterling shares between 1919 to 1933, since no country issued debt denominated
in dollars or sterling of constant gold content in those years.
18
   Considering the evolution of currency shares in both constant and current market exchange rates is
similarly the practice in studies of the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves (e.g.
Truman and Wong, 2006; ECB (various issues)).

                                                                                                     6
        Another issue is the treatment of war-related debts. France is the most notable
case: between 80 and 90% of its foreign public debt was owed to allied governments
and incurred during World War I. Moreover, France’s foreign public debt, at some
$6-7 billion, is by far the largest in our sample, and equivalent to over a third of our
33 countries’ total stock of foreign public debt. It will therefore be important to
check for the sensitivity of our results to the (ex)inclusion of France (from) in the
sample.

        A further distinction is between the fiscal and calendar years, which do not
always coincide.19 A few countries have fiscal years that start on 1 April of year t
and end on 31 March of year t + 1. There are even some countries (e.g. Brazil,
France, Romania and Poland) that changed from calendar to fiscal year at some point
in our sample. We follow the UN statisticians’ convention by assigning data for
fiscal year 1 April t to 31 March t + 1 to calendar year t + 1.20


3. Stylized facts

        We start with an overview of the evidence that can be immediately gained
from these data. By 1929, roughly the mid-point of our sample, our 33 countries
owed more than $17 billion of foreign public debt, about double the amount owed in
both 1920 and 1939 (Figure 2). This amount corresponded to about 4% of world
GDP. It is a bit higher in magnitude than the amount of global reserves (in gold and
foreign exchange, with 24 countries) estimated by Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009)
for that year, namely about $10 billion. By comparison, as of end-2010, the stock of
international debt securities accounted for 17% of world GDP and 114% of world
reserves.21

        Of these $17 billion, some $10 billion was sterling debt (also equivalent to
almost 50% of UK GDP) and another $7 billion was dollar debt (also equivalent to
roughly 7% of US GDP). The shares of both currencies were substantial. This
confirms the insight of the “new view” that there is room for more than one
international financing currency at any point in time.

        Sterling and the dollar together accounted for about 97% of global foreign
public debt. Other currencies, such as the French franc, the Swiss franc, the German
mark and the Dutch guilder, were largely irrelevant, this despite the fact that the
French and German economies were substantial in size.22 The absence of the French
franc is notable, given the efforts of French officials to elevate Paris to the status of
an international financial centre and secure for the franc an international role
(Meyers, 1936). This reinforces Eichengreen and Flandreau’s finding using data on
the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves, which were heavily


19
   As is the case today in most countries.
20
   Two exceptions were France, Poland and Romania, where we assigned the data to calendar year t so
as to avoid gaps in the time series.
21
   According to data from the ECB’s Review of the international role of the euro (July 2011 edition)
and the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook Database (September 2011 edition).
22
   In the early 1930s, the combined share of currencies other than sterling and the dollar reached a
peak of almost 10%, however.

                                                                                                  7
dominated by sterling and dollars and where the French franc similarly did not
provide a meaningful alternative.

        As noted above, securities indexed to gold accounted for a very small share of
international bonds (about 1% in 1929).

        There are also marked differences in the regional origin of foreign public
debt denominated in sterling and dollars (see Figures 3 and 4). Almost 80% of
dollar-denominated debt was owed by Europe. Of that amount, the main debtor was,
by a large margin, France, which alone accounted for almost 60% of global foreign
public debt owed in US dollars. This reflected France’s heavy involvement in World
War I since, as mentioned above, the largest share of its debt was held by allied
governments. US loans to the French government, first through the agency of US
banks and then by the US government itself, amounted to just over $4 billion when
converted into long-term bonds in the early 1920s.23 Most of the remainder was
owed by Latin America (where four countries, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Haiti and
Panama, issued foreign public debt exclusively in dollars). This reflected the strong
economic and financial ties that the U.S. developed with the region since the turn of
the century and, especially, during and after World War I (Mitchener and
Weidenmeier, 2005). The rest was owed by two Commonwealth countries (Australia
and especially Canada) and Japan, which borrowed in the US as early as 1904-5 to
finance its war with Russia and returned to the market in the 1920s.24

        The bulk of sterling-denominated debt (about 40%) was owed by the
Commonwealth countries, in line with their strong political as well as economic ties
to the UK. A further 40% was owed by Europe. France was again the main European
originator, accounting for a third of global foreign public debt denominated in
sterling. Asia (i.e. Japan and Siam, with the latter one issuing debt exclusively in
sterling) accounted for around 5% of global foreign public debt in sterling, while
Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Honduras, Guatemala,
Nicaragua, Peru and Uruguay) accounted for a further 9%.25

        When did the dollar surpass sterling as leading currency of denomination of
international bonds? Figure 5a shows the breakdown of global foreign public debt at
market exchange rates when the sample includes all 33 countries. By 1931, the share
of the dollar (45%) was almost equal to that of sterling (51%).

        Including our five Commonwealth countries in the aggregates may bias the
results, however, due to their strong political links with the UK, which constrained

23
   Amounts borrowed from the UK by the French government were slightly smaller (Moulton and
Pasvolsky 1926, p. 45). The relatively even breakdown of French debt between sterling and dollars in
the 1920s is evident in Figure 7 below.
24
   Of $245 million of war loans floated abroad by the Japanese government in 1904-5, $192 billion
were sold in the United States (Lewis 1938, p. 340). It appears that, unlike Japanese borrowing in
New York in the 1920s, these earlier bonds were not dollar denominated.
25
   That India, as a British colony, should have issued debt exclusively in London is unsurprising.
While the Thais successfully maintained their independence by playing the British and French
colonialists off against one another, their dependence on the London market (with their foreign debt
consisting “entirely of sterling obligations”, as stressed in UN (1948, p. 129) is evidence of the
continuing importance of sterling and secondary status of the French franc in international bond
markets (see above).

                                                                                                  8
their tendency to issue debt in currencies other than sterling.26 Indeed, the picture
changes dramatically when one excludes the Commonwealth countries, as in Figure
5b. The cross-over date is now 1929. Sterling’s lead is largest in 1924, although the
dollar’s share of the market is already substantial. The second half of the 1920s then
shows the dollar closing the gap; this was the period marked by “the scramble for
‘investment opportunities’” (Lewis, 1938, p. 376 – the quotation marks around
“investment opportunities” are hers) and when British authorities, concerned with
the weakness of the balance of payments, used moral suasion and controls in an
effort to restrain long-term foreign lending (Moggridge, 1971).

       Figure 5b is strikingly similar to that obtained by Eichengreen and Flandreau
(2009) using their data on reserve composition.27 It is inconsistent with the
conventional wisdom that sterling remained the dominant currency throughout the
interwar period despite the fact that the US had long since overtaken the UK as the
main economic, commercial and financial global power.

        Sterling then regained market share after 1933 and again ran neck and neck
with the dollar at the end of the decade. U.S. experience with foreign public debt in
this period was unhappy; some two-thirds of outstanding issues lapsed into default,
roughly double the share of sterling-denominated debt (Winkler, 1933). This
reflected a combination of factors: bonds issued in dollars appear to have been more
marginal credits; U.S. underwriters were less experienced; sterling-denominated
bonds issued by members of the British Commonwealth and Empire were faithfully
serviced all through the 1930s (Mintz, 1951, Eichengreen and Portes, 1990). But
whatever the explanation, the relatively widespread defaults on dollar-denominated
debts demoralized the New York market and limited foreign issuance there. The
Johnson Act of 1934 then prohibited governments in default on their sovereign debts
from marketing new loans in the United States.28

        History can be messy; this is certainly true of the 1930s. But the fact that a
variety of special factors caused the lead of the dollar over sterling as a currency of
denomination for international bonds to narrow temporarily does not change our
central conclusion that the greenback had emerged as a major vehicle for long-term
foreign lending already in the 1920s. Indeed, it reinforces the point that fortunes can
change quickly and that the advantages of incumbency tend to be overstated.

        How sensitive are these conclusions to alternative methods? The finding of a
sterling-dollar duopoly carries over if we calculate currency shares at constant rather
than current exchange rates in order to control for valuation effects due to the
devaluation of sterling in 1931 and of the dollar in 1933.29 However, the dollar no
longer comes close to surpassing sterling in 1931, since we have eliminated the
devaluation of sterling-denominated claims in September of that year; still, the
26
   The sovereignty of these countries remained indeed subject to limitations at least until the statute of
Westminster in 1931, which declared self-governing dominions within the British Empire to be equal.
27
   The parallel could reflect the fact that official and private foreign investors respond to similar
pecuniary and nonpecuniary incentives. Another interpretation is that central banks hold reserves in
part to facilitate intervention in the foreign exchange market, where the relevant foreign exchange
market is the one on which domestic issuers depend.
28
   But, notwithstanding this setback, the dollar then permanently overtook sterling in the early 1940s.
And not only after World War II, as suggested in earlier accounts.
29
   We focus on the full sample of 33 countries, unless explicitly stated otherwise.

                                                                                                        9
greenback retains a sizeable share of global bond markets, of about 40% (Figure 6a).
The results similarly point to the existence of a sterling-dollar duopoly rates when
one excludes France, the largest dollar debtor (Figure 6b).30

        Using current exchange rates and unweighted averages to control for the fact
that the largest debtors have a disproportionate influence on the aggregates changes
things noticeably, however (Figure 6c). By this metric, the dollar overtook sterling
already in the mid-1920s.

        Likewise, using current exchange rates and weighted (by the size of debt)
averages but excluding countries owing debt exclusively in dollar or sterling as well
as Commonwealth countries which were so much tilted to sterling issuance for
political reasons suggests that the dollar already surpassed sterling in the late 1920s
and never gave back its dominant position (see Figure 6d).31

        Figure 7 shows that already at the time of World War I the dollar was the
dominant currency of foreign debt denomination in Belgium, the Dominican
Republic, Haiti, Panama, Poland and Switzerland.32 Swiss bonds, for example, were
sold in New York as early as 1899.33 The efforts of New York underwriters to attract
foreign borrowers to the U.S. market were actively supported by the State
Department, which saw foreign dependence on US lending as a lever for opening
foreign markets to American exports. Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Guatemala, Norway,
Peru, Romania and Uruguay steadily increased the share of their foreign currency
debt in dollars in the course of the 1920s, this being when American promoters
aggressively “search[ed] the world over for foreign borrowers.”34

        In just three countries – Austria, Colombia and Finland – did the share of the
dollar decline markedly in the interwar years. In Austria this reflected the growing
dependence of the government on Paris, the one market that remained open during
the early-1930s financial crisis. Finland borrowed in Swedish kronor (for, inter alia,
extension of its telephone system) in the 1930s and during World War II. Colombia
engaged in a borrowing binge in New York in 1927-28, when it issued two mega-
loans in dollars; thereafter its relatively modest borrowings were both in sterling and
dollars as well as in French francs in the case of a substantial 1931 loan floated in
Paris, bringing down the dollar share of the total. There was similarly some
movement by central banks into subsidiary currencies like the French franc and
Swedish kronor in the 1930s, when problems affected the markets in dollars and
sterling, but it was similarly limited in incidence and magnitude (Eichengreen,
2011).




30
   Here we again use market exchange rates.
31
   Many of these countries borrowing exclusively in one of the two major currencies were members of
the British Empire who essentially had no choice. One might argue that in analyzing the choice of
vehicle currency for foreign borrowing we should focus exclusively on countries that actually had
such a choice points to excluding these cases.
32
   And by 1919 in the case of Poland, after it gained independence in 1918.
33
   Lewis (1938), p.337.
34
   Lewis (1938), p.377.

                                                                                                10
4. Econometric specification

We now estimate the determinants of currency shares of foreign public debt. Given
that shares are, at any point in time and in any country, bounded between zero and
one, we estimate a tobit model. Since our panel has a 3-dimensional structure with
country, currency and time dimensions, we account for the possibility of
unobservable country, currency and time effects:

                    yi*, j ,t   i , j  C j  s j ,t  γX j, t  θDt   i , j ,t
                                                                                          1)

       with

                                                 1           if yi*, j ,t  1
                                                 *                                       2)
                                 yi , j , t     yi , j ,t if 0  yi*, j ,t  1
                                                 0            if yi*, j ,t  0
                                                

        where i, j, and t are the country, currency and time dimensions; y is the share
of currency j in country i’s foreign public debt in year t; s is a measure of financial
depth; X is a vector of key other determinants of international currency status
(including inertia, size and credibility effects in the baseline specification); D is a
vector of time effects. We reduce the dimensions of our panel from three to two by
distinguishing country-currency (subsequently referred to as ‘group’) and time
dimensions. With 33 countries and two currencies, we therefore have 66 groups, and
control for unobserved random effects at the group level, denoted α. We control for
other unobserved currency effects with a dummy C, which equals one for US dollar
observations and 0 otherwise. The estimable parameters are therefore α, η, β together
with the vectors γ and θ.

         The disturbances are split into unobserved group effects, with variance σα2,
and panel-level effects, with variance σε2, which are assumed to be independent. To
gauge whether random-effects tobit estimation is required, we calculate the ρ -
statistic, which measures the contribution of the variance of the disturbances due to
group effects to the total variance of the disturbances:

                                                              2
                                                  
                                                          2   2

         When ρ is close to zero, random-effect tobit estimation is not significantly
different from the standard tobit model. Formal comparison between the two models
can be achieved by conducting a likelihood-ratio test, where the null hypothesis is
that a standard tobit model is better suited than a random-effects tobit model.

        Building on the literature on the determinants of currency shares (e.g. Chinn
and Frankel 2007, 2008, Frankel 2011), we focus on four categories of explanatory
variables. The first of these is network externalities, which is widely emphasized in
the earlier literature. An international currency, like a domestic currency, is more
useful when others use it. That is to say, a currency used in international debt

                                                                                          11
markets is more likely to be used in international trade transactions, in foreign
exchange trading, as an anchor currency or as a reserve currency, etc. which gives
rise to economies of scope.35 This network effect gives rise to inertia or incumbency
effects. To capture them we include the lagged value of y in X.

       Our second potential determinant is country size. The currency of an
economy with a large share in global output, trade and finance has a “big natural
advantage”, to paraphrase Chinn and Frankel (2007). To proxy for such size effects,
we use the time-varying shares of US and UK output in global output.36

        A third potential determinant is confidence in a currency’s value. An
international currency being a store of value, investors will want to know that its
value is stable and will not be inflated away. As a proxy for confidence we use
contemporaneous inflation, calculated using annual CPI data.37 We also consider a
proxy for economic proximity in the robustness checks, namely the share of US
(respectively UK) trade in a country’s trade.

        Our final potential determinant of currency shares is s, financial depth.
Liquidity is widely recognized as an important attribute of the attractiveness of
investing in a particular security – or for that matter in a security denominated in a
particular currency – and financial development is an important determinant of
market liquidity. Financial depth has not been used in previous studies of the
determinants of choice of currency of denomination for, inter alia, central bank
reserves, although Eichengreen and Flandreau (2010) show that financial depth and
development was a key determinant of the rise of dollar-denominated trade credits in
the 1920s.38 As our measure of financial development we use bank assets relative to
GDP as measured by Schularick and Taylor (forthcoming). This is in the spirit of
Eichengreen and Flandreau, who similarly proxy financial development by the asset
side of banks’ balance sheets.


5. Baseline empirical results

To benchmark our results with the estimates in the existing literature for the currency
composition of foreign exchange reserves in recent historical periods, we first
exclude financial deepening from the model and focus on the other core determinants
of international currency status: persistence, credibility and country size. Table 1

35
   Krugman (1980) first showed how the use of international currencies as vehicles in foreign
exchange markets could be subject to tipping points and path dependency, while Krugman (1984)
introduced the notion of multiple equilibria in this context. Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993)
considered the issue in the context of random matching games, along with Zhou (1997). Rey (2001)
looked at the emergence of multiple equilibria determined by network externalities and international
trade patterns. Flandreau and Jobst (2009) also find empirical evidence in favour of persistence in
foreign exchange trading data for the late 19th century, but not if favour of pure path dependency and
lock-in effects.
36
   Calculated using data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre (founded by Angus
Maddison). See http://www.ggdc.net/databases/hna.htm.
37
   Again taken from GFD.
38
   King and Levine (1993) and a large surrounding literature also analyze the impacts of financial
deepening, where financial depth is typically proxied by variables such as credit to GDP or money to
GDP, and has been found to have strong causal effects on domestic growth.

                                                                                                  12
presents these benchmark results, where the three variables are entered first one-by-
one and then together.

        Inertia effects are strong, with a point estimate on the lag of currency share of
about 0.98. In other words, only about 2% of the adjustment to the long run in
international currency shares in global debt markets is estimated to occur in a single
year, ceteris paribus. This corresponds to a half-life of about 29 years. This estimate
is similar in magnitude to the (linear) point estimates of Chinn and Frankel (2007,
Table 8.4, p. 303) of 0.90-0.96 using reserve data for 1973-1998.39 It suggests that in
order to adequately understand the evolution of currency shares it is important to
consider an extended period of time, as we do here.

        Credibility also matters, although its effect is smaller. Lower inflation
significantly raises the share of the dollar or sterling in countries’ foreign public
debt, although the impact is small in magnitude. The full model estimate (column 4
of Table 1) suggests that the short run (one year) effect of reducing the inflation rate
by 10 percentage points (a large amount by US and UK standards in the 1920s) is
associated with an increase in the share of the US dollar (sterling) of slightly less
than a percentage point. Again, our estimated coefficient of -0.07 is fairly close to
those of Chinn and Frankel (2007), who found (linear) estimates ranging between -
0.07 and -0.14.

        Country size is also important. The full model estimate suggests that the short
run effect (one year) of an increase in the share of the US (UK) economy in global
output of 10 percentage points corresponds to an increase in the share of the US
dollar (sterling) by roughly one percentage point. The estimated coefficient of 0.12 is
strikingly close to that of Chinn and Frankel (2007), whose (linear) estimates range
from 0.09 to 0.12.

        Columns 5 and 6 report the results for financial deepening. The point
estimates for the persistence and credibility effects remain unaltered, while the size
effect is larger than before (with an estimated elasticity above unity) and credibility
loses statistical significance. Importantly, financial deepening also exerts a
significant effect on the share of the US dollar (sterling) in global foreign public debt
markets. The full model estimate suggests that in the short run (over one year) an
increase in the ratio of banking assets to GDP by 10 percentage points is associated
with an increase in the share of the US dollar (sterling) of about three percentage
points.

        Figure 8 shows the contributions of size, credibility and financial deepening to
the change in the average share of the US dollar in foreign public debt between 1918
and 1932. The contributions are calculated using the estimated parameters of the
benchmark model (Table 1, column 6). They take into account dynamic effects
arising from the persistence introduced by the lagged values of currency shares in the
specification. Those dynamics imply that changes in these variables in the current
period have an impact on currency shares not just contemporaneously but in the
future as well. For each year t between 1919 and 1932 we calculate the contribution

39
  Note that they also provide panel logit estimates; we tried to run regressions with this estimator as
well, but convergence of the likelihood function to a global maximum was not obtained.

                                                                                                   13
of variable z (i.e. either size, credibility or financial deepening) to the change in the
average share of the US dollar (sterling) in global foreign public debt y as (Σi = 0,…∞
ρiθdzt-i)/dyt, where θ is the estimated parameter for z, ρ is the estimated parameter for
the lag of y, and dyt = yt - yt-1. The overall contribution of z to the change in y is then
obtained by summing the 14 annual contributions between 1919 and 1932.

        Figure 8 shows that financial deepening is by far the most important
contributor to the increase in the share of the dollar as a currency of denomination for
international bonds between 1918 and 1932, consistent with the findings of
Eichengreen and Flandreau (2010) for the market in trade acceptances. With the ratio
of US banking assets to GDP rising from 70% to 100% of GDP over the period, the
share of the dollar in global foreign public debt would have risen by almost 50
percentage points ceteris paribus.40 Next in importance is greater credibility due to
lower US inflation, although this impact is not statistically significant.41

       Interestingly, country size contributed negatively to the rise of the dollar, since
the share of the US in global output fell from 30% in 1918 to 22% in 1932,
contributing to a decline in the share of the US dollar of 30 percentage points ceteris
paribus.

        Figure 9 shows similarly estimated contributions for sterling. Here too
financial deepening had a positive impact. But country size is the most important
factor explaining the fall in the average share of sterling between 1918 and 1932, with
the share of the UK in global output falling from 13% in 1918 to 8% in 1932.42 This
is consistent with the large literature emphasizing how slow growth and high
unemployment handicapped Britain’s efforts to maintain its financial pre-eminence
and undermined the role of sterling in the 1920s (Chandler, 1958; Sayers, 1976).

        If one conducts a similar exercise for the period 1932-1939, during which the
average share of the US dollar in foreign public debt declined by about ten
percentage points, it is again financial depth (in this period financial retrenchment)
that contributes most (see Figure 10). Over that period, the ratio of bank assets to US
GDP fell by nearly 20 percent of GDP as a result of the bank failures of the Great
Depression.43

        In sum, we can explain a significant fraction of the change in currency shares
in global bond markets in the 1920s and 1930s. Financial development in the United
States is the most important determinant of the dollar’s rise in the 1920s, while


40
   Arithmetically, the bank-asset ratio continues increasing in the United States through 1931-32
despite the fact that bank assets decline (GDP declines faster). After that, however, the trend reverses.
41
   There was indeed marked regime shifts between 1918-1919, when the US had double-digit
inflation, 1921-22, when it experienced double-digit deflation, and the remainder of the 1920s, when
prices were broadly stable.
42
   To be more precise, financial deepening is the single most important identified contributor to the
decline in the share of sterling, given that the contribution of the residual is even larger in absolute
magnitude.
43
   As an alternative hypothesis, one could suggest that it is the dollar’s departure from the gold
standard that led to the decline in its share of global foreign public debt. This is unlikely to be the
case, however. Sterling left the gold standard two years earlier than the dollar, but its share did not fall
and actually increased throughout the 1930s.

                                                                                                        14
economic stagnation leading to a decline in relative country size is the most
important factor in sterling’s decline.


6. Robustness

        Table 2 examines the robustness of the results to alternative estimation
methods, including a panel tobit estimator without time effects (column 1), a linear
random effect estimator (column 2), as well as a linear fixed effect estimator (column
3) with errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity for both linear
estimators (to explicitly control for possible residual correlation between country-
dollar and country-sterling observations in each year). The results are very close to
our baseline estimates both in terms of statistical significance and economic
magnitude (with the exception of credibility, which again loses statistical
significance).

        One could also argue that the interpretation of the lagged dependent variable
in terms of inertia is problematic, insofar as the latter is simply picking up persistent
error terms. The combination of serially correlated errors and the lagged dependent
variable also introduces the possibility of biased coefficient estimates due to
correlation between the lagged variable and the error term.

        One way to deal with this problem is to instrument the lagged dependent
variable with its second lag and the first lags of the independent variables (see e.g.
Griliches, 1961; Liviatan, 1963). This will yield consistent, albeit inefficient,
estimates.44 Intuitively, including only the predicted component of lagged currency
shares enhances the plausibility that the lag is picking up genuine inertia effects,
rather than merely persistent random errors. Another approach is that of Hatanaka
(1974), which includes both the fitted value and the residual from the first-stage
regression in the second stage and yields estimates that are both consistent and
efficient.

       Columns 4 and 5 of Table 2 report the results for the two approaches. The
estimates are strikingly close to those obtained with the baseline specification, in
terms of sign, statistical significance and economic magnitude (at 0.90, the
magnitude of the estimated lagged coefficient is somewhat lower using the Griliches-
Liviatan approach). Overall, these results are consistent with the idea that we are
picking up genuine inertia effects and not merely persistence in the error term.

        In Table 3, column 1, we exclude France, the single largest debtor in both US
dollar and sterling. In column 2 we control for the fact that the number of countries
reporting data varies over time, which could distort our baseline results if large
outliers start (or discontinue) reporting data, thereby creating significant breaks in the
series. We do this by including as additional control variable the number of countries
reporting data on foreign currency debt composition per year. The results again
remain largely unaffected.



44
     Inefficient since the adjustment does not correct for error autocorrelation.

                                                                                       15
         We can also use currency shares calculated at constant exchange rates rather
than current rates (the use of current rates being the established practice in the
literature), in order to take into account possible valuation effects arising from e.g.
devaluations. In this case the estimated impact of financial deepening is somewhat
smaller. The effect of persistence remains broadly unchanged, while that of size
declines markedly in magnitude and that of credibility again loses its significance
(column 3). Importantly, the estimate for financial deepening remains positive,
although it is now smaller in magnitude and significant at the 12% level of
confidence only.

         Next we add a proxy for economic proximity, namely the bilateral share of
trade with the US (respectively the UK), to test whether our results are robust to
taking into account the intensity of economic relations between debtor economies
and those issuing international currencies.45 The new variable enters positively and is
statistically significant, in line with expected theoretical priors. The other results
remain unaltered (credibility effects turn positive, but remain statistically
insignificant; see column 4).

        As an alternative measure of financial development, we focus on market
liquidity as opposed to market size, substituting the short-term dollar-sterling interest
differential for bank claims scaled by GDP.46 Flandreau and Jobst (2009) argue that
in a credible gold standard the short-term interest differential is a very good measure
of relative market liquidity. We define US market liquidity as the differential
between the US short term interest rate and the corresponding sterling rate (i.e. the
lower the spread, the higher the liquidity), and UK market liquidity as the same
spread but with an opposite sign. The results (reported in column 5) further support
our emphasis on financial development: they confirm that a higher spread is
associated with a significant decline in the respective international currency’s share.
Conversely, they show that greater liquidity is associated with greater use of a
particular unit in global debt markets.

        We also consider the possible endogeneity of financial development. In
Section 5 we provided evidence that financial development, as proxied by the ratio of
bank assets to GDP, is an important determinant of the attractions of a currency as a
unit of denomination for international bonds. Readers may be worried about reverse
causality, that the issuance of bonds in a market may be followed by the deposit, at
least temporarily, of the receipts accruing to the issuer in the banks of that same
market. Causality, in other words, may run from the value of bond flotations to the
level of bank deposits as well as the other way around.

       A counter-argument is that our dependent variable is the share of bonds
denominated in a particular currency and not the share floated in a particular national
market; these are not always the same, as noted above. Another counter-argument is
that even if issuers did temporarily deposit the receipts from bond issuance in the
banks of the country where the issue was floated, the money to buy the bonds would

45
   The trade data are taken from Mitchell (1998a, 1998b 1998c). This results in a number of missing
observations and a smaller sample size, which is why we limit use of this variable to this section on
robustness.
46
   We take short-term nominal interest rates from Michael Bordo’s multi-country dataset on financial
crises (http://sites.google.com/site/michaelbordo/home4).

                                                                                                  16
have come, in part, from the same place – that is, investors would have withdrawn
money from those same banks in order to finance their purchases.

        To get at this question, we instrumented bank deposits as a share of GDP
using other dimensions of financial development less plausibly affected by bond
issuance in the same country: broad money to GDP; private credit to GDP; and
narrow money to GDP. The results are in Table 4, column 1.47 The second-stage
regression (see column 2) yields an estimated coefficient on bank assets which is still
positive, significant, and close in magnitude to the baseline (0.3). We also ran a
Durbin–Wu–Hausman 2-step simultaneity test and found no evidence of endogeneity
between currency share and financial depth.48

        As a final robustness check, we exclude the five Commonwealth countries
from the estimation sample. The results remain strikingly similar to those obtained
with the full sample (see Table 5), suggesting that they were not biased by the
inclusion of countries heavily oriented to sterling for institutional and political
reasons, underscoring the generality of our conclusions.


7. Conclusions and implications

This paper has provided new evidence on the emergence of the US dollar as the
leading international currency, focusing on its role as a financing currency in global
debt markets.

        This evidence challenges the three central tenets of the conventional wisdom
on international currencies. First, network externalities, first-mover advantages and
inertia matter, but they cannot indefinitely delay the transfer of leadership in the
international monetary sphere relative to that in the economic, commercial and
financial spheres; they do not dominate to the extent previously thought. Our
evidence shows that, abstracting from the Commonwealth countries, the dollar
overtook sterling already in 1929, at least 15 years prior to the date cited in other
accounts. Even including the Commonwealth countries, which were wedded to
sterling for political and institutional reasons, the dollar was already within hailing
distance of sterling as a currency of denomination for international bonds by the
latter 1920s.

        Second, our evidence challenges the presumption that once international
monetary leadership is lost, it is gone forever. Although sterling lost its leadership in
the 1920s it recovered after 1933 and again ran neck and neck with the dollar at the
end of the decade.


47
   Here we estimate the equation by OLS because we have continuous-uncensored variables on both
the left- and right-hand sides of the equation. When we implemented the Griliches-Liviatan and
Hatanaka approaches, we used a panel Tobit estimator instead in the first stage (and in the second
stage), since we had a (potentially) censored variable on the left hand side. In practice OLS and Tobit
estimations gave virtually the same results.
48
   Specifically, the residual of a first stage regression of financial depth on the exogenous variables
and the instruments was statistically insignificant when added as a regressor to our benchmark
specification in a second stage regression.

                                                                                                   17
        Third, our findings challenge the presumption that there is room for only one
dominant international currency due to strong network externalities and economies
of scope. International debt markets in the 1920s and the 1930s were characterised
by a bipolar currency system, not a unipolar one. This is true even if one takes into
account the Commonwealth countries, which were heavily oriented towards sterling
for very institutional and political reasons.

        Our results point to the development of US financial markets as the main
factor that helped the US dollar overcome sterling’s incumbency advantage. We find
that financial deepening was the most important contributor to the increase in the
share of the US dollar in global foreign public debt between 1918 and 1932. In the
case of the UK, economic stagnation (declining relative economic size) was the most
important factor accounting for sterling’s declining share over the period.

        Our findings have implications for the future of the international monetary
system. They suggest that a shift from a unipolar dollar-based system to a multipolar
system is not impossible; that it could occur sooner than often believed; and that
financial deepening will be a key determinant of the ability of currencies other than
the dollar to strengthen their international currency status. They point to further
financial integration in the euro area as important to the evolution of the euro’s
international profile in the years ahead and to the opening up of domestic financial
markets and the capital account, along with further exchange rate reform as of key
importance to that of the Chinese yuan.

        The international status of a currency will rest on solid foundations, however,
only if financial deepening in the issuing country is sustainable, and not if financial
innovation and liberalization simply causes a boom that eventually goes bust. The
impact of finance on international currency shares in global debt markets worked
both ways during the interwar period. In particular, the collapse of the US banking
system and subsequent financial retrenchment was the most important factor
contributing to the decline in the share of the US dollar in global foreign public debt
between 1932 and 1939.

        The yen’s experience is another cautionary tale. Attempts by the Japanese
authorities to develop the international role of their currency suffered from the
bursting of Japan’s equity and real estate bubbles in the late 1980s and the banking
and economic crisis of the 1990s. This underscores that the compass guiding the pace
and scope of financial sector reform should always point to the direction of medium-
term sustainability. In turn, this highlights the important role that macro-prudential
policies and tools will play in shaping the international status of currencies in the
new millennium.




                                                                                    18
References

Ali Abbas, S., N. Belhocine, A. El-Ganainy and M. Horton (2011), “Historical
   patterns and dynamics of public debt—Evidence from a new database”, IMF
   Economic Review, 59(4), pp. 717-742.
Angeloni, I, A. Bénassy-Quéré, B. Carton, Z. Darvas, C. Destais, L. Gauvin, J.
   Pisani-Ferry, A. Sapir, S. Vallee (2011), Reforming the international monetary
   system: options and implications, joint Bruegel-CEPII report, April 2011.
Bini Smaghi, L. (2011), “The reform of the international monetary system”, Speech at
   the ‘Conference in memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’, Rome, 16 December
   2011.
Bini Smaghi, L. (2011), “The Triffin dilemma revised”, Speech at the Triffin
   International Foundation, Brussels, 3 October 2011.
Borchard, E. (1951), State insolvency and foreign bondholders: general principles,
   New Haven: Yale University Press.
Broz, L. (1997), The international origins of the Federal Reserve System, Ithaca:
   Cornell University Press.
Chandler, L. (1958), Benjamin Strong, central banker, Washington, DC: Brookings
   Institution.
Chinn, M. and J. Frankel (2007), “Will the euro eventually surpass the dollar as
   leading international as leading international currency?” in G7 Current account
   imbalances and adjustment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Chinn, C and J. Frankel (2008), “The euro may over the next 15 years surpass the
   USD as leading international currency”, NBER Working Paper, No. 13909.
Constâncio, V. (2011), “The Future of the International Monetary System”, Speech at
   the Golden Series lecture at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions
   Forum, London, 23 November 2011.
Detken, C. and P. Hartmann (2000), “The euro and international capital markets”,
   International Finance, 3(1), pp. 53–94.
Detken, C. and P. Hartmann (2002), “Features of the euro in international financial
   markets”, Economic Policy, 17, pp. 555–569.
Dorrucci, E. and J. McKay, (2011), “The international monetary system after the
   financial crisis”, ECB Occasional Paper, No. 123, February 2011, Frankfurt am
   Main.
Eichengreen, B. (2011), Exorbitant privilege: the rise and fall of the dollar and the
   future of the international monetary system (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Eichengreen, B. (2012), “When Currencies Collapse,” Foreign Affairs 91, pp.117-
   135.
Eichengreen, B. and M. Flandreau (2009), “The rise and fall of the dollar (or when did
   the dollar replace sterling as the leading reserve currency?)”, European Review of
   Economic History, 13(3), pp. 377-411.
Eichengreen, B. and M. Flandreau (2010), “The Federal Reserve, the Bank of England
   and the rise of the dollar as an international currency, 1914-39”, BIS Working
   Papers, No. 328.




                                                                                  19
Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (2005), Other People’s Money: Debt
   Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press).
Eichengreen, B. and R. Portes (1989), “Settling Defaults in the Era of Bond Finance,”
   World Bank Economic Review, 3, pp.211-239.
Eichengreen, B. and R. Portes (1990), “The interwar debt crisis and its aftermath,”
   World Bank Research Observer 5, pp.69-94.
European Central Bank (various issues), Review of the international role of the euro,
   Frankfurt am Main.
Flandreau, M. and C. Jobst (2009), “The empirics of international currencies: network
   externalities, history and persistence”, Economic Journal, 119(537), pp. 643-664.
Frankel, J. (2011), “Historical precedents for the internationalization of the RMB”
   paper written for a workshop organized by the Council of Foreign Relations and
   the China Development Research Foundation.
Fratzscher, M. and A. Mehl (2011), “China’s ‘dominance’ hypothesis and the
   emergence of a tripolar global currency system”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No.
   8671.
Fratzscher, M., A. Mehl and I. Vansteenkiste (2011), “130 years of fiscal
   vulnerabilities and currency crashes”, IMF Economic Review, 59(4), pp. 683-716.
Forbes, K. (2012), “International monetary reform”, panel discussion at the AEA
   Annual Meetings, Chicago, 7 January 2012.
Ghosh, A., J. Ostry and C. Tsangarides (2011), “Exchange rate regimes and the
   stability of the international monetary system”, IMF Occasional Paper, No. 270.
Griliches, Z. (1961), “A note on the serial correlation bias in estimates of distributed
   lags”, Econometrica, 29, pp. 65-73.
Hartmann, P. (1998), Currency competition and foreign exchange markets – The
   dollar, the yen and the euro, Cambridge University Press.
Hatanaka, M. (1974), “An efficient two-step estimator for the dynamic adjustment
   model with autoregressive errors”, Journal of Econometrics, 2, pp. 199–220.
Kenen, P. (2011), “Beyond the dollar”, paper presented at the AEA Allied Social
   Science Association Meetings, Denver, Colorado.
King, R. & R. Levine (1993), “Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right”,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), pp. 717-37.
Kroszner, R. (1999), “Is it better to forgive than to receive? An empirical analysis of
   the impact of debt repudiation,” revised mimeo.
Krugman, P. (1980), “Vehicle currencies and the structure of international exchange”,
   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12(3), pp.513-526.
Krugman, P. (1984), “The international role of the dollar: theory and prospects” in
   Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, edited by J. Bilson and R. Marston (Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press).
Lewis, C. (1938), America’s stake in international investments, Washington, DC:
   Brookings Institution.
Liviatan, N. (1963), “Consistent estimation of distributed lags”, International
   Economic Review, 4, pp. 44-52.
Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki and A. Matsui (1993), “Toward a theory of international
   currency”, Review of Economic Studies, 60, pp. 283-307.

                                                                                    20
Meyers, Margaret (1936), Paris as a financial center, London: P.S. King.
Mintz, Ilse (1951), Deterioration in the quality of foreign bonds issued in the United
  States, 1920-1930, New York: National Bureau of Economic Reserch.
Mitchell, B. (1998a), International historical statistics, Europe, 1750-1993,
  McMillan, 4th edition, London.
Mitchell, B. (1998b), International historical statistics, Africa, Asia & Oceania,
  1750-1993, McMillan, 4th edition, London.
Mitchell, B. (1998c), International historical statistics, the Americas, 1750-1993,
  McMillan, 4th edition, London.
Mitchener, K. and M. Weidenmeier (2005), “Empire, public goods and the Roosevelt
  corollary,” Journal of Economic History 65, pp.658-692.
Moggridge, D. (1971), “British controls on long term capital movements, 1924-31,”
  in D.N. McCloskey (ed.), Essays on a mature economy: Britain since 1840,
  Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.113-138.
Moulton, H. and L. Pasvolsky (1926), World war debt settlements, New York:
  Macmillan.
Reinhart, C. (2010). “This time is different chartbook: country histories on debt,
  default, and financial crises”, NBER Working Paper, No. 15815, March 2010.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2008a), “The forgotten history of domestic debt”, NBER
  Working Paper No. 13946, April 2008.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2008b), “Is the 2007 U.S. subprime crisis so different?
  An international historical comparison”, American Economic Review, vol. 98 No.
  2, May 2008, pp. 339-344.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009a), “The aftermath of financial crises”, American
  Economic Review, vol. 99 No. 2, May 2009, pp. 466-472.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009b), This time is different: Eight centuries of financial
  folly, Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2010), “Growth in a time of debt”, American Economic
  Review, vol. 100 No. 2, May 2010, pp. 573-578.
Rey, H. (2001), “International trade and currency exchange”, Review of Economic
  Studies, 68(2), pp. 443-464.
Sayers, R. (1976), The Bank of England 1891-1944, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Schularick, M. and A. Taylor, “Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage
   cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008”, American Economic Review,
   forthcoming.
Subramanian, A. (2011), “Renminbi rules: the conditional imminence of the reserve
   currency transition”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working
   Paper 11-14.
Triffin, R. (1960), Gold and the dollar crisis: the future of convertibility (New Haven:
   Yale University Press).
Truman, E. and A, Wong (2006), “The Case for an International Reserve Standard,”
   Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper 06/2.



                                                                                    21
United Nations (1948), Public Debt, 1914-1946, Department of Economic Affairs,
   (Lake Success, New York, 1948: United Nations).
Winkler, M. (1933), Foreign bonds, an autopsy: a study of defaults and repudiations
   of government obligations, Philadelphia: Roland Swain.
World Bank (various years), Global Development Finance (Washington, DC: World
   Bank).
Zhou, R. (1997), “Currency exchange in a random search model”, Review of
   Economic Studies, 64, pp. 289-310.




                                                                               22
                Figure 1: Number of countries reporting data
   30



   25



   20



   15



   10



    5



    0
         1914
         1915
         1916
         1917
         1918
         1919
         1920
         1921
         1922
         1923
         1924
         1925
         1926
         1927
         1928
         1929
         1930
         1931
         1932
         1933
         1934
         1935
         1936
         1937
         1938
         1939
         1940
         1941
         1942
         1943
         1944
Note: The figure shows for each year between 1914 and 1946 the number of countries
reporting data on the currency composition of their foreign public debt, as available
from United Nations (1948).




                   Figure 2: Global foreign public debt
     (Currency breakdown in USD million; at current exchange rates)
        20000       GB P   USD   Go ld   Other




        16000




        12000



         8000




         4000



            0
                1914
                1915
                1916
                1917
                1918
                1919
                1920
                1921
                1922
                1923
                1924
                1925
                1926
                1927
                1928
                1929
                1930
                1931
                1932
                1933
                1934
                1935
                1936
                1937
                1938
                1939
                1940
                1941
                1942
                1943
                1944
                1945




Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and
Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure plots over time the global
stock of foreign public debt, in USD million and at current exchange rates, calculated
with our full sample of 33 countries, and broken down into selected currencies.


                                                                                         23
 Figure 3: Global foreign public debt in US dollar – Main debtors
             (As a % of total; at current exchange rates; in 1929)



                    Europe excl.
                      France
                       20%




          Commonwealth
              7%


                         Asia
                         2%


                                                                 France
                            Latin America
                                                                  57%
                                 14%



Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and
Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows for 1929 (roughly the
mid-point of our sample) the global stock of US dollar-denominated foreign public debt
(amounting to USD 6,828 million) broken down by main debtor regions.

  Figure 4: Global foreign public debt in sterling – Main debtors
             (As a % of total, at current exchange rates; in 1929)

                            France
                             37%




          Europe excl.
            France                                                   Latin America
              7%                                                          9%




                                                                    Asia
                                                                    5%




                                Commonwealth
                                   42%


Notes: Authors’ estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and
Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows for 1929 (roughly the
mid-point of our sample) the global stock of sterling-denominated foreign public debt
(amounting to USD 10,232 million) broken down by main debtor regions.




                                                                                         24
        Figure 5a: Global foreign public debt – Selected currency shares
                          (As a % of total; at current exchange rates)
                 100
                                         GB P        USD        Go ld       Other

                  90

                  80

                  70

                  60

                  50

                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                      0
                          1914
                          1915
                          1916
                          1917
                          1918
                          1919
                          1920
                          1921
                          1922
                          1923
                          1924
                          1925
                          1926
                          1927
                          1928
                          1929
                          1930
                          1931
                          1932
                          1933
                          1934
                          1935
                          1936
                          1937
                          1938
                          1939
                          1940
                          1941
                          1942
                          1943
                          1944
                          1945
       Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and
       Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows the evolution over
       time of the shares of sterling, US dollar, gold and other currencies in the global stock
       of foreign public debt (in % and at current exchange rates) based on our full sample of
       33 countries. Data for Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa refer to the
       location (London or New York) where debt was “payable”, “redeemable” or “due” and
       are not strictly comparable with those of the remaining 29 countries whose data refer
       to actual foreign currency debt denomination.

Figure 5b: Global foreign public debt (excl. Commonwealth countries) – Selected
                                currency shares
                          (As a % of total; at current exchange rates)
                 90
                                         GB P        USD        Go ld       Other

                 80

                 70

                 60

                 50

                 40

                 30

                 20

                 10

                  0
                          1914
                          1915
                          1916
                          1917
                          1918
                          1919
                          1920
                          1921
                          1922
                          1923
                          1924
                          1925
                          1926
                          1927
                          1928
                          1929
                          1930
                          1931
                          1932
                          1933
                          1934
                          1935
                          1936
                          1937
                          1938
                          1939
                          1940
                          1941
                          1942
                          1943
                          1944




       Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and
       Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows the evolution over
       time of the shares of sterling, US dollar, gold and other currencies in the global stock
       of foreign public debt (in % and at current exchange rates) based on a restricted sample
       of 28 countries, i.e. the full sample minus our five Commonwealth countries (India,
       Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa).

                                                                                                  25
                                         Figure 6: Global foreign public debt – Alternative methods to calculate currency shares
                                                                             (As a % of total)
                             a. At constant (end-1930) exchange rates                                                   b. At current exchange rates
                                           (incl. France)                                                                      ( excl. France)
                           100                                                                                 100                 GB P          USD         Go ld      Other
                                           GBP     USD     Gold          Other
                            90                                                                                     90

                            80                                                                                     80

                            70                                                                                     70

                            60                                                                                     60

                            50                                                                                     50

                                                                                                                   40
                            40
                                                                                                                   30
                            30
                                                                                                                   20
                            20
                                                                                                                   10
                            10
                                                                                                                    0
                             0




                                                                                                                        1914
                                                                                                                        1915
                                                                                                                        1916
                                                                                                                        1917
                                                                                                                        1918
                                                                                                                        1919
                                                                                                                        1920
                                                                                                                        1921
                                                                                                                        1922
                                                                                                                        1923
                                                                                                                        1924
                                                                                                                        1925
                                                                                                                        1926
                                                                                                                        1927
                                                                                                                        1928
                                                                                                                        1929
                                                                                                                        1930
                                                                                                                        1931
                                                                                                                        1932
                                                                                                                        1933
                                                                                                                        1934
                                                                                                                        1935
                                                                                                                        1936
                                                                                                                        1937
                                                                                                                        1938
                                                                                                                        1939
                                                                                                                        1940
                                                                                                                        1941
                                                                                                                        1942
                                                                                                                        1943
                                                                                                                        1944
                                 1914
                                 1915
                                 1916
                                 1917
                                 1918
                                 1919
                                 1920
                                 1921
                                 1922
                                 1923
                                 1924
                                 1925
                                 1926
                                 1927
                                 1928
                                 1929
                                 1930
                                 1931
                                 1932
                                 1933
                                 1934
                                 1935
                                 1936
                                 1937
                                 1938
                                 1939
                                 1940
                                 1941
                                 1942
                                 1943
                                 1944
           c. At current exchange rates, arithmetic average across 33 countries                   d. At current exchange rates, excluding Commonwealth countries or
                                                                                                           those issuing only in US dollar or sterling
                     100                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                          GB P         USD      Go ld   Other
                                                  GB P            US D
                      90                                                                                      90

                      80                                                                                      80

                      70                                                                                      70

                      60                                                                                      60

                      50                                                                                      50

                      40                                                                                      40

                      30                                                                                      30

                      20                                                                                      20

                      10                                                                                      10

                       0                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                    1914
                                                                                                                    1915
                                                                                                                    1916
                                                                                                                    1917
                                                                                                                    1918
                                                                                                                    1919
                                                                                                                    1920
                                                                                                                    1921
                                                                                                                    1922
                                                                                                                    1923
                                                                                                                    1924
                                                                                                                    1925
                                                                                                                    1926
                                                                                                                    1927
                                                                                                                    1928
                                                                                                                    1929
                                                                                                                    1930
                                                                                                                    1931
                                                                                                                    1932
                                                                                                                    1933
                                                                                                                    1934
                                                                                                                    1935
                                                                                                                    1936
                                                                                                                    1937
                                                                                                                    1938
                                                                                                                    1939
                                                                                                                    1940
                                                                                                                    1941
                                                                                                                    1942
                                                                                                                    1943
                                                                                                                    1944
                            1914
                            1915
                            1916
                            1917
                            1918
                            1919
                            1920
                            1921
                            1922
                            1923
                            1924
                            1925
                            1926
                            1927
                            1928
                            1929
                            1930
                            1931
                            1932
                            1933
                            1934
                            1935
                            1936
                            1937
                            1938
                            1939
                            1940
                            1941
                            1942
                            1943
                            1944
                            1945
                            1946




Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows the evolution over
time of the shares of sterling, US dollar, gold and other currencies in the global stock of foreign public debt using alternative methods to calculate currency shares and
based on our full sample of 33 countries (except Figure 6d). Data for Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa refer to the location (London or New York) where
debt was “payable”, “redeemable” or “due” and are not strictly comparable with those of the remaining 29 countries whose data refer to actual foreign currency debt
denomination.

                                                                                                                                                                                26
                                                  Figure 7: Share of US dollar/sterling debt in foreign public debt – Breakdown by country
                                                                                 (% at current exchange rates)

                                                                    argentina                    australia                     austria                        belgium                       bolivia                       brazil




                                                  50 100
                                                  0
                                                                     canada                        chile                      colombia                       costarica                       cuba                       denmark



                                                  50 100
                    As % of foreign public debt
                                                  0



                                                                dominicanrepublic                  finland                      france                       guatemala                       haiti                      honduras
                                                  50 100
                                                  0




                                                                      india                        japan                     newzealand                      nicaragua                      norway                      panama
                                                  50 100
                                                  0




                                                                      peru                        poland                       portugal                       romania                        siam                      switzerland
                                                  50 100
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                    191 0 1920 1930 1 940 19 50 191 0 192 0 193 0 1 940 1 950 1 910 1 920 1 930 194 0 195 0


                                                                      turkey                 unionofsouthafrica                uruguay
                                                  50 100
                                                  0




                                                           19 10 1920 1930 1940 1 950 191 0 192 0 193 0 194 0 1 950 1 910 1 920 1 930 1 940 195 0




                                                                                                                  Pound sterling                                                US dollar
                                                  Graphs by cty


Notes: Authors’ own estimates based on United Nations (1948) as well as the GFD and Measuring Worth databases on exchange rates. The figure shows the
evolution over time of the shares of the US dollar and sterling in the foreign public debt of each of our sample’s 33 countries (in % and at current exchange
rates). Data for Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa refer to the location (London or New York) where debt was “payable”, “redeemable” or
“due” and are not strictly comparable with those of the remaining 29 countries whose data refer to actual foreign currency debt denomination.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              27
Figure 8: Estimated contributions to the change in the share of the US dollar in
               global foreign public debt between 1918 and 1932
                              (In percentage points)

         60

         40

         20

          0

         -20

         -40

         -60
                   Size         Credibility     Financial        Residual     Total change in
                                                deepening                          share




Figure 9: Estimated contributions to the change in the share of sterling in global
                  foreign public debt between 1918 and 1932
                             (In percentage points)

         60

         40

         20

          0

         -20

         -40

         -60
                   Size         Credibility     Financial        Residual     Total change in
                                                deepening                          share



       Notes: The contributions reported in Figures 8 and 9 are calculated using the
       estimated parameters of benchmark model (6) of Table 1. They include dynamic
       effects which we calculate as follows. For each year t between 1919 and 1932 we
       calculate the contribution of variable z (i.e. either size, credibility or financial
       deepening) to the change in the average share of the US dollar (sterling) in global
       foreign public debt y as (Σi = 0,…∞ ρiθdzt-i)/dyt, where θ is the estimated parameter for z,
       ρ is the estimated parameter for the lag of y, and where dyt = yt - yt-1. The overall
       contribution of z to the overall change in y throughout the period is obtained by
       summing the 14 annual contributions between 1919 and 1932. Recall also that the
       estimated effect of credibility was found to be statistically insignificant.



                                                                                                      28
Figure 10: Estimated contributions to the change in the share of the US dollar in
               global foreign public debt between 1932 and 1939
                              (In percentage points)

         60

         40

         20

          0

         -20

         -40

         -60
                   Size        Credibility     Financial      Residual   Total change in
                                               deepening                      share
       Notes: Please refer to the notes to Figures 8 and 9.




                                                                                           29
                                    Table 1: Baseline model estimates
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)

       Inertia                  0.978***                                  0.978***                    0.980***
                                 (0.007)                                   (0.007)                     (0.006)
       Credibility                              0.013                      -0.073*                      -0.068
                                               (0.107)                     (0.040)                     (0.052)
       Size                                                 0.685***      0.124**                     1.069***
                                                             (0.144)       (0.053)                     (0.172)
       Financial depth                                                                      0.370*** 0.280***
                                                                                             (0.122)   (0.074)
       Constant                  0.531       42.808*** 36.247***           -2.417*          22.145** -26.054***
                                (1.124)       (6.740)   (6.870)            (1.400)           (9.863)   (5.826)

       Observations             1,493           1,563         1,563         1,493               1,284             1,214
       No. of groups              66              66            66            66                  66                66
       ρ                        0.0320          0.833         0.835         0.0345              0.840             0.0212
       σα                       0.980           34.54         34.65         1.015               34.46             0.833
       σε                       5.387           15.49         15.38         5.371               15.05             5.655
       Log likelihood           -4651           -6656         -6645         -4647               -5452             -3837

Note: The table reports panel tobit estimates for the benchmark model of Eq. (1)-(2) including the
main determinants of international currency status, group effects, currency effects and time effects.
The shaded specification is the benchmark model. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                  Table 2: Estimates with alternative estimation methods
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)           (5)
                                             xt tobit     Linear       Linear          Griliches     Hatanaka
                                           (excl. time   random         fixed           (1961)        (1974)
                                             effects)     effects      effects         Liviatan
                                                                                        (1963)

                  Inertia                   0.979*** 0.985***         0.902***
                                             (0.006)   (0.004)         (0.011)
                  Credibility                 -0.018    -0.069          -0.073    -0.158**   -0.086
                                             (0.022)   (0.063)         (0.052)     (0.077)  (0.058)
                  Size                      0.503*** 1.087***         0.867*** 0.844*** 1.048***
                                             (0.121)   (0.164)         (0.174)     (0.241)  (0.178)
                  Financial depth           0.087**   0.276***        0.293***    0.249**  0.274***
                                             (0.036)   (0.062)         (0.069)     (0.100)  (0.076)
                  Constant                 -9.882*** -26.352***      -29.147*** -16.704** -25.134***
                                             (3.348)   (4.961)         (7.985) (8.040)      (5.980)
                  Fitted inertia                                                 0.907*** 0.978***
                                                                                   (0.020)  (0.007)
                  1st stage residual                                                       0.964***
                                                                                            (0.032)

                  Observations               1,214        1,214        1,214            1,146            1,146
                  No. of groups               66           66            66               64               64
                  ρ                         0.0217          0          0.747            0.238            0.0252
                  σα                         0.852          0          9.657            4.213             0.923
                  σε                         5.718        5.624        5.624            7.541             5.744
                  Log likelihood            -3850           .          -3770            -3999            -3641
Note: The table reports panel tobit estimates for our benchmark model (Table 1; Eq (6)) using: (1) a
panel tobit estimator without time effects; (2) a linear random effects estimator and (3) a linear fixed
effects estimator (with errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity); (4) the
Griliches (1961)-Liviatan (1963) estimator; and (5) the Hatanaka (1974) estimator. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                                                                           30
                                      Table 3: Other sensitivity tests
                                              (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)            (5)
                                             Excl.      Compo.      Constant   Economic      Market
                                            France      effects      shares    proximity    liquidity


              Inertia                      0.980***     0.980***    0.978***   0.982***    0.975***
                                            (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.007)     (0.007)
              Credibility                   -0.089*      -0.068       0.014      0.060       -0.039
                                            (0.052)      (0.052)     (0.048)    (0.061)     (0.043)
              Size                         1.063***     1.069***    0.623***   1.075***     0.094*
                                            (0.175)      (0.172)     (0.160)    (0.193)     (0.055)
              Financial depth              0.281***     0.280***     0.107*    0.321***
                                            (0.076)      (0.074)     (0.069)    (0.083)
              # reporting countries                      -0.033
                                                         (0.104)
              Bilateral trade with US/UK                                       0.028***
                                                                                (0.010)
              Market liquidity                                                        -0.399**
                                                                                       (0.188)
              Constant                     -29.620*** -27.371*** -13.166** -30.115*** -1.483
                                             (5.862)    (6.557)   (5.400)    (6.422)   (1.469)
              Observations                    1,177      1,214     1,214       882      1,493
              No. of groups                     64        66         66         49       66
              ρ                              0.0233     0.0212     0.0376    0.00945   0.0403
              σα                             0.872       0.833       1.033      0.534        1.097
              σε                             5.647       5.655       5.229      5.471        5.354
              Log likelihood                 -3719       -3837       -3748      -2754        -4645

Note: The table reports panel tobit estimates for our benchmark model (Table 1; Eq (6)) and (1)
excluding France (largest debtor) from the estimation; (2) controlling for the number of countries
reporting data; (3) using currency shares calculated at constant exchange rates; (4) controlling for
economic proximity. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.13.

                                           Table 4: Endogeneity
                              st                                    nd
                            1 -stage regression                 2 -stage regression
                        Dependent variable: banking         Dependent variable: currency
                                assets/GDP                             share

                     Private credit/GDP     0.151***      Inertia          0.979***
                                              (0.020)                       (0.007)
                     Narrow money/GDP       -0.841***
                                                 Credibility               -0.143**
                                              (0.044)                       (0.057)
                     Broad money/GDP         1.294***
                                                 Size                      0.650***
                                              (0.015)                       (0.131)
                                                 (instr.) Financial depth 0.254***
                                                                            (0.066)
                     Constant         -11.499*** Constant                 -17.348***
                                        (0.853)                             (4.609)

                     Observations             1,650       Observations                  1,179
                                                          No. of groups                   66
                                                          ρ                             0.0213
                                                          σα                            0.841
                     R2                       0.900       σε                            5.708
                     Log likelihood           -4322       Log likelihood                -3737

Note: The table reports in the 1st-stage (OLS) and 2nd-stage (panel tobit) regression estimates for our
benchmark model (Table 1; Eq (6)) where the ratio of banking assets to GDP is instrumented by three
other financial depth proxies. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.



                                                                                                        31
                 Table 5: Estimates excluding Commonwealth countries
                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

      Inertia           0.971***                            0.970***             0.975***
                         (0.008)                             (0.008)              (0.007)
      Credibility                     -0.064                -0.098**               -0.078
                                     (0.122)                 (0.046)              (0.059)
      Size                                      0.596***    0.153**              1.198***
                                                 (0.171)     (0.063)              (0.195)
      Financial depth                                                   0.420*** 0.325***
                                                                         (0.138)  (0.084)
      Constant            0.120    35.622*** 29.486***      -3.103**     11.430 -33.420***
                         (1.580)    (7.039)   (7.206)        (1.582)    (10.845)  (6.545)

      Observations        1,279       1,339      1,339       1,279       1,121       1,061
      No. of groups        56           56         56          56          56          56
      ρ                  0.0268       0.797      0.799       0.0289      0.805       0.0170
      σα                  0.944       32.42      32.42       0.979       32.67       0.788
      σε                  5.691       16.34      16.27       5.670       16.06       6.002
      Log likelihood     -4052        -5766      -5760       -4048       -4824       -3415

Note: The table reports panel tobit estimates for our benchmark model (Table 1; Eq (6)) excluding the
five Commonwealth countries in our sample (Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand and South Africa)
and including the main determinants of international currency status, group effects, currency effects
and time effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                 32
 Appendix I: Primary sources used by the United Nations to compile data on the
                 currency composition of foreign public debt

Argentina. Memoria del Departamento de Hacienda; Memoria de la Contaduria de
la Nación; El Ajuste de los Resultados Financieros de los Ejercicios de 1928 a 1936,
Buenos aires, 1938; Dirección General de Estadística, Informe No. 6, Series F., No. 2,
Buenos Aires, 1923, Revista de Economia Argentina.

Australia. The Budget, Finance Bulletins - Summary of Australian Financial
Statistics, the Treasurer's Statement of Receipts and Expenditure, Official Year-Book
of the Commonwealth of Australia.

Austria. Bundes-Rechnungsabschluss        der   Republik   Österreich,   Statistisches
Handbuch für dir Republik Österreich.
Belgium. Office Central de Statistique, Annuaire Statistique, Evolution des Finances
de l’Etat, 1931-1940 ; Banque Nationale, Bulletin d'Information et de Documentation.
Bolivia. Oficina Nacional: Estadística Financiera, Estadística Boliviana; Dirección
General de Estadística: Extracto Estadístico. Ministerio de Hacienda, Dirección
General de Estadística: Finanzas. Banco Central de Bolivia: Boletín.
Brazil: Contadoria Geral da Republica: Balancos Gerais da União (title varies
slightly during the period 1914-1943), Anuario Estadistico do Brasil. Sir Otto E.
Niemayer: Report submitted to the Brazilian Government, 1931.
Canada: Public Accounts; Canada Yearbook.
Chile. Sinópsis Estadística, 1926/27, Price, Waterhouse, Faller & Co.; Informe sobre
el Estado de la Hacienda Pública; Memoria de la Controleria General; Sinópsis
Geográfico-Estadística, 1933.
Colombia: Informe Financiero de Contralor General, Anuario Estadistica, Boletin
del Departamento de Controloria.
Costa Rica. Secretaria de Hacienda y Comercio, Memoria; Congreso Constitucional,
Centro de Control, Informe.
Cuba. Communications received by the Economic, Financial and Transit Department
of the League of Nations from the Cuban Government.
Denmark: Closed Accounts, Statistik Aarbog, Danske Staatslaan.
Dominican Republic: Informe de la Camara de Cuentas; Moody’s Government and
Municipal Manual; Secretaria de Estado del Tesoro y Credito Público; Anuario de
Estadístico de la República Dominicana; Annual Report of the Council of the
Corporation of Foreign Bond Holders.
Finland: Closed Accounts, Bureau Central de Statistique, Annuaire Statistique de
Finlande, Recueil de Statistique, Communication from Bank of Finland, Institute for
Economic Research.
France. Closed accounts (Comptes Généraux), Ministère des Finances, Dette
Publique (Situations Mensuelles), Inventaire de la Situation financière (1913-1946).


                                                                                  33
Guatemala. Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Público, Memoria; Council of the
Cooperation of Foreign Bondholders, Annual Reports.
Haiti. Annual Reports of the Fiscal Representative, Banque Nationale d’Haïti, Annual
Reports of the Fiscal Department.
Honduras: Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Público; Memorias; Council of Foreign
Bondholders, Annual Reports.
India. Combined Finance and Revenue Accounts, Budgets of the Government of
India, Statistical Abstracts for British India.
Japan. Department of Finance, Financial and Economic Annual of Japan, Résumé
statistique de l'Empire de Japon, Bank of Japan, Economic Statistics of Japan,
Oriental Economist, Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, Japanese Economic
Statistics.
New Zealand: Public Accounts; New Zealand Official Yearbook.
Nicaragua. Memoria del Secretaria de Hacienda y Tesoro, Memoria del Recaudador
General de Aduanas y alta Comisión, Informe del alta Comisión, Boletín Mensual
Estadística, Año 2, Nos. 11 y 12.
Norway. Closed accounts; Statistique officielle de la Norvège, serie VIII; Statistical
Year-Books of Norway.
Panama. Secretaria de Hacienda y Tesoro, Memoria; Contralor General de la
República, Informe; Dirección de Estadística y Censo, Estadística Panamena.
Peru. Balance y cuenta de la Republica, Extracto Estadístico del Perú.
Poland. Budgets, Closed Accounts, Annuaire Statistique de la République Polonaise,
the Statistical Bulletin of the Ministry of Finance; the Bulletin of the Bank of Poland;
Central Statistical Office, Statistical News.
Portugal. Conta Geral do Estado, Orçamento Geral, Movimiento Financeiro de
Portugal, Anuário Estadistico.
Romania. Exposé des motifs, Budgets, Central Statistical Institute, Statistical Year-
Books, National Bank, Bulletin d'Information et de Documentation.
Siam. Reports of the Financial Adviser on the Budget of the Kingdom of Siam. Annual
Reports of the Bank of Siam.
Switzerland. Comptes d'Etat, Statistical Year-Books of Switzerland.
Turkey. Closed Accounts; Central Bank of Turkey: Bulletins. 1940-1944: Reply by
the Turkish Government to questionnaire of the Economic, Financial and Transit
Department of the League of Nations.
Union of South Africa: Annual Report of the Controller and Auditor-General and
Treasury Statements, Annual Report of the Public Debt Commissioners. Official
Yearbook of the Union of South Africa.
Uruguay. Deuda Pública Nacional, Anuario Estadístico.


                                                                                    34
   Appendix II: Country-level information on the data availability on currency
                      composition of foreign public debt


Argentina. Annual data from 1927 to 1946 (with missing observations for the year
1928 which were filled with interpolation) in six currencies (sterling, US dollar,
Spanish peseta, Swiss franc, Italian lira and gold Argentinean peso) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 11). Book value of outstanding debt amounts in these
currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of -period) market exchange
rates. Debt in gold peso converted to US dollar using the exchange rate at which
Argentina re-entered the gold standard in 1927 (1.0385 ARS/USD).

Australia. Annual data for 1928 and 1937 to 1947 on bonds “redeemable” in London
and in New York are available from United Nations (1948, p. 18). Data are
interpolated for the period 1929-1936 by assuming that currency shares remain
constant at the average of 1928 and 1937 values. Book value of outstanding debt
amounts reported in local currency converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-
period) market exchange rates.

Austria. Annual data from 1925 to 1937 in 15 currencies (sterling, US dollar, French
franc, Swiss franc, Belgian franc, gold franc, Dutch Gulden, Italian lira, Spanish
peseta, Swedish crown, Norwegian crown, Danish crown, Czech crown, Egyptian
pound and German Reichmark) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 19). Book
value of outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of -period) market exchange rates. Debt in gold franc (issued in 1932)
converted to US dollar amounts using the Franc Poincaré 1928 parity (25.575 gold
francs per US dollar). Data on debt issued in Czech crown was converted into US
dollar amounts using the exchange rate of the koruna vs. the US dollar available from
the United Nations volume (Table I, p. 49). Data on debt issued in Egyptian pound not
converted to US dollar amounts due to missing exchange rate data (and thereby
discarded).

Belgium. Annual data from 1919 to 1945 in seven currencies (sterling, US dollar,
French franc, Dutch gulden, Swiss franc, Swedish crown and Canadian dollar) are
available from United Nations (1948, p. 22). Book value of outstanding debt amounts
in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of -period) market
exchange rates.

Bolivia. Annual data from 1914 to 1944 in two currencies (sterling, US dollar) are
available from United Nations (1948, p. 25). Book value of outstanding debt amounts
in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of -period) market
exchange rates.

Brazil. Annual data from 1914 to 1946 in four currencies (sterling, US dollar, French
franc, gold franc) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 28). Book value of
outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using
(end-of -period) market exchange rates. Debt in gold franc (issued in 1914) converted
to US dollar amounts using the Franc Germinal 1914 parity (5.095 gold francs per US
dollar).



                                                                                   35
Canada. Annual data for 1928 and 1937 to 1947 on bonds “payable” in London and
in New York are available from United Nations (1948, p. 37). Data are interpolated
for the period 1929-1936 by assuming that currency shares remain constant at the
average of 1928 and 1937 values. Book value of outstanding debt amounts reported in
local currency converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange
rates.

Chile. Annual data from 1914 to 1946 in three currencies (sterling, US dollar, Swiss
franc) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 38). Book value of outstanding
debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of -
period) market exchange rates.

Colombia. Annual security-by-security data for 1928 and 1937 to 1944 on bonds in
two currencies (sterling, US dollar) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 44).
Due to large bond amounts in unspecified currencies (National City Bank and others’;
‘Export and Import Bank, Washington”; ‘Conversion bonds’) data post-1940 had to
be discarded. Data are interpolated for the period 1929-1936 by assuming that
currency shares remain constant at the average of 1928 and 1937 values. Book value
of outstanding debt amounts reported in local currency converted to US dollar
amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Costa Rica. Annual data from 1914 to 1944 in three currencies (sterling, US dollar,
French franc) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 45). Book value of
outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using
(end-of -period) market exchange rates.

Cuba. Annual data from 1928 to 1946 in one currency (US dollar) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 48), reported in millions of national currency. Foreign debt
consists of US dollar obligations. Book value of outstanding debt amounts reported in
local currency converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange
rates.

Denmark. Annual security-by-security data for 1928 and 1935 to 1944 on bonds in
five currencies (sterling, US dollar, Dutch gulden, Swedish kronor and Swiss franc
and some issues in multiple currencies) are available from United Nations (1948, pp.
53-54). Data are interpolated for the period 1929-1934 by assuming that currency
shares remain constant at the average of 1928 and 1935 values. Book value of
outstanding debt amounts reported in local currency converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Dominican Republic: Annual data for 1914-1946 on bonds in one currency (US
dollar) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 55).

Finland. Annual security-by-security data for 1928 and 1934 to 1945 on bonds in
three currencies (sterling, US dollar, Swedish kronor and some issues in unspecified
currencies) are available from United Nations (1948, pp. 63). Data are interpolated for
the period 1929-1933 by assuming that currency shares remain constant at the average
of 1928 and 1934 values. Book value of outstanding debt amounts reported in local
currency converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange
rates.


                                                                                   36
France. Annual data from 1920 to 1931 in two currencies (sterling, US dollar) are
available from United Nations (1948, p. 65) corresponding to the debt owed to the
“allied governments”. Data on commercial (private) debt (denominated in gold franc)
are also available accounting for approximately 15% of total foreign debt. Since we
focus on public debt in the paper, we exclude such commercial debt from our
empirical analysis. Book value of outstanding debt amounts in these currencies
converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of -period) market exchange rates.

Guatemala. Annual data for 1915 and from 1921 to 1946 in two currencies (sterling,
US dollar) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 74). With the exception of a
4% sterling loan, the whole of foreign debt consists of US dollar obligations.

Haiti. Annual data from 1915 to 1946 in one currency (US dollar) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 76-77). Foreign debt consists of two issues of dollar bonds.
Book value of outstanding debt amounts reported in local currency converted to US
dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Honduras. Annual data for 1933 and from 1938 to 1946 in one currency (sterling) are
available from United Nations (1948, p. 78-79). Foreign debt consists of four loans in
sterling. Data are interpolated for the period 1934-1937 by assuming that currency
shares remain constant at the average of 1933 and 1938 values. Book value of
outstanding debt amounts reported in local currency converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

India. Annual data from 1914 to 1945 in one currency (sterling) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 83). Foreign debt consists entirely of sterling obligations.
Book value of outstanding debt amounts converted to US dollar amounts using (end-
of-period) market exchange rates.

Japan. Annual data from 1914 to 1939 in three currencies (sterling, US dollar, French
franc) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 93). Book value of outstanding
debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-
period) market exchange rates.

Nicaragua. Annual data from 1914 to 1944 in two currencies (sterling, US dollar) are
available from United Nations (1948, pp. 104-105). Book value of outstanding debt
amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period)
market exchange rates.

New Zealand. Annual data from 1937 to 1945 on bonds “due” in London and in
Australia are available from United Nations (1948, pp. 100-103). Annual data from
1917 to 1938 on debt “domiciled” in London and Australia are taken from the New
Zealand Official Year-Book. Book value of outstanding debt amounts reported in
local currency converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange
rates.

Norway. Annual data from 1914 to 1945 in five currencies (sterling, US dollar,
French franc, Swedish crown and Swiss franc) are available from United Nations



                                                                                  37
(1948, p. 107). Book value of outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted
to US dollar amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Panama. Annual data from 1915 to 1944 in one currency (dollar) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 110). Foreign debt consists entirely of dollar obligations.
Data interpolated for the years 1917 and for 1923.

Peru. Annual data from 1918 to 1945 in three currencies (sterling, US dollar, French
franc) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 114). Book value of outstanding
debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using (end-of-
period) market exchange rates.

Poland. Annual data from 1919 to 1939 in 13 currencies (sterling, US dollar, gold
francs, Austrian gold crowns, Austrian gold florins, Austrian schillings, French franc,
Italian Lira, Dutch florin, Norwegian kroner, Swedish kroner, Danish kroner and
Swiss francs) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 117). Book value of
outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using
(end-of-period) market exchange rates. The gold debt data includes only debt in gold
franc. Data on debt issued in Austrian gold crown and Austrian gold florin not
converted to US dollar amounts due to missing exchange rate data and thereby
discarded.

Portugal. Annual data from 1914 to 1946 in one currency (sterling) are available
from United Nations (1948, pp. 120-121). Foreign debt entirely consists of sterling
obligations. Book value of outstanding debt amounts converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Romania. Annual data from 1923 to 1942 in 14 currencies (sterling, US dollar, gold
franc, gold lei, gold florin, gold crown, French franc, Swiss franc, Italian lira,
Belgian franc, German Reichmark, Scandinavian crown, Czechoslovak crown and
paper crown) are available from United Nations (1948, pp. 124-125). Book value of
outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts using
(end-of-period) market exchange rates. Debt in gold franc (issued in 1923) converted
to US dollar using the Franc Germinal 1914 parity (5.095 gold francs per US dollar).
Data on debt issued in gold lei, gold florin, gold crown, Scandinavian crown and
paper crown not converted to US dollar amounts due to missing exchange rate data
and thereby discarded. In order to avoid a gap in the data series due to the change in
the financial year from 31 December to March from 1931 onwards, we have assigned
the data covering the period 1 January 1930-31 March 1932 to the year 1931.

Siam. Annual data from 1914 to 1941 in one currency (sterling) are available from
United Nations (1948, p. 129). Foreign debt consists entirely of sterling obligations.
Book value of outstanding debt amounts converted to US dollar amounts using (end-
of-period) market exchange rates.

South Africa (Union of). Annual data for 1914 to 1947 on bonds “payable” in
London are available from United Nations (1948, pp. 143-145). Book value of
outstanding debt amounts reported in local currency converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.



                                                                                   38
Switzerland. Annual data from 1915 to 1933 in one currency (US dollar) are
available from United Nations (1948, p. 1938). Foreign debt entirely consists of US
dollar obligations.

Turkey. Annual data from 1933 to 1934 and from 1937 to 1938 in eight currencies
(sterling, gold sterling, US dollar, gold dollar, French franc, German Reichmark,
Swedish crown and Turkish lira) are available from United Nations (1948, p. 141).
Book value of outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar
amounts using (end-of-period) market exchange rates.

Uruguay. Annual data from 1914 to 1946 in four currencies (sterling, US dollar, gold
franc and gold peso) are available from United Nations (1948, pp. 154-155). Book
value of outstanding debt amounts in these currencies converted to US dollar amounts
using (end-of-period) market exchange rates. Debt in gold franc (issued in or before
1914 converted to US dollar using the Franc Germinal 1914 parity (5.095 gold francs
per US dollar). Debt in gold peso (issued in 1919) is converted to US dollar amounts
using the exchange rate in 1919 (1.3698 ARS/USD).




                                                                                39
  Appendix III: Outstanding amounts of international debt securities
                  Selected currency shares
                          (As a % of total)

            USD                  EUR                   JP Y                    60
            CHF                  GBP

                                                                               50

                                                                               40

                                                                               30

                                                                               20

                                                                               10

                                                                               0
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Notes: BIS, ECB and authors’ calculations. International debt securities (bonds and
notes and money market instruments) according to the so-called “narrow”
definition (i.e. excluding home currency issuance (see ECB (various issues) as well
as Detken and Hartmann (2000) and (2002)). The share of the euro prior to 1999 is
the sum of the share of the euro legacy currencies, net of intra-euro area issuance.
Both public and private debt is included here. Data are unavailable prior to 1999 for
sterling.




                                                                                        40
