                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRIVATE RETURNS TO PUBLIC OFFICE

                                        Raymond Fisman
                                         Florian Schulz
                                          Vikrant Vig

                                       Working Paper 18095
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18095


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




We would like to thank Patrick Bolton, Ben Olken and seminar participants at the LSE-UCL development
workshop, Columbia and Warwick University. In addition, Vikrant Vig would like to thank the RAMD
research grant at the London Business School for their generous support. Kyle Matoba and Jane Zhao
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Raymond Fisman, Florian Schulz, and Vikrant Vig. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Returns to Public Office
Raymond Fisman, Florian Schulz, and Vikrant Vig
NBER Working Paper No. 18095
May 2012
JEL No. D72,D73,D78

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the wealth accumulation of Indian parliamentarians using public disclosures required of
all candidates since 2003. Annual asset growth of winners is on average 3 to 6 percentage points higher
than runners-up. By performing a within-constituency comparison where both runner-up and winner
run in consecutive elections, and by looking at the subsample of very close elections, we rule out a
range of alternative explanations for differential earnings of politicians and a relevant control group.
The ``winner's premium" comes from parliamentarians holding positions in the Council of Ministers,
with asset returns 13 to 29 percentage points higher than non-winners. The benefit of winning is also
concentrated among incumbents, because of low asset growth for incumbent non-winners.


Raymond Fisman                                     Vikrant Vig
School of Business                                 London Business School
Columbia University                                Regent's Park
622 Uris Hall                                      London NW1 4S, UK
3022 Broadway                                      vvig@london.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu

Florian Schulz
UCLA Anderson School of Management
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
florian.schulz.2013@anderson.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18095
1       Introduction

In economics and political science, there exists an enormous body of work — both theoretical

and empirical — that examines the motivations of politicians. Models of politician behavior

suggest many reasons for seeking office, including non-pecuniary benefits of public service,

financial gains that accrue after leaving office, and both salary and non-salary earnings, legal

or otherwise, while in office. Understanding politicians’ motivations is crucial for modeling

the pool of candidates - both the number and quality - that will seek office, and is also

important for designing policies to constrain politician behavior while in office.

      In this paper, we look at the understudied though widely discussed issue of non-salary

earnings of public officeholders. We take advantage of data gathered via India’s Right to

Information (RTI) Act, which required all candidates standing for public office at all levels

to disclose the value and composition of their assets. Disclosure was mandatory, with punitive

consequences for misreporting. Using these records of politicians’ asset holdings across two

elections allowed us to calculate the asset growth of politicians that competed in consecutive

legislative assembly elections.

      The Indian media has made much of the average asset growth of politicians - 208 percent

over a single election cycle, by one account.1 But how does this rate of wealth accumulation

compare to would-be politicians who failed in their election bids? Looking simply at the

average growth of assets fails to account for unobserved skills, resources, or inside information

that politicians may have access to, which are independent of holding office. And the average

gains to public office may obscure vast differences across politicians - if legislators do extract

high financial benefits from public office on average, which ones obtain the largest gains?

      In our analysis, we focus on the subset of elections where both winner and runner-up
1
    http://www.hindustantimes.com/India-news/Mumbai/Access-to-key-info-makes-city-politicians-rich-
    Study/Article1-745426.aspx



                                                     2
from the same constituency run in two consecutive elections, allowing us to calculate asset

growth for plausibly comparable political candidates. When we further limit our sample to

very close elections, we argue that our findings are very unlikely to be driven by unobserved

ability differences between winners and runners-up. In our baseline specifications, we find

that winning politicians’ assets grow at a rate that is 3 to 5 percent per year faster than

that of runners-up when we employ a basic regression framework; the “winner’s premium”

is slightly higher for politicians winning in close elections (we consider winning margins of

10, 5, and 3 percentage points). When we use a regression discontinuity design, we estimate

a winner’s premium of 6 percent.

   This average benefit masks considerable candidate-level heterogeneity. Most strikingly,

the asset growth of high-level politicians - members of the Council of Ministers (COM) -

is 13 to 16 percent higher relative to control candidates, a difference that holds for very

close elections. Our regression discontinuity estimates imply a 29 percent premium relative

to control candidates. This is despite the fact that COM members earn virtually identical

salaries to other legislators. Once we control for obtaining a COM position, the winner’s

premium is much more modest, and statistically indistinguishable from zero, implying little

financial benefit of public office for most legislators.

   Further, we find that there is a large difference in the winner’s premium between incum-

bents and candidates that had not previously held public office. There is little financial return

to winning for first-time politicians. Indeed, the point estimates imply a negative return for

non-incumbents, suggesting that their private sector outside options are comparable to or

even higher than the returns obtained through public office. By contrast, for incumbents our

estimate of the winner’s premium is 12.6 percent, primarily because of the very low returns

earned by incumbents that lose in their electoral bids. This provides suggestive evidence that

career politicians have relatively weak earning opportunities relative to public office.

   A pair of robustness checks provide some evidence that our results are not driven by

selection problems. In the first of these, we focus on contests between pairs of politicians



                                                 3
where both had competed and been winner or runner-up in the two elections prior to 2003. We

argue that these “seasoned” politicians are unlikely to be affected by selection concerns, and

we obtain similar (though larger) estimates for the winner’s premium using this subsample.

We also look at a quasi-experiment in the state of Bihar where a hung parliament in February

2005 resulted in a follow-up election in October of the same year. By looking at candidates

that won in February but lost in October, and vice-versa, we argue that we come as close

as possible to providing a causal estimate of the returns to public office. The Bihar quasi-

experiment also yields similar (though somewhat larger) estimates of the winner’s premium,

relative to our main analysis.

   Overall, our findings suggest little return to holding office for most politicians, while

high-level positions generate very high returns. This is broadly consistent with a tournament

model of politics in the spirit of Lazear and Rosen (1981), where participants compete for

the high returns that only a small fraction of entry-level politicians will attain. Further, our

results on how the winner’s premium is affected by incumbency indicate that becoming a

career politician may results in weaker private sector outside options.

   In interpreting our findings, a few comments and caveats are in order. Most importantly,

our results necessarily account only for publicly disclosed assets, and hence may serve as a

lower bound on any effect (though we note that non-politicians may also engage in hiding

assets for tax purposes). This makes it all the more surprising that the data reveal such high

returns for state ministers. Additionally, we measure the returns to holding public office

only while a politician is in power. To the extent that politicians profit from activities like

lobbying and consulting after leaving office, we may consider our estimates to be a lower

bound on the full value of holding public office. Further, even if we assume transparent

financial disclosure, the relatively modest returns from winning public office do not imply

the complete absence of corruption among lower-level politicians. Given the low salaries of

legislators, they may be required to extract extra-legal payments merely to keep up with their

private sector counterparts. That is, what we aim to measure here is the financial returns of

politicians relative to private sector opportunities, and cannot directly measure the extent


                                               4
of illegitimate financial returns of elected officials.

   Our work contributes to the literature on politicians’ motivations for seeking public of-

fice. There exist numerous theoretical models describing politician motivation and behavior.

These include the seminal contributions of Barro (1973), Ferejohn (1986) and Buchanan

(1989), as well as more recent work by Besley (2004), Caselli and Morelli (2004), and Ma-

tozzi and Merlo (2008). A number of recent studies examine empirically the role of official

wages in motivating labor supply, including Ferraz and Finan (2011) and Gagliarducci and

Nannicini (forthcoming) for Brazilian and Italian mayors respectively; Kotakorpi and Pout-

vaara (2011) for Finnish parliamentarians; and Fisman et al (2011) for the Members of the

European Parliament. Diermeier et al (2005) further consider the role of career concerns

for Members of Congress in the United States. In contrast to these analyses that focus on

the effect of official wages, we compare the general wealth accumulation of winning versus

losing politicians to extract a measure of the broad financial benefits of holding public office,

relative to private sector employment.

   Our work also relates to several studies that attempt to infer the non-salary financial ben-

efits of public office. Two recent papers examine the stock-picking abilities of U.S. legislators

over different time periods, and with widely disparate results - Ziobrowski et al. (2011)

reports high positive abnormal returns for Senators and members of the House of Repre-

sentatives, while Eggers and Hainmueller (2011) reports that Congress members’ portfolios

underperform the market overall, though outperforming the market for investments in donor

companies and those in their home districts. Braguinsky et al (2010) estimate the hidden

earnings of public servants in Moscow by cross-referencing officials’ salary data with their

vehicle registrations.

   Several studies also examine the wealth accumulation of U.S. and British politicians. Lenz

and Lim (2009) compare the wealth accumulation of U.S. politicians to a matched sample

of non-politicians from the Panel Study on Income Dynamics. Their results suggest little

benefit from public office. Using a regression discontinuity design, Eggers and Hainmeuller



                                                  5
(2009) finds that Conservative party MPs benefit financially from public office while Labour

MPs do not. Finally, Querubin and Snyder (2009) examine the wealth accumulation of U.S.

politicians during 1850-1880 using a regression discontinuity design and find that election

winners out-earn losers only during 1870-1880. We view our work as complementary to these

studies in several ways. First, we focus on a modern context where abuse of public office

is plausibly a greater concern.2 Further, the mandatory disclosures of all Indian candidates

since 2003 help to mitigate selection issues that affect some of these earlier studies, and also

concerns over the use of wealth information provided on a voluntary basis.

       Our work is closest to the study of Bhavnani (2012), which also examines politicians’

wealth accumulation in India based on mandatory asset disclosures. Given the similarities,

it is important to note how our work is distinguished from Bhavnani’s concurrent paper.

Bhavnani’s data include information on elections in 11 states, while we have a much more

comprehensive database covering elections in 24 states. This affords a number of crucial

advantages. Most importantly, we are able to include analyses that allow for constituency

fixed-effects, which helps to rule out many explanations for the winner’s premium based

on unobserved differences across candidates. Our sample is also less vulnerable to selection

concerns, since disclosures were matched across elections by hand rather than via a matching

algorithm. Our specifications also differ in a number of ways - for example, we focus on assets

net of liabilities, a standard measure of wealth, while Bhavnani focuses only on assets. This

distinction is potentially important in the presence of, for example, preferential loan access

of politicians which would mechanically inflate asset measures.

       Finally, our work also contributes to the growing empirical literature that aims, often

via indirect means, to detect and measure corruption (See Olken and Pande, 2012, for a

recent survey). While we cannot detect corruption directly, the rapid wealth accumulation of

higher-level officials in our dataset necessarily implies access to income beyond official wages.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a description of relevant
2
    For example, Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index in 2000 ranked the United Kingdom
    and the United States as the 10th and 14th least corrupt countries out of the 91 countries in the Index. India
    ranked 69th.


                                                         6
political institutions and the data we employ, including those obtained through the Right

to Information Act. Section 3 presents our estimation framework. Section 4 presents our

empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.



2       Background and Data

We use hand-collected data from sworn affidavits of Indian politicians running as candidates

in state assembly elections (Vidhan Sabha). Prompted by a general desire to increase trans-

parency in the public sector, a movement for freedom of information began during the 1990s

in India. These efforts eventually resulted in the enactment of the Right to Information Act

(2005), which allows any citizen to request information from a “public authority,” among

others. During this period, the Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR) successfully

filed public interest litigation with the Delhi High Court requesting the disclosure of the

criminal, financial, and educational backgrounds of candidates contesting state elections.3

Disclosure requirements of politicians’ wealth, education and criminal records were de facto

introduced across all states beginning with the November 2003 assembly elections in the

states of Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, and Rajasthan. The punishment

for inaccurate disclosures include financial penalties, imprisonment for up to six months, and

disqualification from political office.

       Candidate affidavits provide a snapshot of the market value of a contestant’s assets and

liabilities at a point in time, just prior to the election when candidacy is filed. In addition

to reporting own assets and liabilities, candidates must disclose wealth and liabilities of the

spouse and dependent family members. This requirement prevents simple concealment of

assets by putting them under the names of immediate family members, and henceforth, our

measure of wealth will be aggregated over dependent family members. Further, criminal

records (past and pending cases) and education must be disclosed. While the relationship

linking wealth, education, and criminal activity to election outcomes is interesting in its own
3
    http://adrindia.org/about-adr/



                                                7
right, we focus in this study on the effect of electoral victory on wealth accumulation over

an election cycle, of five years on average. Since reporting requirements are limited to those

standing for election, asset growth can only be measured for re-contesting candidates, i.e.,

those that contest - and hence file affidavits - in two elections. Therefore, our study is limited

to elections in the 24 states which had at least two elections between November 2003 and

December 2011, covering about 94 percent of India’s total electorate. Table 1 lists the 24

states in our sample along with descriptive information corresponding to the first of the two

elections.

    The primary sources for candidate affidavits are the GENESYS Archives of the Election

Commission of India (ECI)4 and the various websites of the Office of the Chief Electoral

Officer in each state. The archives provide scanned candidate affidavits (in the form of

pictures or pdfs) for all candidates, though links to a few affidavits are non-functional. A

sample affidavit is shown in Online Appendix A. Except for the nine elections prior to October

2004, we are able to collect these data from the websites of the National Election Watch which,

in collaboration with ADR, provides digitized candidate affidavits.5 We extended the dataset

by collecting data for the remaining nine elections directly from the scanned affidavits.

    In a first step, among all the candidates that contest in the first election in each state,

we filter out the winners and runners-up (our control group) using the Statistical Reports of

Assembly Elections provided by the Election Commission of India (ECI).6 We then match

these winners and runners-up with candidates that contest in the subsequent election in that

state. Due to large commonalities among Indian names as well as different spellings of names

across elections, matching was done manually. Overall, we are able to manually match a total

of 3622 re-contesting candidates (2303 winners and 1319 runners-up) based on variables such

as name, gender, age, education, address, and constituency, as well as a family member’s

name (usually the name of the father or spouse).7
4
  http://eci.gov.in/archive/
5
  http://www.myneta.info/
6
  http://eci.gov.in/eci main1/ElectionStatistics.aspx
7
  A probabilistic matching algorithm, based on variables such as name and age, proved to be inefficient.
  To provide an example, in the Tamil Nadu Election of 2006, there are 2 runners-up with identical names



                                                   8
    Of these initial 3622 matched candidates, we were unable to locate affidavits for both

elections for 53 candidates because of broken weblinks and hence discard them from our

sample. Further, we filter out candidates with affidavits that are poorly scanned, have

missing pages, or handwriting that is too unclear or ambiguous to get a clear picture of a

candidate’s reported financial situation. This drops a total of 561 candidates, or about 15.7

percent of the remaining sample matches.8 Next, we verify suspicious values and, since our

main focus is on growth in wealth, remove candidates that list significant assets without

corresponding market value information, leaving a sample of 2944 matched candidates (1872

winners and 1072 runners-up). Of these 2944 candidates, we have 633 constituencies in which

both the winner and the runner-up re-contest in the following election. This is shown by

state in the last 3 columns of Table 1.

    From the affidavits, we compute the candidate’s net wealth, defined as the sum of movable

assets (such as cash, deposits in bank account, and bonds or shares in companies) and

immovable assets (such as agricultural land and buildings) less liabilities (such as loans from

banks), aggregated over all dependent family members listed on the affidavit. Finally, we

remove candidates with negative or extremely low net asset bases using a cutoff of beginning

net worth of Rs 100,000, and Winsorize net asset growth at the first and 99th percentiles.9

This leaves us with a final sample of 2741 matched candidates (1754 winners and 987 runners-

up) of which 1100 are constituency-matched pairs, i.e., we have 550 constituencies in which

both the winner and runner-up recontest.

    We define a Criminal Record dummy equal to one if the candidate has pending or past

criminal cases at the time of the first election, and measure education based on years of

schooling (Years of Education). In addition to information gathered from candidates’ affi-
  (RAJENDRAN.S), Age (56), and education (10th Pass) despite being identifiably distinct candidates. We
  also commonly encountered differential spellings of names between elections, for instance, Shakeel Ahmad
  Khan (Bihar, 2005) and Shakil Ahmad Khan (Bihar, 2010).
8
  Affidavit availability and quality differs somewhat across states and tends to be slightly worse in the earlier
  years. For example, out of 54 matched candidate in Delhi (2003), 27 percent of affidavits are unavailable or
  of very poor quality.
9
  None of these adjustments materially changes the quantitative nature of our results. Our findings are very
  robust to using different cutoff values (e.g., Rs 500,000), trimming instead of Winsorizing, or no adjustment
  at all.



                                                       9
davits, we also collect data on election victory margins and incumbency from ECI’s Statis-

tical Reports of Assembly Elections. The reports also allow us to classify constituencies as

Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST), or “general” constituencies. SC and ST con-

stituencies are reserved for candidates classified as SC or ST in order to promote members of

historically under-represented groups. That is, general candidates cannot compete in these

SC/ST-designated constituencies. We also distinguish among winning candidates based on

whether they held significant positions in the state government, using an indicator variable

for membership in the Council of Ministers, the state legislature’s cabinet.

   As a measure of state-level opportunities for political rent extraction, we obtain a measure

of state-level corruption using the index reported in the 2005 Corruption Study by Trans-

parency International India. This report constructs a corruption index for 20 Indian states

based on perceived corruption in public services using comprehensive survey results for over

10,000 respondents. The index takes on a low value of 240 for the state of Kerala and a high of

695 for Bihar. Our sample covers 17 of the 20 states for which an index value is available and

we rescale the original measure by dividing it by 100. Finally, we collected a cross-section of

state legislature salaries during 2003-2008, and use the Base Salary of politicians to examine

more formally whether official salaries are an important determinant of wealth accumulation.

As we note in the introduction, these official salaries are likely too low to account for the

high levels of wealth accumulation of some politicians.

   Table 2 lists definitions of the main variables used in the analysis and in Table 3, we show

some descriptive statistics for our constituency-matched sample of 1100 candidates (Panel

A) as well as for a subsample of elections decided by close margins (Panel B). Average

net assets are about Rs 9.7 million ($194,000 at an exchange rate of Rs 50 per dollar)

for winners and Rs 10.1 million (about $202,000) for runners-up. As a point of reference,

state legislators’ salaries, including allowances, are generally well under Rs 1,000,000 (about

$20,000) with relatively little variation as a function of seniority. Overall, winners and

runners-up in our sample appear to be similar in age, education, and gender. The two

groups differ based on incumbency - incumbents are less likely to win in this sample of


                                              10
re-contestants, consistent with Linden’s (2004) finding of an incumbency disadvantage for

Indian politicians. The only other difference we observe is in net asset growth, which we

will explore in much more detail throughout the paper. About 14 percent of winners are

members of the state Councils of Ministers and 19 percent of the elections in our sample

are from SC/ST-designated constituencies. Runners-up in the subsample of close elections

tend to be slightly more educated than winners on average (14 years of educations vs. 13.8

for winners) though the median years of education is identical. Overall, based on these

observables, runners-up seem to constitute a reasonable comparable control group.10



3        Empirical Framework

Before proceeding to our regression results, it is worth emphasizing what it is that we are

attempting to measure as the returns to public office, and how our sample and specification

plausibly serve to estimate this. We wish to measure the percentage annual growth rate of

assets for an individual elected to public office, relative to the counterfactual where he was

not elected:


Ret. to Public Office = E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 1)−E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 0)



       Of course, we cannot measure winner versus loser growth rates for a given politician, but

will rather make a comparison across observed winners and losers. We require that, condi-

tional on observables, assignment to the winner category is independent of returns to winning,

that is, [E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 0), E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 1)]⊥W inneri |Xi .

For the sample of politicians as a whole, this condition clearly fails - for example, politicians

that benefit most from winning will exert the greatest effort in campaigning, and those with

different unobserved (i.e., not in Xi ) attributes may be of greater skill.
10
     On further investigating election expense for a subset of candidates, we also find no material differences
     between winners and runners-up. Election expenditure on each candidate is further limited by law to about
     Rs 1,000,000 in large states, and candidates generally receive lump sum grants from their political parties.




                                                        11
       The subset of politicians that we may include in our analysis requires the further condition

that they choose to run at the end of an election cycle, regardless of whether they won the

first time around - otherwise, we observe only their initial asset levels, not their growth rates.

Hence, what we can plausibly estimate is the following:


     (Ret. to Public Office|Rerun = 1) = E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 1, Rerun = 1)

                                                − E(N etassetgrowthi |W inneri = 0, Rerun = 1)



       The independence of winning and the financial returns while in office is at least more

plausible with this subset of the pool of candidates - if these returns were much lower for

W inner = 0 candidates, they may choose not to run again. While this is a relevant subset

of the pool of candidates - those that make a career of running for office - it is likely one for

which the returns to public office are relatively high: if their outside options were sufficiently

good, such candidates may choose not to run again conditional on losing. We discuss this in

more detail in Section 4.4.

       This does not necessarily mitigate concerns of unobserved skills correlated with winning,

and also with earnings ability. To make the closest comparison of like candidates, we focus on

a within-constituency comparison of winners and runners-up who choose to run in subsequent

elections, e = 1 and e = 2. This plausibly holds constant labor market opportunities, and

other local attributes affecting the earnings possibilities of winners and runners-up. That is,

we estimate the following fixed effects regression:


     N et Asset Growthwc = αc + β ∗ W innerwc + log(N etAssetswc ) + Controlswc + wc                          (1)



       where w ∈ {0, 1} indexes winners and runners-up, c indexes constituencies, αc is a con-

stituency fixed-effect, and wc is a normally distributed error term.11 In our main empirical
11
     Note that an alternative formulation would be to ‘first difference’ the data, using the difference between
     winner and runner-up net asset growth for each constituency as the outcome variable, as a function of
     first-differenced covariates. For our main specifications, this approach yields virtually identical results to
     those presented here.


                                                         12
analysis, we present results on the full within-constituency sample, and also for the subset of

winner/runner-up pairs where the election was decided by a relatively slim margin. We argue

that the within-constituency close election estimation plausibly obviates many concerns of

within-pair unobserved differences.

       We also employ a regression discontinuity research design (RDD) as an alternative empiri-

cal strategy, which effectively estimates the winner’s premium based on the winner-runner-up

difference in close elections. Under the identification assumption that outcomes of close elec-

tions are random, the difference in asset growth rates of winners and losers can be causally

attributed to holding public office.

       The scatterplots and lines of best fit we show in our figures are produced using common

methods developed in the regression discontinuity literature (e.g., DiNardo and Lee (2004),

Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Angrist and Pischke (2009)). Specifically, we are interested

in the extent to which winning causes a discontinuity in asset growth residuals at the win-

ning threshold. First we generate residuals by regressing growth in net assets on candidate

observables, including net assets, gender, and age, but excluding winner dummy and margin.

We next collapse the residuals on margin intervals of size 0.5 (margins ranging from -25 to

+25) and then estimate the following specification:


                 R̄i = α + τ · Di + β · f (M argin(i)) + η · Di · f (M argin(i)) + i                      (2)



       where R̄i is the average residual value within each margin bin i, M argin(i)) is the mid-

point of margin bin i, Di is an indicator that takes a value of one if the midpoint of margin

bin i is positive and a value of zero if it is negative, and i is the error term.12 f (M argin(i))

and Di · f (M argin(i)) are flexible fourth-order polynomials. The goal of these functions is

to fit smoothed curves on either side of the suspected discontinuity. The magnitude of the

discontinuity τ is estimated by the difference in the values of the two smoothed functions
12
     To address heterogeneity in the number of candidates and residual variance within each bin, we weigh
     observations by the number of candidates, and alternatively by the inverse of within-bin variance. Results
     are similar in both specifications.



                                                       13
evaluated at zero.



4       Results

4.1       Graphical presentation of results


We first present a series of figures that provide a visual description of our results. In Figure 1

we plot the Epanechnikov kernel densities of the residuals obtained from regressing growth in

net assets on candidate observables. Panel A uses the entire sample of constituency-matched

candidates while Panel B only uses candidates that were within a margin of 5 percentage

points.13 In both cases, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of the distribution function

of winner and runner-up residuals is rejected at the 1 percent level and 5 percent level,

repectively. These figures thus depict a differential effect of election outcomes on net asset

growth between the treatment and control groups. In Panel C, we disaggregate winners

into ministers and non-ministers and plot kernel densities of these two groups as well as the

runners-up. The kernel density plots further suggest a long right tail for ministers, implying

that a relatively small number of these high-level politicians generate very high asset growth.

In Panels D and E, we disaggregate the sample based on whether an incumbent is standing for

reelection in the constituency. Panel D shows winner and runner-up densities for the sample

of constituencies where an incumbent was standing for reelection - the winner distribution is

clearly shifted to the right, implying a greater winner’s premium in races involving incumbents

(a test for equality of the distribution function is rejected at the 1 percent level). Panel E

shows densities for the subsample of non-incumbent constituencies - the winner distribution

is now shifted to the left and a test for equality of the distribution function is rejected at the

10 percent level (p-value of 0.086). We investigate in greater detail the patterns of net asset

growth among incumbents versus non-incumbents in our regression analyses below.
13
     The chosen bandwidth is the width that would minimize the mean integrated squared error if the data were
     Gaussian and a Gaussian kernel were used.




                                                      14
4.2   Regression Analyses


We now turn to analyze the patterns illustrated in Figure 1 based on the regression framework

described in the prior section. We use the basic specification shown in Equation 1, which

provides a within-constituency estimate of the winner’s premium, and present these results

in Table 4. In the first column, we show the binary within-constituency correlation between

Winner and N et Asset Growth. The coefficient of 0.0296, significant at the 5 percent level,

implies a winner’s premium in asset growth of about 3 percent. Adding log(Net Assets) as

a control in column (2) slightly lowers the point estimate to 0.0291, still significant at the 5

percent level. Column (3) adds controls for gender, incumbency, having a criminal record,

as well as quadratic controls for age and years of education; the point estimate is 0.0265,

significant at the 5 percent level. In columns (4) - (6) we examine the winner’ s premium in

close elections, defined by those where the vote share gap between winner and runner-up was

less than 10, 5, and 3 percentage points. In each case, the winner’s premium is estimated to

be around 3 - 5 percent and significant at the 5 percent level. The point estimate increases

for the 3 percent margin sample, where the coefficient on Winner is 0.0519 and significant

at the 5 percent level (p-value of 0.012).

   In Table 5, we consider the returns to office as a function of potential influence in gov-

ernment. In the first column, we add an indicator variable, Minister, denoting whether the

constituency winner was appointed to the state’s Council of Ministers. The point estimate

on Minister is about 0.134, implying a 13.4 percent higher growth rate for Ministers relative

to the runner-up candidates in their constituencies. Further, the coefficient on Winner drops

to very close to zero. The point estimate is 0.01, with a standard error of 0.013, allowing us

to reject a winner’s premium of greater than 4 percent for those not appointed minister, at

the 5 percent level of significance. The results are robust to looking at narrow victory mar-

gins, as indicated by the results in columns (2) - (4). In columns (5) and (6) we include the

interaction of Winner and an indicator variable for whether a candidate’s party was part of

the state government; the small and insignificant coefficient on this interaction term suggests



                                              15
no premium for merely being part of a ruling coalition.14 The coefficient on Minister remains

large and significant, implying extraordinary growth in wealth only for high-level positions.

It is worth emphasizing that it is problematic to assign a causal interpretation to the corre-

lation between Minister status and returns, since assignment to these posts is non-random.

At the same time, the very large effect of holding a Minister position on asset returns is such

that it is not easily explained by unobserved differences in abilities, and warrants further

investigation in future work.

     In columns (7) and (8) we disaggregate asset growth into M ovable Asset Growth through

holdings such as cash, bank deposits, and jewelry, and Immovable Asset Growth from land

and building assets (see the full definition in the Data section). We see a sharp difference

between the asset growth of Minister versus non-Minister politicians. The coefficient on

Winner is a highly significant predictor of growth in movable assets, implying a winner’s

premium of 5.23 percent. The magnitude of the coefficient on Minister in (7) implies a

further premium in movable asset growth of 4.2 percent, though this effect is not significant.

For immovable assets, the Minister growth premium is 8.8 percent and significant at the 10

percent level, while the winner’s premium is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.

Note that immovable assets constitute, on average, about three quarters of a candidate’s

total assets. If the asset growth of politicians is the result of extra-legal payments, this

difference may simply reflect the fact that the scale of gifts is larger for ministers (e.g., cars

versus buildings). It may also result from access to low cost purchase of land for high-level

individuals as suggested by, for example, the case of Karnataka’s former Chief Minister B.S.

Yeddyurappa, who acquired land parcels at extremely favorable prices before selling them off

to mining companies.15 Such opportunities may only be available to high-ranking politicians.

     In Table 6 we turn to assess how the winner’s premium differs as a function of incumbency,

by including the interaction term Winner*Incumbent. As suggested by the patterns in Fig-
14
   We also considered the effect of membership in the two main political parties - the Congress and the BJP -
   on the winner’s premium. The Winner*Congress interaction was marginally significant and positive, while
   the interaction of Winner*BJP was negative, though not significant at conventional levels.
15
   “Ministers stole millions in Karnataka mining scam,” BBC South Asia, July 21, 2011




                                                     16
ure 1, the winner’s premium comes exclusively from incumbents. The coefficient on Winner

is -0.053 and significant at the 5 percent level, implying that non-incumbent winners’ asset

growth is 5.3 percent lower than that of non-incumbent runners-up. The pattern is reversed

for incumbents, where there is a winner’s premium of nearly 12.6 percent (the sum of the

coefficients on Winner and Winner*Incumbent). One plausible interpretation of this differ-

ential winner’s premium by incumbency is that it reflects the relatively limited private sector

options available to career politicians. Alternatively, it may result from the greater skill with

which incumbents extract value from political office. The data are at least suggestive of the

first of these explanations - the large winner’s premium for incumbents is primarily the result

of the low earnings of incumbents that are not returned to office: incumbent winners have a

median asset growth of 0.205, virtually identical the median asset growth of non-incumbents

overall (0.204), while the median asset growth of incumbent runners-up is 0.15.



4.2.1   Electoral Accountability


The extent that legislators extract financial returns from their positions may be limited by

pressure from the electorate, particularly given the transparency afforded by the Right to

Information Act. We emphasize that the asset growth calculations we perform here are based

on data easily accessible via the internet, and their availability has been widely reported in

the Indian media. In Table 7 we examine whether there is any effect of high asset growth on

election outcomes, through the following specification:


            Reelectionwc = αc + β1 ∗ W innerwc + β2 ∗ N et Asset Growthwc                    (3)

                               +β3 ∗ W innerwc ∗ N et Asset Growthwc + wc



   where Reelectionwc is an indicator variable that takes on a value of 1 if the candidate

won election e = 2 and 0 otherwise. While none of the coefficients are significant, the results

point, if anything, in the opposite direction - the coefficient on N et Asset Growth is positive

in Column (1), and its interaction with Winner, capturing the effect of asset growth among


                                               17
election winners, is positive (Column 2). In results not reported, we also find that legislators

who win by large margins do not earn a higher winner’s premium. Such a specification

is, however, subject to extreme problems of unobserved heterogeneity - the large margin

may be because of a candidate’s effort or political skill, confusing the interpretation of the

Winner*Margin interaction. Finally, the negative coefficient on Winner is consistent with a

negative incumbency effect in India that was already observed in Table 3.



4.2.2   Exploring Cross-sectional Heterogeneity


In Table 8 we examine heterogeneity in the winner’s premium as a function of a number of

other candidate characteristics. In column (1) we look at the effect of state-level Corrup-

tion. The coefficient on the interaction term Winner*Corruption, while positive and hence

implying a higher winner’s premium in more corrupt states, is not statistically significant.

In column (2) we allow for a Minister*Corruption interaction; the coefficient on this term is

positive, again implying a larger asset growth premium in more corrupt states, but also not

significant. In column (3) we consider whether candidates with prior criminal records have

a higher winner’s premium. The coefficient on the interaction term is not significant.

   In column (4) we consider the set of constituencies reserved for members of disad-

vantaged groups, so-called Scheduled Tribes and Castes (SC/ST). The interaction term

SC/ST Quota ∗ W inner is significant at the 1 percent level, and implies a winner’s premium

in asset growth of about 8 to 9 percent for constituencies reserved for SC/ST candidates.

   There are two primary explanations for the relatively high winner’s premium for SC/ST-

designated constituencies. First, since these seats are reserved for a subset of potential

candidates, it may slacken electoral competition, allowing candidates to extract greater rents

without fear of losing their positions. Alternatively, SC/ST politicians may have less lucrative

private sector options as a result of discrimination, lower unobserved skill levels, or weaker

labor market opportunities in SC/ST-dominated areas. While we cannot include both the

direct effect of SC/ST Quota and constituency fixed effects in a single specification, in



                                              18
column (5) we look at the direct effect of SC/ST quotas with a coarser set of fixed effects, at

the district level. There are approximately half as many districts as constituencies in our main

sample. We find a very similar coefficient on the interaction term SC/ST Quota ∗ W inner

in this specification - approximately 0.09 - while the direct effect of SC/ST Quota is -0.073.

That is, it would appear that among runners-up, SC/ST politicians fare significantly worse

than other candidates, providing suggestive evidence that the differential SC/ST effect results

in large part from different private sector opportunities.

   In column (7), we examine the effects of candidates’ education levels by including as

covariates the logarithm of years of schooling as well as its interaction with Winner. We

find a small positive direct effect of years of schooling, implying that for runners-up, asset

growth is higher for more educated candidates. However, this is more than offset by the in-

teraction term, log(Years of Education)*Winner. The sum of the coefficients on log(Years of

Education) and its interaction with Winner, while negative, is not significant at conventional

levels. This is broadly consistent with highly educated candidates having better private

sector opportunities, but not greater earning capacity as public officials.

   We show the interaction of Female and Winner in column (6). The coefficient is positive,

though not statistically significant. Finally, in column (8) we interact Winner with log(Base

Salary). We find no evidence that the winner’s premium is higher in states with more

generous official salaries for legislators, implying that it is unlikely that official salaries play

a major role in the differential asset accumulation of elected officials.



4.3   Regression Discontinuity Design


Our main empirical identification strategy is effectively based on a regression discontinuity

design, with the winner’s premium identified from the winner-loser differential in close elec-

tions . In this section, we explicitly model the value of winning using regression discontinuity

methods, as described in Section 3. We first show a series of figures that depict our tests

for discontinuities around the winning threshold, followed by an analysis of the magnitudes


                                                19
of winner-loser discontinuities. Note that we follow the approach outlined in Section 4.1 by

looking at net asset growth residuals which allows us to control for remaining differences in

covariates of candidates as well as observed and unobserved constituency heterogeneity. The

methodology in this section can thus be considered as conditional RD. Results are quantita-

tively similar when (unconditional) net asset growth in used.

       In Figure 2, Panels A - E, we provide a visual description of this analysis and columns (1)

- (5) of Table 9 provide the corresponding discontinuity estimates of the winner’s premium.16

Panel A shows the sample of all winners and corresponding runners-up. Our estimated

regression indicates a jump in the residual values around the threshold. The point estimate

of τ is 0.065, and statistically significant at the 1 percent level (t-statistic of 2.8). Panel B only

includes ministers with corresponding runners-up - the point estimate of the discontinuity

increases to 0.287 (t-statistic of 5.26), a result qualitatively similar to that of the regression

analysis in the previous section, though somewhat larger in magnitude. On the other hand,

the subsample of winners not appointed to a Council of Ministers and corresponding runners-

up does not indicate a jump at all (Panel C) - the coefficient estimate of the discontinuity

is 0.0265 with a t-statistic of 1.13. In Panels D and E, we disaggregate the sample based on

whether an incumbent is standing for reelection in the constituency. Panel D shows results for

the sample of constituencies where an incumbent was running for reelection. The coefficient

estimate of the discontinuity is 0.08 and significant at the 1 percent level (t-statistic of 3.19).

By contrast, for the sample of non-incumbent constituencies, we observe no jump at the

threshold (the point estimate is 0.028 with a t-statistic of 0.79). Overall, these results are in

line with those obtained from standard regression analysis.

       Finally, in Figure 3 we plot kernel densities of age and log(Net Assets) for the sample of

constituency-matched candidates that were within a Margin of 5 percentage points (“close

elections”). Panel A plots age densities for winners and runners-up and Panel B plots densities

for log(Net Assets). For both observables, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of the
16
     Note that the apparent symmetries in the RD plots are the result of constituency fixed effects. Including con-
     stituency fixed effects allows us to control for observable and unobservable constituency-level heterogeneity,
     for example, differences in local labor markets or SC/ST Quota.



                                                         20
distribution function of winners and runners-up cannot be rejected at conventional levels,

providing some validation of our regression discontinuity design.

       Based on these discontinuities, we can perform a simple back-of-the envelope calculation

to to approximate the winner’s premium in monetary terms. We do this by first calculating

how winners’ average wealth would have grown had they not won the election using the net

asset growth rate of all constituency-matched runners-up, and then comparing this average

to the level of wealth accumulation using the discontinuity estimates from the RD design.

Overall, for Winners as a group, the estimated annual premium is approximately Rs 1,500,000

(USD 30,000). However, for Ministers the winner premium is significantly larger, about Rs

10,750,000 per year (USD 215,000). By comparison, state-level legislators have salaries that

are much lower - generally under Rs 1,000,000 per year (USD 20,000). Further, these wealth

accumulation increments are relative to candidates’ initial assets that are, on average, only

about Rs 10,000,000 (USD 200,000), implying a very large impact in percentage terms.



4.4       Addressing Selection


Our analysis compares the returns of winners versus runners-up in constituencies where

both candidates run in two consecutive elections. While this sample allows us to include

constituency fixed effects and thus control for local constituency-level omitted variables, it

is important to consider whether these results are external valid for Indian legislators more

generally.

       At the outset, we note that the constituencies that constitute our sample - where both

the winner and the runner-up contest both elections - are very similar on observables to

constituencies where only one of the candidates recontests. Specifically, the mean electorate,

percentage turnout, and percent SC/ST population for our winner/runner-up matched con-

stituencies are not significantly different from the rest of the population. Candidates in these

constituencies are also quite similar in attributes such as log of assets, age, and education.17
17
     For brevity, tables are not shown but are available from the authors upon request.




                                                       21
Thus, we believe that the local average treatment effects documented above can be likely

generalized to the population.

     As noted earlier, our identification strategy – comparing candidates from the same con-

stituency in close elections – attempts to control for unobserved ability differences in can-

didates. By comparing the net asset growth of two otherwise similar candidates following

an election where one prevails by a narrow margin, we may calculate the private returns to

public office relative to a similar candidate that just lost the election. One significant concern

with this approach, however, is that electoral victory may itself influence the probability of

recontesting, and hence inclusion in the sample. Indeed, in Panel A of Figure 4, we find

that runners-up have a lower probability of re-contesting the second election when compared

to the corresponding constituency winners. The probability of recontesting is increasing in

margin, with a clear discontinuity at zero.18

     In considering how this differential exit rate may affect our results, we note first that it

is not obvious a priori which direction any selection effect would bias our estimates. One

one hand, winners and runners-up that re-contest the second election are plausibly more

similar in terms of political ability than pairs where both contest the first election but one

subsequently chooses not to contest the second election. In this case, one might expect

that the ability differences between winners and runners-up are smaller in our sample of

constituencies than those without matched winners/runners-up, hence biasing our results

towards zero.    19   Alternatively, if candidates that exit have higher outside options compared
18
   In a separate analysis (not reported for brevity), we examine the recontesting decision of political candidates
   using a simple probit model. The dependent variable is one if we can match the candidate in a subsequent
   election and zero if we only observe a candidate at election 1. We conduct our analysis separately for the
   sub-samples of winners and runners-up, and find that candidates that win the first election are significantly
   more likely to re-contest in the subsequent election. For the sub-samples of both winners and runners-up,
   we find that wealthier and more educated candidates are more likely to rerun, whereas age is negatively
   related to the decision to re-contest. The only variable that affects both groups differently is the winning
   margin at the first election – runners-up who lose by wider margins are significantly less likely to re-contest,
   whereas for winners margin is not a significant predictor of running in the next election. There are two
   ready explanations for this difference - (1) if a candidate loses by a large margin, he may re-evaluate his
   chances of winning and not re-contest a second time, or (2) he may not get chosen to represent his party if
   he has shown little success in the previous attempt.
19
   Runners-up and winners in our sample have virtually identical chances of succeeding in the subsequent
   election (42.08 percent and 41.89 percent, respectively), providing further support for similar political ability
   of the two groups.



                                                        22
to candidates that decide to re-contest, neglecting the asset growth of unsuccessful candidates

that do not rerun may bias our analysis towards finding an effect even when none exists.



4.4.1   Evidence from Seasoned Candidates


To further assess the influence that differential exit rates may have on the estimated winner’s

premium, we analyze a restricted sample of constituencies where both winner and runner-

up are seasoned politicians, in the sense of both competing in at least two elections prior

to the elections we consider in our analysis, and where both were either winner or runner-

up in these earlier elections. Repeated contests of this sort between seasoned politicians

is surprisingly common in our sample. We provide one illustrative example below for the

Biswanath Assembly Constituency in the state of Assam. In this case, both candidates,

Prabin Hazarika and Nurjamal Sarkar, have contested all elections since 1991 and have been

either a winner or a runner-up in each instance. We argue that such career politicians are

less likely to exit because of party decisions or a reevaluation of future electoral success -

by construction, we include only politicians who have performed well as candidates in the

recent past. This subset of active seasoned politicians arguably represent more comparable

treatment and control candidates than the full sample of re-contesting politicians.

                    Biswanath     Assembly Constituency (Assam)
         Year       Winner         %age Party     Runner-up   %age              Party
         2011   Prabin Hazarika    45.51 AGP Nurjamal Sarkar 44.09              INC
         2006   Nurjamal Sarkar    41.76 INC Prabin Hazarika 39.46              AGP
         2001   Nurjamal Sarkar    48.55 INC Prabin Hazarika 44.3               AGP
         1996   Prabin Hazarika    42.62 AGP Nurjamal Sarkar 31.76              INC
         1991   Nurjamal Sarkar    46.49 INC Prabin Hazarika 17.39              AGP



   We focus our analysis on this set of active seasoned candidates in Panels B and C of

Figure 4. In Panel B, we find no differential probability of re-contesting the second election;

however, Panel C documents a jump in net asset growth rates around the winning threshold.

The point estimate of the discontinuity is 0.12 and significant at the 5 percent level. This is

consistent with differential exit rates of winners and runners-up creating a downward bias in

                                              23
our main estimates on the returns to public office.



4.4.2       Evidence from Bihar’s Hung Parliament


We conclude this section by presenting some results from a quasi-experiment, albeit one

that involves a very limited sample of constituencies. In Bihar’s legislative assembly election

in February 2005, no individual party gained a majority of seats, and attempts at forming

a coalition came to an impasse. As a result of this hung parliament, new elections were

held in October/November of the same year.20 In a significant fraction of these contests,

repeated within less than a year of one another, the initial winner was defeated in the

follow-up election. For these constituencies, we come as close as possible to observing the

counterfactual of winners reassigned to runner-up, and vice-versa.

       From the 243 constituencies contested in the February election, we sample those where

both the winner and runner-up matched up again in the October election of the same year

and emerged as winner/runner-up or runner-up/winner in this later election. This leaves

a sample of 260 candidates (130 constituencies) for which we analyze the probabilities of

winning the October election as a function of the winning margin at the February Election.

Results are shown in the Table below:

          Bihar February 2005            Probability of Winning October 2005 Election

          Winner                         66.2%      63.2%      60.9%      58.6%     52.2%     50.0%
          Runner-Up                      33.8%      36.8%      39.1%      41.4%     47.8%     50.0%
          Margin (February 2005)                   < 20%      < 15%      < 10%       < 5%     < 1%
          Elections                         130        117        110          87        46      10



       Overall, winners in the February 2005 election won in the later contest only 66.2 percent

of the time. Further, as on narrows the margin, this advantage decreases monotonically.

At the 5 percent threshold, the probability of winning is statistically indistinguishable from
20
     Bihar was under the direct rule of India’s federal government during this period.



                                                        24
50 percent for either candidate. This suggests a significant element of randomness to close

elections in this sample.21

       To further sharpen our empirical strategy, we compare the net asset growth of two groups

– the treatment and control groups. The treatment group consists of candidates that were

runners-up in the February 2005 election but won in the October 2005 contest, while the

control group is comprised of candidates that were winners in February 2005 but runners-

up in the October election. These cases where winners and losers were switched owing to

the hung parliament provides a measure of the returns to public office with a relatively

straightforward causal interpretation. We look at all such candidates whose winner status

shifted between these two 2005 elections, and also chose to run again in 2010, so we can

calculate their asset growth rates. The resulting set of candidates is relatively small - 25

winners and 26 runners-up - which limits the types of statistical tests one can perform on

this sample. For this subset of candidates we find that the annual net asset growth of the

treatment group is on average 12.76% higher than that of the control group, a difference that

is significant at the 5 percent level. If we limit ourselves only to the constituency matched

samples where winner and runner-up status switched and both candidates ran in the 2010

election, the sample is reduced to 11 constituencies - 22 candidates - and we find a difference

in the net asset growth between winners and runners-up of approximately 6 percent, roughly

similar to the magnitudes we observe with the full sample. Given the small sample size, the

difference in asset growth for the sample of 22 candidates is not statistically significant.



5        Conclusion

In this paper, we utilize the asset disclosures of candidates for Indian state legislatures,

taken five years apart at two points across a five year election cycle, and accessed through
21
     Recent papers by Snyder (2005), Caughey and Sekhon (2010), Carpenter et al. (2011), and Folke et al.
     (2011) critically assess regression discontinuity studies that rely on close elections. There remains an active
     debate on whether close elections can really be considered a matter of random assignment. If sorting around
     the winning threshold is not random, but close winners have systematic advantages, then the RD design
     may fail to provide valid estimates of the returns to office. The Bihar example provides at least suggestive
     evidence that close elections are relatively random in the context we consider in this paper.


                                                          25
the country’s Right to Information Act. This has allowed us to compare the asset growth

of election winners versus runners-up to calculate the financial returns from holding public

office relative to private sector opportunities available to career politicians.

   Our main findings suggest, at least in the Indian context, a relatively limited financial

benefit of public office for most politicians. By contrast, we find a 13-29 percent growth

premium for ministers in our sample, suggesting very strong earnings possibilities for higher-

level politicians. Looking at election winners not appointed to the Council of Ministers,

the asset growth premium for election winners is about one percent per year. Further,

this premium is derived entirely from the winner-loser differential among incumbents, with

incumbent runners-up earning unusually low returns when confronted with private sector job

opportunities; for non-incumbents, the winner’s premium is negative.

   These findings have a number of implications for the modeling of the political process and

politicians’ behavior. First, our results suggest a sharp difference in the value of influencing

legislators at different levels in the Indian hierarchy: the votes of individual legislators have

relatively low value for private agents, while the influence of ministers is potentially very

valuable. At least in financial terms, one may thus think about prospective politicians being

motivated more by future rewards from gaining higher positions than by the initial returns of

holding office. This is broadly consistent with a tournament model of politics in the spirit of

Lazear and Rosen (1981), where participants compete for the high returns that only a small

fraction of entry-level politicians will attain.

   Our work also presents several possible directions for future work. Given the high returns

we observe among ministers, it may be fruitful, with the benefit of additional data, to examine

whether particular positions within the Council are associated with high rents. And while

we do not observe a strong sensitivity of election outcomes to asset growth, one may assess

whether electoral accountability is affected by voter exposure to asset data, in the spirit of

Banerjee et al (2011). It may be interesting to explore the impact of the Right to Information

Act itself: disclosure requirements may induce exit by winners that have extracted high rents,



                                                   26
in order to avoid possible corruption-related inquiries. Finally, we are unable in this work to

uncover the mechanism through which asset accumulation takes place. We leave these and

other extensions for future work, which will be enabled either by experimental intervention

or the accumulation of new data via the Right to Information Act.




                                              27
References

 [1] Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 2009, Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, Princeton, NJ.

 [2] Banerjee, Abhijit V., Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande and Felix Su, 2011, Do Informed Voters Make
    Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India, Working Paper.

 [3] Barro, Robert, 1973, The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model, Public Choice 14:19-42.

 [4] Besley, Timothy, 2004, Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence, Journal of the European Eco-
    nomic Association, 2, 193-215.

 [5] Bhavnani, Rikhil R., 2012, Using Asset Disclosures to Study Politicians Rents: An Application
    to India, Working Paper.

 [6] Braguinsky, Serguey , Sergey Mityakov, and Andrey Liscovich, 2010, Direct Estimation of Hidden
    Earnings: Evidence From Administrative Data, Working Paper.

 [7] Buchanan, James, 1989, The Public Choice Perspective, in Essays on the Political Economy,
    Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

 [8] Carpenter, David, Brian Feinstein, Justin Grimmer and Eitan Hersh, 2011, Are Close Elections
    Random?, Working Paper.

 [9] Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli, 2004, Bad Politicians, Journal of Public Economics 88,
    759-782.

[10] Caughey, Devin M. and Jasjeet S. Sekhon, 2010, Regression-Discontinuity Designs and Popular
    Elections: Implications of Pro-Incumbent Bias in Close U.S. House Races, Working Paper.

[11] Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane and Antonio Merlo, 2005, A Political Economy Model of Con-
    gressional Careers, American Economic Review 95(1): 347373.

[12] DiNardo, John and David S. Lee, 2004, Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
    Employees: 1984-2001, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1383-1441.

[13] Eggers, Andrew and Jens Hainmueller, 2009, MPs for Sale? Estimating Returns to Office in
    Post-War British Politics, American Political Science Review, 103(4): 513-533.

[14] Eggers, Andrew and Jens Hainmueller, 2010, Political Investing: The Common Stock Investments
    of Members of Congress 2004-2008, Working Paper.


                                                28
[15] Ferejohn, John, 1986, Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control, Public Choice 50: 5-25.

[16] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, 2011, Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence
    from the Audits of Local Governments, American Economic Review 101, 12741311.

[17] Fisman, Raymond J., Nikolaj Harmon, Emir Kamenica and Inger Munk, 2011, Labor Supply of
    Politicians, Working Paper.

[18] Folke, Olle, Shigeo Hirano and James M. Snyder, Jr, 2011, A Simple Explanation for Bias at the
    50-50 Threshold in RDD Studies Based on Close Elections, Working Paper.

[19] Gagliarducci, Stefano and Tommaso Nannicini, forthcoming, Do Better Paid Politicians Perform
    Better? Disentangling Incentives from Selection, Journal of the European Economic Association.

[20] Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux, 2008, Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Prac-
    tice, Journal of Econometrics 142(2) 615-635.

[21] Kotakorpi, Kaisa and Panu Poutvaara, 2011, Pay for Politicians and Candidate Selection: An
    Empirical Analysis, Journal of Public Economics 95 (7-8): 877-885.

[22] Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen, 1981, Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Con-
    tracts, Journal of Political Economy 89(5): 841-864.

[23] Linden, Leigh, 2004, Are Incumbents Always Advantaged? The Preference for Non-Incumbents
    in India, Working Paper.

[24] Lenz, Gabriel, and Kevin Lim, 2009, Getting Rich(er) in Office? Corruption and Wealth Accu-
    mulation in Congress, Working Paper.

[25] Matozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo, 2008, Political Careers or Career Politicians?, Journal of
    Public Economics 92(3-4), pages 597-608.

[26] Olken, Benjamin and Rohini Pande, 2012, Corruption in Developing Countries, Working Paper.

[27] Querubin, Pablo and James Snyder, Returns to U.S. Congressional Seats in the Mid-19th Cen-
    tury, in The Political Economy of Democracy, Enriqueta Aragones, Carmen Bevia, Humberto
    Llavador, and Norman Schofield (eds.), 2009.

[28] Snyder, Jason, 2005, Detecting Manipulation in U.S. House Elections, Working Paper.

[29] Ziobrowski, Alan J., James W. Boyd, Ping Cheng and Brigitte J.Ziobrowski, 2011, Abnormal
    Returns From the Common Stock Investments of Members of the U.S. House of Representatives,
    Business and Politics: Vol. 13: Iss. 1, Article 4.


                                                  29
                                                           Table 1: Overview of Sample States
     Notes: This Table provides an overview of the states in our sample along with some state characteristics at the time of the first elections. The columns
     labeled Winners and Runners-up show the number of candidates which we were able to manually match across elections and in parentheses we show the
     number of matches that were potentially usable (i.e., good quality affidavits). Pairs refers to the number of constituencies in which Winners and Runners-up
     both recontested. *October 2005 Re-Election. Sources: Statistical Reports on General Elections, Election Commission of India, New Delhi (various years);
     India Corruption Study 2005, Transparency International India (June 30, 2005).

                                                                                                                              Matched Candidates
                                                Corruption                                Constit-     Total            Winners    Runners-up            Pairs
       State                Year 1    Year 2      Index         Electorate    Turnout     uencies    Contestants          (Parentheses: good Affidavits)

       Andhra Pradesh        2004      2009         4.21         51,146,498     69.96%      294           1896           152 (122)        94 (79)      57 (40)
       Arunachal Pradesh     2004      2009           -             683,512     64.02%       60            168             55 (40)        22 (14)      19 (11)
       Assam                 2006      2011         5.42         17,434,019     75.77%      126            997            108 (98)        69 (58)      61 (45)
       Bihar*                2005      2010         6.95         51,385,891     45.85%      243           2135           169 (134)        99 (67)      72 (35)
       Chhattisgarh          2003      2008         4.45         13,543,656     71.30%       90            819             56 (27)        31 (15)       15 (4)
       Delhi                 2003      2008         4.96          8,448,324     53.42%       70            817             46 (27)          8 (3)        7 (2)
       Goa                   2007      2012           -           1,010,246     70.51%       40            202             36 (34)        19 (18)      18 (17)
       Haryana               2005      2009         5.16         12,735,888     71.96%       90            983             59 (50)        42 (37)      30 (18)
       Jharkhand             2005      2009         5.20         17,766,202     57.03%      81            1390             63 (43)        51 (38)      43 (22)




30
       Karnataka             2004      2008         5.76         38,586,754     65.17%      224           1715             83 (51)        35 (23)        2 (1)
       Kerala                2006      2011         2.40         21,483,937     72.38%      140            931            102 (65)        23 (20)      18 (13)
       Madhya Pradesh        2003      2008         5.84         37,936,518     67.25%      230           2171           126 (109)        51 (40)      29 (20)
       Maharashtra           2004      2009         4.33         65,965,792     63.44%      288           2678           196 (177)        98 (88)      75 (62)
       Manipur               2007      2012           -           1,707,204     86.73%      60             308             47 (40)        33 (28)      28 (17)
       Mizoram               2003      2008           -             532,028     78.65%       40            192             31 (16)        17 (10)       15 (5)
       Orissa                2004      2009         4.75         25,651,989     66.05%      147           802             108 (88)        78 (69)      60 (46)
       Puducherry            2006      2011           -             659,420     86.00%       30            218             25 (25)        17 (16)      14 (13)
       Punjab                2007      2012         4.59         16,775,702     75.45%      116           1043             87 (74)        59 (46)      46 (29)
       Rajasthan             2003      2008         5.43         33,928,675     67.18%      200           1541            105 (76)        72 (52)      41 (18)
       Sikkim                2004      2009           -             281,937     79.23%       32             91             12 (12)        14 (14)        2 (2)
       Tamil Nadu            2006      2011         5.09         46,603,352     70.82%      234           2586           125 (101)        41 (30)      22 (12)
       Uttar Pradesh         2007      2012         4.91        113,549,350     45.96%      403           6086           297 (273)      216 (184)    168 (132)
       Uttarakhand           2007      2012           -           5,985,302     59.45%       69            785             57 (48)        30 (27)      23 (17)
       West Bengal           2006      2011         4.61         48,165,201     81.97%      294           1654           158 (142)       100 (96)      59 (52)

       TOTALS                                                  631,967,397                  3601         32208       2303 (1872)     1318 (1071)    924 (633)

       Lok Sabha             2004      2009                     671,487,930     58.07%      543           5435
                              Table 2: Variable Definitions

Variable                Description

Movable Assets (1)      Sum of (i) Cash, (ii) Deposits in Banks, Financial Institutions and Non-Banking Financial
                        Companies, (iii) Bonds, Debentures and Shares in companies, (iv) NSS, Postal Savings etc.,
                        (v) Personal loans/advance given, (vi) Motor vehicles, (vii) Jewelry, and (viii) Other assets
                        such as values of claims/interests as reported on the candidate affidavit. This item excludes
                        the value of life or other insurance policies (which are usually reported at payoff values).

Immovable Assets (2)    Sum of (i) Agricultural Land, (ii) Non-Agricultural Land, (iii) Commercial Buildings and (vi)
                        Residential Buildings (”Buildings and Houses”), and (v) Others as reported on the candidate
                        affidavit.

Total Assets            Defined as the sum of (1) and (2).

Total Liabilities (3)   Sum of (i) Loans from Banks and Financial Institutions, (ii) Loans from Individuals/Entities
                        and (iii) any other liability, as well as (vi) any dues reported on the candidate affidavit.

Net Assets              ”Net Worth” of the Candidate. Defined as the sum of (1) and (2) minus (3). We remove
                        candidates with extremely low net assets bases (Net assets below Rs 100,000 as of election
                        1).

Net Asset Growth        Annualized Growth in Net Assets over an election cycle. Winsorized at the 1 and 99 per-
                        centiles.

Winner                  Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the contestant won election 1.

Minister                Dummy variable indicating whether the constituency winner was appointed to the state’s
                        Council of Ministers.

Margin                  Vote share difference between winner and runner-up (scale of 0 to 100).

Incumbent               Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the contesting candidate won the preceding con-
                        stituency election.

Education               Ordinary scale variable ranging from 1 to 9. We assign values based on the following education
                        bands: 1 = Illiterate, 2 = Literate, 3 = 5th Pass, 4 = 8th Pass, 5 = 10th Pass, 6 = 12th Pass,
                        7 = Graduate or Graduate Professional, 8 = Post Graduate, 9 = Doctorate. This variable
                        is missing if education information was not given.

Years of Education      Number of years of education the candidate has received.

Criminal Record         Dummy variable indicating whether the candidate has past or pending criminal cases.

Government              Dummy variable indicating whether the candidate’s party is part of the ruling state govern-
                        ment.

SC/ST Quota             Dummy variable indicating whether the constituency of the candidate is that of disadvan-
                        taged groups, so-called Scheduled Castes and Tribes (SC/ST).

Corruption Index        Survey-based state corruption index (based on perceived corruption in public services) as
                        reported in the 2005 Corruption Study by Transparency International India. The index
                        takes on a low value of 2.40 for the state of Kerala (perceived as ”least corrupt”)and a high
                        value of 6.95 for Bihar (perceived as ”most corrupt”). We rescaled the original index by
                        dividing it by 100.

Female                  Dummy indicating the gender of the candidate (1 = Female).

Base Salary             Monthly base salaries of MLAs. Collected from states’ Salaries and Allowances and Pension
                        of Members of the Legislative Assembly (Amendment) Acts, official websites, and newspaper
                        articles.




                                                  31
                            Table 3: Descriptive Statistics of Constituency-Matched Pairs (1100 Candidates)
     Notes: Panel A shows descriptive statistics for the 1100 constituency-paired candidates that constitute our main sample (550 winners and 550 runners-up).
     In Panel B, we only include candidates of those constituencies that are decided by a winning margin of five or less percent (’close elections’). Except for
     net asset growth, which is measured over the legislature period, all variables are as of the first of the two elections. Variables are defined in detail in Table
     2. The last column shows t-statistics of difference in means tests.

                                         Winner and Runner-up                        Winner                          Runner-up                 Diff. in Means
            Variable                     Mean Median  Std. Dev.            Mean     Median  Std. Dev.        Mean    Median  Std. Dev.             (T-stat)


           Panel A: All Constituencies

           log(Net Assets)               15.16      15.14        1.43      15.16      15.16        1.40      15.16      15.13        1.46            -0.08
           Net Asset Growth (ann.)       0.219      0.189        0.22      0.234      0.204        0.22      0.205      0.179        0.23             2.20
           Female                         0.06          0        0.24       0.06          0        0.24       0.06          0        0.24            0.13
           Age                           48.44         48        9.96      47.76         48        9.86      49.13         49       10.01            -2.28
           Education                      6.61          7        1.30       6.57          7        1.38       6.65          7        1.23            -1.04
           Years of education            13.89         15        3.13      13.78         15        3.29      13.99         15        2.97            -1.07
           Incumbent                      0.37          0        0.48       0.34          0        0.47       0.41          0        0.49            -2.50
           Criminal Record                0.30          0        0.46       0.30          0        0.46       0.30          0        0.46            0.02
           Government                     0.43          0        0.50       0.56          1        0.50       0.30          0        0.46            9.09




32
           Minister                        0.07         0        0.25        0.14        0         0.35
           Margin                          8.32      6.28        7.40
           SC/ST Quota                     0.19         0        0.39

           MLA Base Salary               16151      8000        20820


           Panel B: Constituencies decided by Margin ≤ 5%

           log(Net Assets)               15.07      15.12        1.37      15.03      15.11        1.32      15.11      15.16        1.43            -0.60
           Net Asset Growth (ann.)       0.214      0.185        0.21      0.234      0.199        0.21      0.194      0.170        0.20             2.04
           Female                         0.06          0        0.24       0.06          0        0.25       0.06          0        0.24            -0.20
           Age                           48.42       48.5        9.95      47.49         47        9.72      49.34         49       10.11            -1.95
           Education                      6.66          7        1.30       6.53          7        1.45       6.80          7        1.12            -2.17
           Years of education            14.00         15        3.13      13.69         15        3.46      14.32         15        2.73            -2.12
           Incumbent                      0.37          0        0.48       0.34          0        0.47       0.40          0        0.49            -1.29
           Criminal Record                0.31          0        0.46       0.29          0        0.46       0.33          0        0.47            -0.83
           Government                     0.42          0        0.49       0.53          1        0.50       0.32          0        0.47            4.45

           Minister                        0.06         0        0.25        0.13        0         0.34
           Margin                          2.39      2.47        1.45
           SC/ST Quota                     0.14         0        0.35
            Table 4: Within-Constituency Effects of Winning the Election
Notes: The regression equation estimated is: N et Asset Growthwc = αc +β ∗W innerwc +log(N etAssetswc )+
Controlswc + wc . The dependent variable, N et Asset Growthwc , is the annualized growth rate in net wealth.
αc is a constituency fixed-effect. W innerwc is the dummy for winning the election (e=1). log(N etAssetswc )
is the logarithm of the net assets of the politician. Controlswc include education (scaled from 1 to 9, with 9
being the highest), criminal record (dummy if a criminal record were present as of the first election), gender,
age, and incumbency. The regression is also run for close elections (Columns 4-6), where the vote share gap
between the winner and the incumbent was less than 10, 5, and 3 percentage points. Robust standard errors
are given in parentheses. The reported constant is the average value of the fixed effects. Coefficients with
***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                       Net Asset     Net Asset    Net Asset      Net Asset       Net Asset      Net Asset
   Variables            Growth        Growth       Growth         Growth          Growth         Growth

   Winner               0.0296**     0.0291**      0.0265**       0.0352**       0.0341**       0.0519**
                        (0.0133)     (0.0123)      (0.0132)       (0.0137)       (0.0163)       (0.0203)
   log(Net Assets)                  -0.0716***    -0.0720***     -0.0720***     -0.0740***     -0.0825***
                                     (0.0086)      (0.0093)       (0.0106)       (0.0122)       (0.0146)
   Education                                       -0.00777
                                                   (0.0065)
   Criminal Record                                    0.01
                                                   (0.0219)
   Female                                          -0.0748*
                                                   (0.0453)
   Age                                              -0.0047
                                                   (0.0076)
   Age2                                            3.80E-05
                                                   (0.0001)
   Incumbent                                         0.0144
                                                   (0.0161)
   Constant             0.205***     1.291***      1.404***       1.291***       1.312***       1.436***
                        (0.0094)     (0.1300)      (0.2350)       (0.1600)       (0.1840)       (0.2190)

   Close Elections:                                             Margin ≤ 10     Margin ≤ 5     Margin ≤ 3

   Observations           1100         1100          1060            740            436            268
   R-squared              0.511        0.585         0.598          0.604          0.656          0.661




                                                      33
                           Table 5: The Effect of Potential Influence in Government on the Returns to Office
     Notes: Net asset growth of the politician is the dependent variable in columns 1-6. Winner is 1 if the politician won election e=1 and 0 if the politician
     did not win. Minister denotes whether the constituency winner was appointed to the state’s Council of Ministers. Log(Net Assets) is the logarithm of
     the politician’s net assets. In columns 2-4, close elections are examined, with the vote share gap between the winner and incumbent being less than 10,
     5, and 3 percentage points, respectively. Being part of the ruling government is coded as Government; we further included an interaction term between
     Government and Winner. In columns 7 and 8, there is a disaggregation of asset growth into two categories - Movable Asset Growth (holdings such as
     cash, bank deposits, and jewelry) and Immovable Asset Growth (land and building assets). Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. The reported
     constant is the average value of the fixed effects. Coefficients with ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)               (8)
                                     Net Asset      Net Asset       Net Asset      Net Asset     Net Asset     Net Asset      Movable          Immovable
            Variables                 Growth         Growth          Growth         Growth        Growth        Growth      Asset Growth      Asset Growth

            Winner                     0.0107         0.0221          0.0197        0.0332         0.0242         0.0291       0.0523***          0.0259
                                      (0.0130)       (0.0144)       (0.0173)       (0.0216)       (0.0342)      (0.0344)        (0.0185)        (0.0162)
            Minister                  0.134***       0.112***        0.111**       0.157***                     0.139***         0.0417          0.0876*
                                      (0.0355)       (0.0430)       (0.0494)       (0.0538)                     (0.0385)        (0.0529)        (0.0466)
            log(Net Assets)          -0.0728***     -0.0729***     -0.0749***     -0.0826***     -0.0717***    -0.0733***     -0.0362***       -0.0718***




34
                                      (0.0085)       (0.0105)       (0.0121)       (0.0146)       (0.0087)      (0.0086)        (0.0101)        (0.0102)
            Government                                                                             0.0143        0.0217          0.0307          -0.0048
                                                                                                  (0.0382)      (0.0383)        (0.0198)        (0.0177)
            Winner*Government                                                                      0.0021        -0.0442
                                                                                                  (0.0712)      (0.0728)
            Constant                  1.309***       1.304***       1.326***       1.437***       1.287***      1.310***       0.780***         1.297***
                                       (0.129)        (0.160)        (0.183)        (0.221)        (0.131)       (0.130)        (0.155)          (0.155)

            Close Elections:                       Margin ≤ 10     Margin ≤ 5     Margin ≤ 3

            Observations               1100            740             436            268          1100          1100            1074             1042
            R-squared                  0.596          0.612           0.664          0.677         0.586         0.596           0.522            0.565
                                          Table 6: Incumbency
Notes: The table shows results for the constituency fixed-effects regression model and investigates the effects
of incumbency. Net asset growth of the politician is the dependent variable. Winner is 1 if the politician
won election e=1 and 0 if the politician did not win. Incumbent is the dummy for incumbency. We also
include an interaction term between Winner and Incumbent. Minister indicates whether the constituency
winner was appointed to the state’s Council of Ministers. Log(Net Assets) is the logarithm of the politician’s
net assets. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. The reported constant is the average value of
the fixed effects. Coefficients with ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

                                                      (1)                  (2)
                        Variables              Net Asset Growth     Net Asset Growth

                        Winner                      -0.0455*             -0.0530**
                                                    (0.0264)              (0.0262)
                        Incumbent                  -0.0864***           -0.0819***
                                                    (0.0312)              (0.0311)
                        Winner*Incumbent            0.203***              0.179***
                                                    (0.0597)              (0.0596)
                        Minister                                          0.117***
                                                                          (0.0366)
                        log(Net Assets)            -0.0736***           -0.0737***
                                                    (0.0086)              (0.0085)
                        Constant                    1.356***             1.356***
                                                    (0.1310)              (0.1290)

                        Observations                 1100                  1100
                        R-squared                    0.596                 0.604




                                                      35
                       Table 7: Effect of Asset Growth on Reelection
Notes: The following constituency fixed-effects model is run: Reelectionwc = αc + β1 ∗ W innerwc + β2 ∗
N et Asset Growthwc +β3 ∗W innerwc ∗N et Asset Growthwc +wc where Reelectionwc is an indicator variable
that takes on a value of 1 if the candidate won election e = 2 and 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors are
given in parentheses. The reported constant is the average value of the fixed effects. Coefficients with ***,
**, and * are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                             (1)          (2)
                           Variables                      Reelection   Reelection

                           Winner                         -0.00608      -0.0593
                                                          (0.0378)     (0.0639)
                           Net Asset Growth                 0.141        0.0235
                                                          (0.1190)     (0.1640)
                           Winner*Net Asset Growth                       0.242
                                                                       (0.2360)
                           Constant                       0.392***     0.416***
                                                          (0.0362)     (0.0428)

                           Observations                     1098         1098
                           R-squared                        0.204        0.205




                                                     36
                                                       Table 8: Other Candidate Characteristics
     Notes: Other characteristics analyzed include corruption, criminal record, constituencies reserved for SC/ST candidates, gender, and years of education.
     There are interaction terms for Winner and Corruption, and Minister and Corruption, where corruption is measured at the state-level as outlined in the
     variable description. Criminal Record is a dummy equal to one if a criminal record was present as of the first election. SC/ST Quota is a dummy for
     whether or not the constituency of the candidate is that of a disadvantaged group, so-called Scheduled Tribes and Castes (SC/ST). Female is the dummy
     for the gender of the candidate. log(Years of Education) is the logarithm of the years of education the candidate has received. Robust standard errors are
     given in parentheses. The reported constant is the average value of the fixed effects. Coefficients with ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1%,
     5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                 Net Asset     Net Asset    Net Asset    Net Asset    Net Asset    Net Asset    Net Asset    Net Asset
               Variables                          Growth        Growth       Growth       Growth       Growth       Growth       Growth       Growth

               Winner                              -0.0464      -0.0144     0.0290*       0.0134        0.0141     0.0256**      0.396**       0.0448
                                                  (0.0819)     (0.0833)     (0.0161)     (0.0134)      (0.0132)    (0.0127)      (0.1750)     (0.1220)
               Winner*Corruption                   0.0158      0.00651
                                                  (0.0163)     (0.0165)
               Minister                                          -0.269
                                                               (0.2660)
               Minister*Corruption                               0.0755




37
                                                               (0.0534)
               Criminal Record                                               0.0144
                                                                            (0.0288)
               Winner*Criminal Record                                       0.000342
                                                                            (0.0392)
               SC/ST Quota*Winner                                                        0.0847***    0.0875***
                                                                                          (0.0324)     (0.0313)
               SC/ST Quota                                                                            -0.0734**
                                                                                                       (0.0329)
               Female                                                                                               -0.0956*
                                                                                                                    (0.0570)
               Winner*Female                                                                                         0.0595
                                                                                                                    (0.0770)
               log(Years of Education)                                                                                            0.0414
                                                                                                                                 (0.0478)
               log(Years of Education)*Winner                                                                                    -0.139**
                                                                                                                                 (0.0656)
               Winner*log(Base Salary)                                                                                                         -0.0024
                                                                                                                                              (0.0130)
               log(Net Assets)                   -0.0725***   -0.0730***   -0.0714***   -0.0714***   -0.0699***   -0.0709***   -0.0730***    -0.0734***
                                                  (0.0092)     (0.0092)     (0.0087)     (0.0084)     (0.0068)     (0.0085)     (0.0091)      (0.0093)
               Constant                           1.302***     1.309***     1.283***     1.287***     1.277***     1.286***     1.201***      1.318***
                                                  (0.1390)     (0.1380)     (0.1340)     (0.1280)     (0.1030)     (0.1290)     (0.1760)      (0.1400)

               Observations                          960          960         1099         1100         1100         1100         1061          995
               R-squared                            0.579        0.587        0.586        0.591        0.419        0.588        0.597        0.592
                                                           Table 9: Regression Discontinuity Design
     Notes: In this table, we report results from regression discontinuity specification. We first generate residuals by regressing growth in net assets on candidate
     observables, including net assets, gender, and age, but excluding winner dummy and margin. We then collapse the residuals on margin intervals of size 0.5
     (margins ranging from -25 to +25) and then estimate the following specification: R̄i = α + τ · Di + β · f (M argin(i)) + η · Di · f (M argin(i)) + i where R̄i is the
     average residual value within each margin bin i, M argin(i)) is the midpoint of the margin bin i, Di is an indicator that takes a value of 1 if the midpoint of
     margin bin i is positive and a value of 0 if it is negative, and i is the error term. f (M argin(i)) and Di · f (M argin(i)) are flexible fourth-order polynomials.
     The goal of these functions is to fit smoothed curves on either side of the suspected discontinuity. The magnitude of the discontinuity, τ , is estimated by
     the difference in the values of the two smoothed functions evaluated at 0. In column (1), we report results using the entire sample of constituency matched
     winners and runners-up; (2) only includes Ministers with corresponding runners-up, and (3) only includes winners not appointed to the Council of Ministers
     and corresponding runners-up. In columns (4)-(5), we disaggregate the sample based on whether an incumbent is standing for reelection in the constituency.
     Column (4) shows results for the sample of constituencies where an incumbent was standing for reelection; column (5) uses the sample of non-incumbent
     constituencies. Coefficients with ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Robust standard errors are given in
     parentheses.

                                                  (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                                               Net Asset             Net Asset            Net Asset            Net Asset             Net Asset
                           Variables        Growth Residual       Growth Residual      Growth Residual      Growth Residual       Growth Residual




38
                           τ                    0.0652***            0.2869***               0.0265             0.0799***              0.0283
                                                 (0.0233)             (0.0546)              (0.0234)             (0.0250)             (0.0358)

                           Sample:             All Winners            Ministers         Non-Ministers          Incumbent          Non-Incumbent
                                                                                                              Constituencies      Constituencies

                           Observations            1065                  144                  921                  797                   268
                           Margin Bins               98                   68                   95                   91                    83
                           R-squared               0.119                0.399                 0.06                 0.21                 0.284
                       Figure 1: Kernel Densities of Asset Growth Residuals
Notes: This figure plots Epanechnikov kernel densities of residuals obtained from regressing growth in net
assets on candidate observables (characteristics such as net assets, gender, and age but excluding winner
dummy and margin) for the sample of constituency-matched candidates. Panel A uses the entire sample of
constituency-matched candidates while Panel B only uses candidates that were within a margin of 5 percentage
points (“close elections”). In both cases, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of the distribution function
of winner and runner-up residuals is rejected at the 1% level and 5% level, repectively. In Panel C, we further
disaggregate winners into ministers and non-ministers and plot kernel densities of these two groups as well as
the runners-up. In Panels D and E, we disaggregate the sample based on whether an incumbent is standing for
reelection in the constituency. Panel D shows winner and runner-up densities for the sample of constituencies
where an incumbent was standing for reelection - test for equality of the distribution function is rejected at
the 1% level. Panel E shows densisties for the subsample of non-incumbent constituencies - test for equality
of the distribution function is rejected at the 10% level.



                                                     Panel A
                                            Winners and Runner-ups
           4




                                                                                         Winner
                                                                                         Runner-up
           3
        Density
          21
           0




                     -.5                                 0                                    .5
                                                      Residuals




                                                      39
                                              Panel B
   4        Winners and Runner-ups in Close Elections (Margin within 5%)
                                                                     Winner
                                                                     Runner-up
   3
Density
  21
   0




          -.4                  -.2                 0          .2                 .4
                                              Residuals


                                              Panel C
                           Runner-ups, Ministers and Non-Ministers
   4




                      Runner-up
                      Winner (Non-Minister)
                      Minister
   3
Density
  21
   0




                -.5                               0                      .5
                                              Residuals




                                              40
                                           Panel D
          4           Constituencies with Incumbent standing for reelection
                                                                        Winner
                                                                        Runner-up
          3
Density
  2       1
          0




              -.5                             0                               .5
                                            Residuals


                                           Panel E
                    Constituencies without Incumbent standing for reelection
          3




                                                                        Winner
                                                                        Runner-up
          2
Density
          1
          0




                -.5                              0                                 .5
                                            Residuals




                                            41
                               Figure 2: Regression Discontinuity Design
Notes: This figure investigates residuals obtained from regressing growth in net assets on candidate observables
(characteristics such as net assets, gender, age and incumbency but excluding winner dummy and margin) as
a function of winning margin for the sample of constituency-matched candidates. We first collapse residuals
on margin intervals of size 0.5 (margins ranging from -25 to +25) and then estimate the following equation:
R̄i = α + τ · Di + β · f (M argin(i)) + η · Di · f (M argin(i)) + i where R̄i is the average residual value within
each margin bin i, M argin(i)) is the midpoint of the margin bin i, Di is an indicator that takes a value
of 1 if the midpoint of margin bin i is positive and a value of 0 if it is negative, and i is the error term.
f (M argin(i)) and Di · f (M argin(i)) are flexible fourth-order polynomials. Panel A shows results using the
sample of all winners sand runners-up; Panel B only includes Ministers with corresponding Runners-up; Panel
C only includes winners that were not appointed to the Council of Ministers with corresponding Runners-up.
In Panels D and E, we disaggregate the sample based on whether an incumbent is standing for reelection in
the constituency. Panel D shows results for the sample of constituencies where an incumbent was standing
for reelection; Panel E shows the subsample of non-incumbent constituencies.



                                                       Panel A
                                             Runner-ups and Winners
            .2
            .1
        Residuals
           0-.1
            -.2




                        -20                                0                                   20
                                                       Margin Bin




                                                        42
                                        Panel B
    .4
    .2                          Runner-ups and Ministers
Residuals
    0
    -.2
    -.4




                  -20                       0                     20
                                        Margin Bin


                                        Panel C
                              Runner-ups and Non-Ministers
    .2
Residuals
    0
    -.2




            -30         -20       -10           0            10    20
                                        Margin Bin




                                        43
                                          Panel D
    .2              Constituencies with Incumbent standing for reelection
Residuals
    0
    -.2




            -30         -20         -10           0           10             20
                                          Margin Bin


                                          Panel E
                   Constituencies without Incumbent standing for reelection
    .5
Residuals
    0
    -.5




                  -20                         0                             20
                                          Margin Bin




                                          44
         Figure 3: Kernel Densities of Observables Characteristics in Close Elections
Notes: This figure plots Epanechnikov kernel densities of age and log(Net Assets) for the sample of
constituency-matched candidates that were within a Margin of 5 percentage points (“close elections”). Panel
A plots age densities for winners and runners-up and Panel B plots densities for log(Net Assets). For both
observables, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of the distribution function of winner and runner-up
cannot be rejected at conventional levels.



                                                   Panel A
                       Winners and Runner-ups in Close Elections (Margin within 5%)
           .04




                                                                                     Winner
                                                                                     Runner-up
           .03
        Density
         .02
           .01
           0




                  20                      40                         60                         80
                                               Age of Candidate




                                                    45
                                   Panel B
          Winners and Runner-ups in Close Elections (Margin within 5%)
   .4




                                                                Winner
                                                                Runner-up
   .3
Density
  .2
   .1
   0




          12         14           16            18         20            22
                                 Log(Net Assets)




                                    46
                                Figure 4: Recontesting of Candidates
Notes: We investigate recontesting decisions for winners and runners-up. In a first stage we obtain residuals
from regressing a binary recontesting dummy on candidate observables (characteristics such as age, gender,
incumbency but excluding winner dummy and margin) and constituency fixed effects. Residuals are then
collapsed into margin bins and a polynomial is fitted to the data. In Panel A, we show results for the full
sample (5246 candidates), indicating a significant jump in recontesting around the winning threshold (point
estimate of 0.1328 with a t-statistic of 6.41). In Panel B, we show results for for the subsample of seasoned
politicians (322 candidates) - no jump in recontesting can be detected around the threshold. In Panel C,
we analyze net asset growth residuals for the subsample of seasoned politicians. The point estimate of the
discontinuity is 0.1206 and significant at the 5% level (t-statistic of 2.19).



                                                    Panel A
                                     Recontesting Probability Residuals
            .2  0
        Residuals
            -.2
            -.4




                    -20            -10                  0                    10                   20
                                                    Margin Bin




                                                     47
                                           Panel B
    .5              Seasoned Politicians - Recontesting Probability Residuals
Residuals
    0
    -.5




            -20              -10               0                   10            20
                                           Margin Bin


                                           Panel C
                         Seasoned Politicians - Asset Growth Residuals
    .4
    .2
Residuals
    0
    -.2
    -.4




                  -20           -10            0              10            20
                                           Margin Bin




                                            48
