                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PUBLIC SECTOR UNION GROWTH
                       AND BARGAINING LAWS:
                 A PROPORTIONAL HAZARDS APPROACH
                   WITH TIME-VARYING TREATMENTS




                         Casey Ichniowski




                      Working Paper No. 1809




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The author wishes to thank Richard Berk and Ann Witte for their
comments, and Paul Huo for expert assistance in the research. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1809
                                                    January 1986


             Public Sector Union Growth and Bargaining   Laws:
      A Proportjonal Hazards Z\pproach with Ti-Varying Treatrrents

                                 ABSTRC

      This   study uses a Cox proportional hazards model to estimate the

 relationship between state-level collective bargaining policies and

 union growth in the public sector. The proportional hazards analysis

 is performed with data on approximately eight hundred municipal police

 departments. The timing of unionization in these departments clearly

 indicates that unionization rarely precedes the enactment of a statute.

Where bargaining laws have not been enacted, formal collective bargaining

between municipalities and their police is virtually nonexistant. More-

over, the proportional hazards analysis that controls for the effects of

other state-level and municipal-level covariates indicates that the bar-

gaining laws and policies are the most important determinant of unioniza-

tion among police. Among different types of bargaining policies, "duty-

to-bargain" provisions lead to higher unionization rates than do statutes

that permit, but do not require, employers to bargain with police. How-

ever, after controlling for for the effects of other covariates, there

appears to be no difference in the unionization rates between the states

that have duty-to-bargain provisions along with an interest arbitration

mechanism and those states that have duty-to-bargain provisions without

such a dispute resolution mechanism.



                                              Professor Casey Ichniowski
                                              Uris Hall 713
                                              Graduate School of Business
                                                   Administrstjon
                                              Columbia University
                                              New York, NY 10027
                                                                                  I




   I.    Introduction



         Entering the 1960s, few public
                                          sector employees were organized.   By
  1980, approximately 43% of all
                                    govermflent employees in the United States
  were members of Unions.1 For
                                   certain occupational
                                                          groups, Particularly
  the protective
                   services, collective bargaining
                                                     establishes salaries and
  working Conditions for the vast
                                    majority of departments in the United
  States.2 This
                   explosion in public sector unionism has occurred while

 private sector unionization has
                                    declined dramatically. It also coincides
 with the passage of state laws that provide various
                                                     degrees of protection
 of public employees'
                      rights to organize and to bargain
                                                             collectively. The
 role that these laws play in the growth of public
                                                   sector unionism is the
 central focus of this study.



 II. Previous Research and
                              Current Methodology



        Largely because the coverage of the
                                              National Labor Relations Act
 (NLRA) extends across most areas of private sector
                                                       employment, econo-
metric investigations of the
                               relationshIp between policy variables and
union growth using private sector data are necessarily
                                                            very limited.
The most convincing studies
                              are perhaps case studies of groups that were
at times covered by the NIRA and at other times not
                                                    covered; for example,
supervisors in the Foremen's Association
                                         of America3 in the late 1930s
and early l940s, or agricultural
                                 workers in the United Farm Workers in
California in the late 1960s.4 In
                                   contrast, the public sector provides a
better laboratory for
                      examining the linkages between puLic policies and
Union growth given the extreme
                                 variation in public sectcr collective
                                                                          2




bargaining laws across states and across different occuptional groups.

Despite this fact, there have been very few investigations of the rela-

tionship between bargaining laws and union growth in the public sector.5

The data and methodologies used in previous studies are quite limited and

not entirely appropriate for uncovering the relationships of interest.

By employing municipal-level data with dates of unionization among United

States police departments, this study employs a proportional hazards

technique to uncover the impact of different bargaining laws and other

state and municipal characteristics on police unionization.



Level of Analysis



     Previous studies of the relationship between bargaining laws and

public employee unionism focus exclusively on unionization among teach-

ers. They rely on aggregate state-level data and therefore suffer from

 several inherent limitations. First, it is generally argued in these

 studies that it is easier to form new bargaining units where legislation

 is more favorable to public employee bargaining.   The state-level percent

 organized or percent covered measures used as dependent variables,

 however, are affected not only by the formation of new units, but also by

 subsequent emploent effects of collective bargaining.6 Second,

 state-level percent organized variables give equal weight to a given

 percentage increase in unionization in different states, even though the

 same percent increase represents very different numbers of bargaining

 units and covered employees from state to state. For example, a gin

 percentage increase in New Hampshire's percent organized may corresi rid

 to the formation of only a very small number of bargaining units covering
                                                                                 3


  relatively few employees, while in California the same
                                                         percentage in-
  crease may mean a very large number of new units were formed.
                                                                 Finally,
  state-level analyses cannot provide any information on the kinds
                                                                   of
  municipalities that are more or less
                                          likely to enter bargaining relation-
  ships with their departments.

       This study focuses on the
                                   municipal_level, which is normally the
  level at which bargaining
                              units are formed for most public sector Occupa-
  tions. The data for this
                              study pertain to approximately
                                                               i,ooo municipal
 police departments and describe the
                                        history of Unionization, as well as
 characteristics of the
                           department, the municipality and the state.


 Model Specification:
                        Proportional Hazards Framework



      With municipal-level data, more appropriate specifications
                                                                 than
 those used previously can be
                                employed. The existing state-levelstudies
 are generally cross-sectional and can only document whether unionization

 tends to be higher in states that
                                     have laws; they reveal nothing about
the more interesting
                        question of whether or not the legislation is

necessary to permit the growth. Even where the
                                                    longitudinal information
has been brought to bear
                           on the question, several problems remain.

Institutionally, the decision to form
                                         a bargaining unit carries with it a
great deal of inertia. There is little
                                            evidence of decertifjcation in
the public sector or of Unionized
                                     municipal departments going out of
business.7   However, models that express
                                            percent organized (as a level)
as a function of bargaining laws
                                   implicitly assume that municipal de-
partments choose whether or not to organize in each period. For
                                                                    example,
a department that unionizes in the
                                     first period after the enactment of a
                                                                             4




law adds to the level of unionization in each subsequent period analyzed.

The inaccurate assumption about the underlying process of forming muni-

cipal bargaining units will greatly overstate the precision of the

estimated parameters. This particular problem is overcome to some extent

by analyzing changes in the percent unionized variable.8 Still, even

this specification suffers from all of the inherent limitations asso-

ciated with state-level data described above.

     With more detailed municipal-level data, the process of bargaining

unit formation can be modelled as a duration study: what determines the

length of time that will pass before a department unionizes? By posing

the problem this way, each municipal police department is treated as

providing information on one possible transition into unionization.

Several alternative dependent duration variables are developed in the

next section. Whatever assumptions are used to define different duration

variables, exact values of any dependent duration variable can be calcu-

lated only for unionized departments. Duration variables for nonunion

 departments must be treated as "right-censored"; that is, it is not known

 how much longer than the current period the municipality's nonunion

 status will last.

      Let the dependent duration variable to be defined in the next      -




 section   be represented by    To analyze the multivariate determinants

 of Y., a Cox proportional-hazards (PH) model is employed.   Let: f(Y)

 represent the probability density function of the duration variable; F(Y)
                                                 f(Y)/(1-F(Y)) the hazard
 the cumulative probability function; and H(Y)

 function describing transitions into unionization.   The basic approach of

 the PH model is to assume multiplicative effects of the independent

 variables according to the form:9
                                                                                     5


                   H(Y)     H(Y)exp(X)


  where X is a vector of
                          municipal- and state-level variables that influ-
  ence the decision to form a
                               bargaining unit. No specific form is assumed
  for 11(Y); therefore, it is
                              not necessary to develop a model in which
  different elements of the X
                               vector may influence different structural
  parameters of the 11(Y) function. The
                                          X's are assijned to induce parallel
  shifts in H(Y), whatever the
                                particular properties of 11(Y) may be. The
  PH model is therefore used
                                  to test whether the
                                                        bargaining law variables
 are associated with an upward shift
                                           in the union hazard rate function.



 III. Data and Variable Definitions

   p4nt Variables: Nonunion Puration and Post-Law Duration



      The likelihood function that
                                        describes transitions into unionization
 for each city and town is generated from a duration
                                                            variable, Y. To
 calculate Y., specific information on dates of transition of police

departments into unionization
                                    are required. To that end, I use responses
from a 1979 survey conducted
                                   by Freeman, Ichniowski and Lauer.0     This
survey contains the questions: "Does
                                           your city have a written labor        -

contract   covering wages, hours, and conditions of
                                                         employment for police
personnel? and "What      year   was the first written labor
                                                               contract signed?"
Here, it is assumed that cities
                                     responding affirmatively to the first
question have continually been
                                    party to a police contract since the date
given in response to the second question. This information
                                                           covers nearly
1,000 municipalities with populations
                                           above 10,000 that report municipal
police employment in the                Yearbook in 1978.11 This survey
                                                                          6




specifically asks if a written collective bargaining agreement was

negotiated, so that other sorts of police associations that do not

formally bargain are treated as non-union.

     Two different duration variables are used as the dependent variable:

nonunion duration (N1JDUR) calculated as the number of years a city

remains nonunion after a given fixed year; and a post-law duration

(PLDUR) calculated as the number of years a city remains nonunion after

the year a bargaining law is enacted. For NIJDUR, two dates were consid-

ered as possible starting dates for calculating the durations: the year

in which the first police department in the United States had a written

labor contract (which is 1911 in this sample), or a year just preceding

the enactment of the first police bargaining policy in the United States

(which is 1959, in Wisconsin). Since the data indicate that very few

departments unionized between 1911 and 1959, the first approach would

greatly increase the length of "nonunion durations" in pre-law years and

reduce dramatically the proportion of city-years that had union transi-

tions in the pre-law period. The second approach is adopted in this

 study for calculating NIJDUR since it is less likely to indicate an

 increase in post-law union transition probabilities. N1JDUR, then, is

 defined: year of unionization - 1955.   The nine departments in the sample

 that obtained their first written collective bargaining agreement prior

 to 1956 are assigned a value of 1 for NUDUR. Those departments that were

 still nonunion in 1979, the year of the survey, receive a value of 24 for

 N1JDUR and are treated as right-censored observations.

      AnaLrzing N1JDUR is a useful starting point for comparing the number

 of years municipalities remain nonunion across groups that were and were
                                                                                7



  not covered by bargaining laws.     There are several distinct limitations
  in how parameters on
                         bargaining law variables in this analysis can be

  interpreted. These parameters will be underestimates of the effect of

  bargaining laws on the
                           propensity of police departments to organize.
  Specifically, as defined in more detail in the next section, a
                                                                    municipal
  observation is assigned a value of one for a given bargaining
                                                                   law dummy
  variable if it is in a state that
                                       enacted such a law and if the Thunjcj-
 pality did not Unionize prior to the
                                         law's enactment. (The important
 distinction is that cities that
                                    unionized before a law was enacted are
 included in the 'no law"
                            comparison group.) The principal difficulty
 with analyzing and interpreting PH models of NUDUR is that
                                                           bargaining
 laws were enacted in different years in different states. Specifically,

 a municipality can only be treated
                                       as having or not having a law, and it
 is this legal status that is being associated with the
                                                        municipality's
 value of MJIMJR. Without additional
                                     controls these NUDUR models are
 treating city's with laws as having laws
                                            throughout the entire period.
 If parameters from a PH model indicate that bargaining laws
                                                             are asso-
 ciated with lower values of
                               NUDUR, those parameters underestimate the
effects of laws on union growth in these NUDUR models since
                                                            many laws
were not enacted until late in the 1959 to 1978 period.

     One way to adjust for this problem is to incorporate a variable that

measures the number of years that pass before a law is enacted. (The

next section presents the exact definition of this control variable
                                                                    as
well as limitations inherent in this
                                        approach.) Another, more direct,
approach is to consider the alternate
                                         dependent duration variable, PLDUR.
PLDUR,   which equals 'year of unionization -
                                              year of law," directly
                                                                            8




corrects the dependent variable by eliminating from the duration measure

any "pre-law" years. PH models analyzing PLDUR will provide accurate

comparisons of the effects of different kinds of laws on unionization

propensities within a sample of municipalities that have laws. The

obvious difficulty here is how to incorporate municipal observations that

unionized prior to a law or that are in states that never had a law.

Several possible answers to this question will be explored and will be a

central part of the development of the empirical results. All alterna-

tives will involve including a "year of law" covariate. The discussion

now turns to the definition of bargaining law and "year of law"

variables.



Bargaining Laws: The Timing and Substance of Time-Varying "Treatments"

       Within the PH framework, the laws play a role similar to time-

varying treatment variables in biological mortality studies.      As de-

scribed above, the definition of a given law variable depends on whether

a city was covered by a law while it was still nonunion.      In other words,

a municipality is treated as part of a "no law" category if either of two

conditions are met: (1) if the municipality is in a state that never had

a bargaining policy or law; or (2) if the municipality is in a state that

enacted a law but unionization occurred prior to enactment of the law.12

       Also indicated above is the fact that because different sets of

cities were covered by laws in different years, a year of law (LAWYR)

must be considered in the analysis. LAYR     is   incorporated in NIJDUR

models in order to try to get better estimates of the effects of the

barga:ning laws on unionization propensities. Specifically, where LAWYR

 is   greater, city!s have been exposed to the law for less time, and the
 probability of being unionized by 1978 will be lower (if the laws do in-

 crease unionization). In models analyzing NTJDUR
                                                         the proportional hazards
 parameter on LAWYR should therefore be negative. There
                                                                  are, however,
 additional difficulties when including a L.AWYR variable. "No law" cities

 by construction are not affected by either the parameters on the law

 variables or those on the LAWYR variable. In the presence of a variable

 like LAWYR, where the definition of the
                                              variable directly depends on an-
 otber covariate control variable (here the dummy law
                                                      variables), precise
methods for testing the significance of the estimated parameters on the

other "treatment"—type dummy     variables   have yet to be developed.13

Despite these various difficulties, it is clear that in N1JDUR models

where LAWYR is included in the model, the parameters on the bargaining

la. variables will increase in magnitude and the parameter on the LAWYR

variable will be negative if laws do in fact spur police Unionization.

        In moving to PH models with PLDUR    as   the dependent variable, LAWYR
is defined in a slightly different
                                         way and conceptually serves a very
different purpose. Since all "pre-law" years are eliminated from the

dependent variable in this case, the parameter on LAWYR          will   indicate
whether union transition rates (values of PLDUR)        tend   to be higher

(shorter) in later time periods. For example, in Wisconsin, values of

PLDUR   are   calculated as years after 1959 that a city remains nonunion,

while in Massachusetts PLDUR    equals   the number of years after 1965.

Since the rate of unionization in Wisconsin
                                                   may be somewhat slower than

in Massachusetts simply because the general climate toward public employ-

ee unionism was less favorable in the late 1950's than in the mid-1960's,

LAWYR is introduced as an additional covarjate in the PH model. Since

the Wisconsin bargaining policy in 1959 was the first in the United
                                                                               1o

States,   this covariate will be defined as: LAWRB   = year   of law - 1958.

The common perception is that acceptance of public employee unionism grew

over the 1958 to 1978 period, so that the estimated parameter on LAWYRB

is expected to be positive. While PH-models using PLDUR as the dependent

variable can be directly applied to a sample of cities with laws, much of

the empirical analysis considers results obtained from expanding this

analysis in different ways to include the "no law" observations.

     Yet to be addressed is the fact that the content of the laws and

policies, as well as their timing, varies significantly from state to

state. A degree of subjectivity is required in categorizing these

different legal environments. In developing these categories, I focus on

two related dimensions: the degree to which bargaining rights are pro-

tected and the degree to which impasse procedures ensure closure of the

bargaining process.

     The first category is "bargaining permitted" (BP). These legal

frameworks establish the legality of collective bargaining for covered

employees. However, under such frameworks employers are not obligated to

bargain with employees. These policies are often stated as giving

employees some weak form of rights "to meet and confer with" or "to

present proposals to" their employers.

     The second law category is comprised of states which have a "duty-

to-bargain" provision (DTB). In moving from BP to DTB environments, the

choice to bargain or not shifts from the employer to the employees.

Employees may be more likely to try to organize where employers have an

 affirmatie obligation to bargain with representatives of the police than

where empioyers may still choose not to bargain.
                                                                            11



      Still, a DTB provision does not necessarily ensure closure to the

 bargaining process. In the private sector, the strike threat forces

 negotiators to evaluate impasses and ultimately moves the parties to some

 resolution of differences in their positions.   However, police strikes
 are illegal in the United States (except in very rare circumstances).

 One can imagine an employer in a DTB environment ¶tbargaining but not

 conceding to any union demands since the strike threat may be signifi-

 cantly dampened for these public employees. By 1978, fourteen states had

 enacted some form of compulsory interest arbitration statutes for police

negotiations. These environments form the fourth law category (ARB).

Under such a statute, police labor organizations need not rely on the

final consent of the public employer to determine the terms and condi-

tions of their employment, but rather a neutral third party has power to

arbitrate contract terms. If employees perceive that this shift in final

decision making authority enhances the opportunity for securing greater

wage gains, employees would have an additional stimulus for forming an

employee organization. What limited empirical evidence there is on the

impact of arbitration on salaries provides some support for this claim. 14

In any case, as long as employees perceive the potential for such an

impact of arbitration, this could be enough to stimulate union growth.

     To summarize the conceptual arguments
                                             concerning why these catego-
ries of laws may be associated with different union transition rates,

employers may be able to resist unionization efforts to a lesser and

lesser extent in moving from "no law" environments where no union repre-

sentation mechanism is available, to "BP" environments where the legality

of bargaining is established, and finally to environments with a duty-

to-bargain provision that obligates employers to bargain when employees
                                                                         12




organize. Among those states with duty-to-bargain provisions (DTB or ARB

equals one), it is possible that compulsory arbitration provisions

increase police wage rates of unionized departments so that the demand

for unionization among police would be even greater in ARB states than in

DTB states.



Other Covariates



     While there is no comprehensive, well-defined theory of union growth

that clearly identifies other variables that might also influence union-

ization propensities, previous empirical studies on union growth and

representation elections can be used to identify aspects of police

departments and municipalities that might also affect unionization rates.

First, it is important to incorporate other state characteristics as

controls since bargaining laws and policies are defined along state

boundaries. Here, the state—level controls include four geographic

region dummy variables (Northeast, North Central, South, and West), the

percentage of a state's non-agricultural work force who are public

employees, and the percentage of a state's private sector nonagricultural

work force that is unionized. The region controls and the percent union

variable will indicate how favorable the climate is toward unionization.

If patterns in the locus of public sector unionization parallel those in

the private sector, one would expect an increase in the union hazard

function (i.e., positive coefficients) for Northeastern and North Central

cities and a negative union hazard function among Southern cities.

Similarly, the percent union varible should obtain a positive coeffi-

cient. High levels of private sector unionism should correspond   to
                                                                             13



 higher area wages and may increase the expectations about a reasonable

 wage increase. This would again lead toa positive correlation between

 this variable and union growth in the public sector. Where a greater

 proportion of a state's workforce is in public employement, a greater

 degree of acceptance of Unionism may have been fostered.
                                                            Conversely, the
 taxpaying public may find it more important to be represented
                                                                 by public
managers who will oppose unionism (and keep labor costs down) where there

 are relatively more public employees.

      Several municipal-level control variables are available for a large

proportion of the municipalities in the sample: population, number of

departmental employees, per capita income, per capita municipal revenue,

central city dummy variable, and three government-type dummy variables

(Council-Manager, Mayor-Council, and Commission).15

     The first two variables acknowledge the importance of unit size in

the unionization process. In the private sector, the most common finding

is that unit size is negatively related to union
                                                   support in certification
electionsj6 The sign of the correlation in this public sector sample

may be different for several reasons. First, the private sector
                                                                   samples
are generally certification elections from the 1970s or early 1980s.

They do not include the earliest unionization campaigns of the 1930s and

1940s, many of which may have had relatively large units.   Here, in

contrast, the study is designed to consider the process of unionization

among all municipalities with populations over 10,000 from the time when

virtually none of the municipal poiice departments were organized.     Also,
.t is reasonable to expect bureaucratization to increase with city size.

n order to obtain a louder voice in these environments,
                                                          employees may
develop a greater interest in unirnization. (Since population is
                                                                         14



available for a slightly larger sample of municipalities than is the

department size variable, and since these two variables are highly

correlated, empirical results are reported in the next section for models

incorporating only the population control.)

     Ability-to-pay variables (revenue and income) might indicate an

increase in the public employer's ability to satisfy more of the diverse

interests groups, including the police department, vying for a share of

the municipal budget. In this way, managers in wealthier cities and

towns might be better able to avoid unionization. Conversely, the

incentive to unionize may be greater where municipal revenues are larger.

In this way, these controls play a role similar to firm profitability in

private sector unionization studies. The impact of profitability on

unionization rates in bargaining unit level studies has received little

attention in the existing private sector studies.17

     Central cities may be associated with relatively high area wages, a

greater degree of private sector unionization, and perhaps more hazardous

duties for Its police. If these forces make police more likely to

consider unionization, this variable will cause an upward shift in the

union hazard function. Finally the degree of bureaucratization of

different government structures might affect the responsiveness of an

employer to employee desires, so that certain government structures might

be more highly correlated with the probability of municipal unionism.

     While a number of these controls do vary over the period considered,

it is necessary to assume that the rankings of municipalities along the

dinnsions of the controls are reasorably stable over the period (e.g.,

rLatively populous cities at the start of the period still ranked high

in population by the end of the period examined).18 It is also necessary
                                                                              15



  to assume that Unionization of a
                                     municipality's police department does
 not affect that city's relative
                                     ranking along the dimensions of the
 control variables (e.g., if a relatively wealthy suburban town organizes

 in the early 1960s, it is still
                                    relatively wealthy by the end of the
 period.) While these assumptions may be more problematic for some

 controls (particularly the revenue variables) than for others (such as

 central city status or government type), these state and municipal

 characteristics may be correlated with the locus and rate of police

 unionization and with state bargaining laws.
                                                  Therefore, they are poten-
 tially important controls that help guard against overestimating the

 impact of bargaining laws on union transition probabilities.



 IV. Empirical Results

        NIJDUR models

    -
        Parameters on bargaining law variables from PH models
                                                              using differ-
ent samples and different dependent variables are presented in Table 1.

The Column (1) specification with NTIDUR as the dependent variable ad-

dresses the question: Do nonunion municipalities that were covered by a

law at some point prior to 1978 unionize earlier in the 1958-1978 period?

From the column (1) estimates, municipalities in DTB and ARB have signi-

ficantly lower post-1955 "nonunion durations"; that is, municipalities

in these environments are characterized
                                           by relatively high probabilities
of a union transition. The point estimate on the BP variable is posi-

tive, but insignificant. As described in the previous section, the

column (1) model is not an appropriate test for
                                                   gauging the magnitude
of the change n the probability of unionization that occurs as a city

becomes coverec by some law. Specifically, these parameters under-
            TABLE   1:   The Effect of Bargaining Laws on Police Unionization: Estimates from Proportional Hazards Models


                                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)
Dependent Variables                  I{UIMJR      NUDUR        PLDUR        PLDUR        PLDUR         PLDUR         PLDUR       PLDIJR
Observations                          793          793          506          506          793           1332          1138         1359

1.   Bargaining Laws
     a. ARB                          .336*        1856S       1.915***     1.819***     1488s                       3101S
                                    (.191)        (.399)       (.162)       (.211)       (.194)        (.306)        (.307)      (.287)

     b.    DTB                       •445**       1.999       1.693***     l.602***      1.551        3.146         3.012       2.590
                                    (.211)        (.419)       (.226)       (.259)       (.204)       (.314)         (.311)      (.262)

      c.   BP                        .078         1.069                                   .566         1.747        1.529        1.442
                                    (.171)        (.283)                                 (.174)        (.217)       (.218)       (.218)

2.   Years Before
     Enactment of Law
     a. LAWYRA                                    _Ø93***
                                                  (.021)

     b. LAWYRB                                                               .018         .158***       .057***       .038*       .092*
                                                                            (.025)       (.015)        (.021)        (.022)      (.109)

3.    Other Controls                  b             b            b            b            b             b             b           b

-2* log-likelihood               5523.6        5504.2       3885.4       3885.0       5210.6        6391.33       6045.60     6410.55


       -   two-tailed    p-value < .01
 **    - two-tailed      p-value < .05
  *    - two-tailed      p-value < .10

a -    Asymptotically  normal standard errors in parentheses.
b -    Other controls  are: three region dummies; percent of private sector workforce in the state that is unionized;
       percent  of state workforce in public employment; two government-type dummies; central city dummy; population; per
       capita income;  and per capita city revenue
s -    Significance  tests inappropriate on law dummy parameters in columns marked with s.
                                                                                  16



  estimate the effect of the laws since laws
                                                 were enacted at many different
  points in time after the 1955 starting time for the NUDUR variable.
                                                                             By
  the same token, even though DTB >         in   column (1), ARB laws may in
  fact increase Unionization
                               probabilities more than DTB laws if ARB laws
 are enacted later in the 1955-1978 period than DTB laws.

      A first method for accounting for the fact that bargaining laws
                                                                      were
 enacted in different years is to
                                     incorporate LAWYRA (i.e., years after
 1955 that a law was enacted) in the model.
                                                   For no law municipalities
 the LAWYRA variable, like the dummy law variables, is set to zero
                                                                   so that
 unionization probabilities for cities in these environments are not

 influenced by this adjustment factor.
                                           While formal significance tests of
 the parameters on the law dummy
                                    variables cannot be performed when the
 LAWYRA covariate is added to the
                                    equation, one does observe that the
magnitudes of all the parameters increases
                                              substantially. The LAWYRA
variable is not, however, an entirely satisfactory control for the fact

that the enactment of a law occurs at different points in time. Post

facto, it is known with certainty that cities for which a law variable

equals one did not Unionize in pre-law
                                          years. However, LAWYRA      -
                                                                          .093
suggests that a one year increase in LAWYRA corresponds to an adjustment

of union transition probabilities of
                                        only .088 per year (i.e.,
1 - exp
        [-.093}). A direct way to utilize this information is to adjust

the dependent variable directly (by
                                       subtracting all "pre-law" years from
the duration variable). This leads to the analysis of PLDUR as a de-

pendent variable.
                                                                                17




PLDUR models

     PLDUR   (i.e.,   year of unionization -   year   of law) is analyzed in the

column (3) model within a sample of municipalities for which one of the

law variables is equal to one. This analysis directly asks the question:

how much do different laws affect the probability of remaining nonunion

from the time the law is enacted? Since this sample only includes

municipalities with some law variable equal to one, BP is omitted as the

comparison group. The parameter estimates from PH models without and

with the LAWYRB control (which equals number of years after 1958 that the

law was enacted) are presented in columns (3) and (4) respectively. Both

models produce similar estimates. Using those in column (4), one can

calculate the relative differences in these hazard rates of unionization

between any pair of law groups. Arbitration statutes are associated with

unionization rates that are some 6.16 times greater than those in BP

environments (i.e., exp [1.819]), while DTB laws are associated with

unionization rates that are 4.96 times higher than those in BP states.

 (Significance tests for the law parameters are performed in the column

 (4) model since LAWYRB is defined for all observations in this sample.)

The relative difference between unionization probabilities in ARB and DTB

 environments is given by exp [1.819 - 1.6021
                                              =         1.24.   From the estimation

 of other related models, however, this ARB vs. DTB difference in the
                                                        20
 column (4) model is judged to be insignificant.

      In these column (3) and (4) models that are not confounded with the

 question of how to treat 'no law" municipalities, several interesting

 results emerge. Utiionization rates are similar in environments that have

 a duty-to-bargain 1:-ovision regardless of whether a compulsory interest

 arbitration mechanism is available. Whether or not an arbitration
                                                                             18



 mechanism increases (or might be perceived to increase) police salaries

 above the levels in other DTB
                                  environments, unionization rates are not
 increased further because of an arbitration mechanism. Also interesting,

 within this restricted sample of municipalities, LAWYRB has a positive

 but insignificant parameter estimate.    From this model's estimate the

 general climate toward public employee unionism did not increase signifi-

 cantly over the 1958 to 1978 period. For
                                             example, post-law unionization
 rates are no lower in states like Connecticut or Massachusetts which

 enacted their DTB provisions in 1965 than in a state like Oklahoma which

enacted its DTB provision six years later. While the column (3) and (4)

models provide interesting insights and a useful benchmark for comparing

differences in unionization rates associated with different kinds of

laws, these models do not provide any information on the important

comparison between unionization rates in environments with and without

laws.

        To return to this central question, the no law cities are introduced

back into the sample in column (5). To do this, PLDIJR for "no law

cities" is defined as the length of time after 1958 that a municipality

remains nonunion. Again LAWYRB is set equal to zero for this group of

observations, and since the definition of the LAWYRB variable depends on

whether or not a city has some law variable equal to one, significance

tests are not performed. This model produces estimates of the effects of

the various laws relative to no law environments that are substantially

larger than the "underestimates" in column (1), but smaller than those in

the column (2) model with the problematic LAWYRA control. However, there

is a clear reason for suspecting that the law vs. no law comparisons made

from the column (5) parameters are also underestimates of the effect that
                                                                                19




these bargaining laws have on unionization rates. Specifically, this

sample eliminates from consideration the fact that none of the cities in

the law categories unionized while they had previously been in no law

environments. To address this problem in sample construction, the column

(6)-(8) models are developed.



PLDUR models with "Expandedt' Samples

     In columns (6)-(8), a new sample for analysis is constructed.

Specifically, there is one observation for each legal environment that a

nonunion municipality experiences. For example, Maine enacted a DTB

policy in 1969. A city in Maine which did not unionize before 1969 will

be represented by two observations. The first has PLDUR = 1969       -   1958

= 11, LAWYRB =   0,   and all law variables equal to zero. This no law

municipal observation is also censored because Maine enacted a statute

before it could be determined how many more years would pass before this

city would unionize in a no law environment. Such a city would be

represented by a second observation as well for which: PLDIJR =     year of
unionization - 1969; LAWYRB = 1969      1958 =   11; and DTB = 1.   If the city

in question unionized by 1978 it Is not censored; otherwise, this second

observation is censored. Cities in Maine that unionized before 1969 are

treated just as they were in the column (5) sample with one uncensored

observation that has PLDUR      year of unionization - 1958, and LAWYRB and

all law dummy variables equal to zero. Cities in states that never

enacted laws are also unaffected and are represented by one observation.

     Estimates from th model that maintains the desirable features of

PLD1SR as the dependent variable (as opposed to N1JDUIR) as well as the
                                                                           20


 "pre-law" information on cities that eventually were covered by laws are

 presented in column (6). All law parameters are in fact larger than the

 column (5) underestimates. They also are larger than the estimates in

 column (2). Also when compared to the column (1), (2), or (5) parame-

 ters, those in column (6) yield estimates of the DTB vs. BP and ARB vs.

 BP that are much more similar to the ones obtained from the column (4)

model which is specifically designed to make such a comparison (i.e., in

 Column (6), ARB -         1.370 and DTB BP = 1.399;while in column
                     BP
 (4) the comparable figures are 1.819 and 1.602). In column (7), the

model is reestimated with a restricted sample. Here those "no law"

observations in states that never had a law are deleted. This leaves two

kinds of no law observations in the sample: (1) uncensored observations

for cities that unionize before the enactment of their state's law; and

(2) censored observations that represent the "pre-law" existence of

cities that had not unionized by the time their states enacted a law.

The column (7) estimates are similar to those obtained in column (6).

Using the column (6) specification, one obtains the following estimates

for the relative unionization probabilities across legal environments:

ARB, DTB, and EP increase unionization rates by 22.5 times, 23.2 times,

and 5.7 times above those in no law environments. While the column (6)

model incorporates several desirable features, the magnitudes of the

effects for ARB and DTB are much larger than those in previous columns.

Several simple calculations of the annual rates of unionization in the

first few years after DTB and ARB laws are passed relative to annual

uniorlizatio: rates in states without laws also suggest DTB and ARB

effects cf   his magnitude.21
                                                                         21




    The column (6) specification incorporates several important features

that help provide more accurate estimates of the effect of bargaining

laws on union transition rates: (1) by using PLDUR as the dependent

duration variable, durations are calculated from the time the law is

enacted; (2) the "expanded" sample still includes important information

on nonunion municipalities that were eventually covered by a law but did

not unionize prior to the law; (3) municipalities that are in states that

never pass a law are still in the sample, but "no law" observations are

assigned a value of zero for the LAWYRB control indicating that the

duration variable begins from an earlier starting date. One final

elaboration to the column (6) specification is also possible with the

"expanded" sample approach. Specifically, one can also use this approach

to account for the fact that several states amended their initial bar-

gaining laws. The most common amendment is that in seven states an

arbitration mechanism was added within the framework of a duty-to-bargain

law. In these states, if most of the unionization occurred after the

amendment (i.e., during ARE years and not DTB years), the results in the

column (6) specification may be overstating the effect of DTB laws and

understating the effect of ARE provisions.

     To incorporate these amendments into the model, an additional

observation is added to the column (6) sample any time a municipality

remains nonunion past the time that a bargaining law is amended. For

example, Wisconsin moved from no law to BP (in 1959), from BP to DTB (in

1962) and from DTB to ARE (in 1971), thereby passing through all four

legal eivironments. In the column (6) sample and specification, there

will b one observation for any Wisconsin municipality that unionized
                                                                                 22



 before 1959, and two observations for those
                                                  municipalities that did not
 Unionize before 1959. Under the final
                                           elaboration, a Wisconsin munici-
 pality that did not unionize until the ARB law
                                                    was enacted (say in 1975)
 would be represented by the following four observations:

      (1) Nonunion until 1959; PLDUR = 1; LAWYRB =
                                                   0; law = none; cen-
           sored  yes.

      (2) Nonunion between 1959 and 1962; PLDUR        3; LAWYRB    1; law =
           BP; censored = yes.

      (3) Nonunion between 1962 and 1971; PLDIJR =
                                                   9; LAWYRB = 4; law =
           DTB; censored =   yes.
      (4) Unionized in 1975; PLIJUR =    4; LAWYRB = 13; law =   ARB; censored
          =   no.

Had this hypothetical Wisconsin
                                    city not unionized by 1978, the fourth
observation would be also censored and PLDUR would equal 7.

     When the PH model is reestimated with the
                                                   newly expanded sample, the
parameters in column (8) are estimated. When compared to column (6), the

effects of the bagaining laws are reduced somewhat, while the parameter

on LAWYRB increases. Again, in the column (8) model, when the ARE and

]JTB variables are collapsed into one dummy variable the explanatory
                                                                     power
of the model is not decreased
                                 significantly.

     The underestimates of the bargaining law effects produced from the

column (1) NUDUR model indicate that the parameters in the DTB and ARB

variables are significant. Still it is important to put the magnitudes

of the parameters on the bargaining law variable from other models into

son comparative context because of the limitations on formal signifi-

caice testing in models that include a LAWYRB covariate.     First, while
                                                                         23




the parameter on LAWYRB in the columns (5)-(8) specifications is signifi-

cant, reestimating these same models without the LAWYRB leaves the

parameters on the bargaining laws and their associated standard errors

unchanged. While it might be argued that such models without the LAWYRB

covariate are not completely specified, the results further suggest the
                                                        -


significance of the bargaining law parameters.

The Relative Impact of Bargaining Laws and Other Covariates

     An alternative way to gauge the relative importance of the bargain-

ing laws on police unionization rates is to compare the law parameters to

parameters on other variables in the model. Column (1) of Table 2

presents the complete set of parameters from the Table (1), column (8)

model. Since the magnitudes of the    parameters are affected by the

units of measurement for the dependent variables, the relative magnitudes

of the various 's do not gauge the relative "importance" of the covari—

ates. Column (2) of Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations

of the covariates for the N = 793 sample.   (The N = 793 sample is used to

calculate sample characteristics instead of the N = 1359 sample since the

latter includes more than one observation for certain municipalities and,

therefore, would not give an accurate picture of the "average" munici-

pality.) Column (3) calculates for the dummy variables in the model the

quantity: exp[]. This calculation yields the ratio of the union hazard

rate for a municipality with the given characteristic and one without it

 (all other covariates the same). Column 4 presents the relative increase

 in the union hazard rate that would result from a one standard deviation

 increase in a given covariate. This is given by: exp[13( +   a)]/exp[l.
 These calculations indicate th the factor that is most important in

 influencing unionization rates is the nature of the bargaining law.
                                                 TABLE 2
                          The Impact of Bargaining Laws, State Characteristics,
                          and Municipal Characteristics on Police Unionization

                                         (1)            (2)             (3)a               (4)b
                                                                                         Relative
                                                                                        Increase in
                                                                                       Unionization
                               f3-parameters
                                                                                        Probability
                                                                 Relative Increases       from a
                               and (standard        Means and      in Unionization     one standard
                                  errors)            (standard    Probability from       deviation
                               from Table 1         deviations)    0 to 1 increase
 Covariates                                                                              increase
                              Col. (8) Model       of Covariates (dummy variables)    (all variables)

 1. Bargaining Laws
     a. ARE                          z. ill               172          15.044              2.779
                                     (.287)             (.377)
      b. DTB                         2.590                175          13. 330             2.676
                                     (.262)             (.380)
      c. BP                          1.442               .332           4.229              1.972
                                     (.218)            (.47 1)
2. LAWYRB                                 092***       6.166                               1.688
                                     (.019)           (5.639)
3. Region
    a. Northeast                      .286                170           1.331              1.111
                                     (.217)            (.376)
     b. Central                      -.   472***         .328            .624               .801
                                     (.147)            (.470)
     c. South                        -
                                         .459*           .281            .632               .813
                                     (.25 1)           (.450)
4. Percent Union                    3.692***            .249                               1.404
                                     (.913)            (.092)
5. Percent Public                    2.525                159                              1.059
                                    (3.203)            (.020)
6. Central City                       .513***           .230                               1.241
                                     (.124)            (.421)
7. Population                         .050 E-6)         67881                              1.009
                                     (.210 E-6)         (188229)
8. Per Capita Income                  .043 E-4          4887                               1.005
                                     (.370 E-4)         (1271)
9. Per Capita City Revenue            .357 E-3           289                               1.071
                                     (.222 E-3)         (193)
10. Government-Type
     a. Mayor-Council               - .068
                                                        .298             .934               .969
                                    (.200)             (.458)
     b. Council-Manager               181               .641            1.198              1.091
                                    (.196)             (.480)
s—   significance tests not performed on parameters for law dummy variables
a-   calculated by: exp[]
     calculated by: exp[( +
     - two—tailed
                  p-value < .01
     - two-tailed   p-value < .05
     - two-tailed   p-value < 10
                                                                          24



The results obtained with the PH model for a national municipal-level

sample of police departments gives additional support to Saltzman's

conclusion based on state-level analyses of teacher unionism: bargaining

laws are the single most important determinant of public sector union-
           22
ization.

     Among other covariates, there are significant effects associated

with the degree of private sector unionization in the state, the region

variables,23 and central city status. The insignificant impact of the

population variable does not necessarily contradict the observation that

the largest cities in the United States are more likely to have unionized

police departments. Central city and population are highly correlated.

Once one controls for the central city effect, one does not find that

municipalities with relatively large populations experience increased

propensities to unionize. While the city income and revenue variables

both have positive parameters, neither is judged to be significant.

Survival Plots

     A useful way to summarize the data and to underscore the importance

of the bargaining laws is to present plots of the survival functions for

various "representative" cities. Figure 1 shows the survival plots for

four municipalities that have average characteristics but differ only

according to the legal environment for police bargaining. These esti-

mates are obtained using the Table 2 model (i.e., the Table 1, column (8)

model). The survival plots for the BP, DTB and ARB municipalities begin

in 1965, 1968, and 1968, respectively. These years represent the average

of the years in which these forms of bargaiing law were enacted.

However, in evaluating the survival functic,s, the unionization probabil-

ities for the BP, DTB, and ARB   municipalities   do not include any LAWYRB
                    IGURE 1: Survival Probability Plots For The "Average' Municipality

                                      Under The Four Different Legal Environments


    P     1.0



                                                                                          NO LAW
U0            .8


RB
              .6                                                                         BP



              .4
V
                                                                                         DTB
A
              .2.                                                                        ARB
L'
    T

    Y                58     60            65              70            75          79

                                                YEAR


                    FIGURE 2: Survival Probability Plots For Each Legal Environment's

                                               "Average" Municipality


    P


    R   1.0

So                                                                                  NO LAW

UB       .8


RA
         .6
VB
II       .4
VL                                                                                  BP

A'       .2
LT
    Y


                                               YEAR
                                                                         25



effect. Figure 1 then shows a municipality that is the same in all

respects except the nature of the bargaining law. One observes that the

no law environments are characterized by very little unionization. The

1979 survival probability for this type of average municipality is

approximately .83. The BP, DTB, and ARB municipalities have 1979 sur-

vival probabilities of .59, .29, and .25, respectively.

     In Figure 2, the plots represent the survival functions for four

municipalities that have the average characteristics of a no law, BP,

DTB, and ARB municipality. The plots are quite similar to those in

Figure 1, underscoring the fact that the legal environment more than any

characteristic dictates the union hazard probabilities. The differences

between the "nonunion survival" rates of the no law municipality and

those of municipalities in other legal environments is slightly larger

than the differences in Figure 1. This reflects the fact that "no law"

cities have lower values of PCTUNION and are less likely to be in the

Northeast region (both of these characteristics are positively associated

with the union hazard function). From Figure 2, one estimates survival

probabilities in 1979 for the average no law, BP, DTB, and ARB munici-

palities of .87, .36, .02, and .01, respectively. The survival plots

clearly indicate the central finding of this study: changes in unioniza-

tion rates among municipal police in the United States occurred after

the enactment of bargaining laws.

Conclusion

     Using a proportional hazards framework for estimating the rate of

unionization among municipal police departments, this study documents the

critical role played by the nature of the statutory bargaining
                                                                         26



 environments. The police bargaining laws are clearly not a result of

 already existing bargaining. The speed with which unionization occurs in

 the first few years after enactment of
                                            laws, particularly those laws with
 some sort of duty-to-bargain provision, perhaps suggest some form of pent—

 up demand for unionization. However, the experience in the private sector

 where unionism continues to decline in spite of the protections of the

 National Labor Relations Act (NLRA)
                                        suggests that bargaining statutes may
be a necessary but insufficient Condition for union growth. Other factors

specific to the public sector might help to account for the rapid rate of

public sector un-ionization after bargaining laws were enacted. Unlike the

standard private sector model of the effects of unionization where

increased wages come at the expense of employment levels, it may be

possible that public sector unionization
                                             may simultaneously increase wages
                  24
and employment.        Also, public sector laws may be more effective safe-

guards of employees' bargaining rights, since these laws may have stricter

enforcement of st-i1fer penalties for violations than does the NLRA in the
                  25
private sector.        Finally, public employers as agents of the government

may be less likely than private sector employers to violate the letter or

spirit of a bargaining statute.
                                                                        27



                              FOOTNOTES

1. Freeman, Richard B. "Unionism Comes to the Public Sector," National
    Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 1452 (September 1982),
      p. 2.

2. Ibid., p. 9.

3. See for example Ross, Phillip, The Government as a Source of Union
    Power (Providence, RI: Brown University Press, 1965), pp. 260-262.

4. Kushner, Sam, Long Road to Delano (New York: International Publish-
      ers, 1975).

5. The most recent study which employs the most rigorous empirical
    tests to date is Saltzman, Gregory, "Bargaining Laws as a Cause and
    Consequence of Teacher Unionism," Industrial and Labor Relations
    Review, vol. 38, no. 3 (April, 1985), pp. 335-351. Also see Moore,
    William, "An Analysis of Teacher Union Growth," Industrial
    tions, vol. 17, no. 2 (May 1978), pp. 204-215.

6. Interestingly, the very limited empirical evidence on this point
    suggests that public unions may raise both wages and employment
    levels; therefore, percent organized statistics may increase not
    just from the formation of new units, but from relative increases in
    manning after departments unionize. See Zax, Jeffrey, "Municipal
    Employment, Municipal Unions and Demand for Municipal Services,"
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1728,
  -

      (October,   1985).

7. Approximately 10% of all municipal police departments in this
    study's data set have been contacted for data verification. No
    unionized department reported decertification of their police union
    after an initial collective bargaining agreement was signed. To
    date there have been no systematic investigations of whether public
    employees do in fact choose to decertify after an initial contract
    is won. The best known cases of decertification are probably those
    involving striking public employees. Any city in this study's data
    set whose police department went on strike between 1972 and 1978 was
    contacted. No striking unionized department in this data set was
    decertified.

8. The only analysis on public sector unionism that analyzes changes
    in a percent organized variable is contained in Saltzman, p. 345.
    However, this analysis does not correlate this change variable to
    all categories of bargaining laws.

9. For the original exposition, see Cox, D. R., "Regression Models and
    Life Tables,' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B,
    vol. 34 (1972), pp. 187—220. Iiore recently, see developments in
    Kalbfleisch, John 1. and Ross Prentice, The Statistical Analysis
    of Failure Time Data (New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1980).
                                                                           28



 10. Freeman, Richard B., Casey Ichniowski and Harrison Lauer, "Collec-
      tive Bargaining Laws and Threat Effects of Unionism in the
      Determination of Police Compensation," National Bureau of Economic
      Research no. 1578 (March 1985), P. 6.

 11. International City Management Association, Municipal Yearbook, 1978
      (Washington, D.C.: ICMA, 1978).

 12. A small number of municipal observations in states that eventually
      enacted a law prohibiting police bargaining are kept in the no law
      comparison group.

 13. For a brief discussion of problems with
                                              significance testing in the
      presence of additional time-varying covariates, see Lawless, J. F.,
      Statistical Models and Methods for Lifetime Data, (New York: John
      Wiley and Sons, 1980). For an application of when to use signi-
      ficance tests of whether certain medical treatments do or do not
      reduce mortality rates, see Crowley, John and Marie Hu, "Covariance
     Analysis of Heart Transplant Survival Data," Journal of the American
     Statistical Associaton, vol. 72, no. 357 (March, 1977).

14. For cross-section estimates of the impact of arbitration statutes,
     see Olson, Craig, "The Impact of Arbitration on the Wages of Fire-
     fighters," Industrial Relations (Spring, 1980), vol. 19, no. 13, pp.
     325-339. For more qualified support of the positive effect of
     arbitration on salaries, see Feuille, Peter and John Delaney,
     "Collective Bargaining, Interest Arbitration, and Police Salaries,"
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review (forthcoming).

15. Municipal Control variables are available from International City
     Managers Association, "Master Code" Data Tape (Washington, D.C.:
     I.C.M.A., 1978). Government type, municipal revenue, per capita
     income, population and department size also appear in the published
     volume I.C.M.A. Municipal Yearbook, 1978.

16. See for example Rose, Joseph, "What Factors Influence Union Repre-
     sentation Elections?" Monthly Labor Review, vol. 95 (October 1972),
     pp. 49-51; Chaison, Gary, "Unit Size and Union Success in Represen-
     tation Elections," Monthly Labor Review, vol. 96 (February, 1973),
     pp. 51-52; or Cooke, William, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union
     Certification Elections," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
     vol. 36 (April 1983), pp. 402—414.

17. In one review of what have generally been
                                               industry-level studies,
     Bain concludes that profit levels seem to have a positive correla-
     tion with union growth and labels this a "prosperity effect". Bain,
     George S., "Certifications, First Agreements, and Decertifications:
     an Analytical Framework" (Canada Department of Labour, Government of
     Canada, 1981), p. 3.

18. For a discussion of the problems that arise when
                                                      incorporating
     variables that have time-varying values, see Lawless, pp. 393-394.
                                                                          29




19. For a useful parallel, see Crowley and Hu for their discussion on
     the purpose of a "waiting time until treatment" variable in their
     mortality study, pp. 32-33.

20. Specifically, a comparison of the log-likelihood statistics from the
     Table 1 Column (4) model and a similar one in which DTB and ARB are
     collapsed into one variable, indicate no significant difference in
     the model. This general conclusion concerning the similarity in the
     effects of TJTB and ARB on unionization probabilities is confirmed by
     similar tests for the models in columns (5)-(8) in Table 1.

21. Of the 985 municipal police departments for which contract dates are
     available, 200 would have DTB = 1 and 150 would have ARB = 1. Of
     the DTB municipalities, 25% organized within two years of the DTB
     law's enactment and 53% were organized within five years. For the
     150 ARB municipalities, the comparable tw3-year and five-year
     figures are 49.3% and 69.3%. By contrast, through the entire 21
     year period from 1958 to 1978, only 9.3% of the 237 municipalities
     in states without laws unionized -- or as a rough approximation .44%
     each year over the 1958-1978 period. By contrast, to have 53.0% (in
     DTB environments) or 69.3% (in ARB environments) organized during
     the first five years after a law is enacted corresponds to an annual
     organization rate of approximately 10.6% and 13.9%. While these are
     simple calculations that do not account for a number of factors,
     these different "annual rates" of unionization suggest that the
     column (6) estimates are in fact reasonable.

22. Saltzman, p. 345.

23. The significance of the set of region controls is judged by compar-
     ing the chi-square statistics for the Table 1, Column (8) model with
     and without the three region variables.

24. See Zax, pp. 24-26.

25. For a critical review of the increase in management unfair labor
     practices and a discussion of the weakness in penalties under the
     NLRA, see Weiler,Paul, "Promises to Keep: Securing Workers' Rights
     to Self-Organization Under the NLRA," Harvard Law Review (June,
     1983), pp. 1769—1827.
