                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CULTURAL PROXIMITY AND LOAN OUTCOMES

                                          Raymond Fisman
                                          Daniel Paravisini
                                            Vikrant Vig

                                        Working Paper 18096
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18096


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




Thanks to Andres Lieberman and Sravya Mamadiana for outstanding research assistance. We would
like to thank Abhijit Banerjee, Oriana Bandiera, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, Michael Kremer, Raghu
Rajan, Antoinette Schoar, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales, and the participants at the CFS-EIEF Conference
on Household Finance, Columbia University, Boston University, European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, London Business School, London School of Economics - Development, MIT-Sloan,
the NBER conferences in corporate finance and household finance, Stockholm School of Economics,
and Vienna University of Economics and Business for valuable feedback. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Raymond Fisman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cultural Proximity and Loan Outcomes
Raymond Fisman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig
NBER Working Paper No. 18096
May 2012
JEL No. D82,G21,J15

                                             ABSTRACT

We present evidence that shared codes, religious beliefs, ethnicity - cultural proximity - between lenders
and borrowers improves the efficiency of credit allocation. We identify in-group preferential treatment
using dyadic data on the religion and caste of bank officers and borrowers from a bank in India, and
a rotation policy that induces exogenous matching between officers and borrowers. Cultural proximity
increases lending on both intensive and extensive margins and improves repayment performance, even
after the in-group officer is replaced by an out-group one. Further, cultural proximity increases loan
dispersion and reduces loan to collateral ratios. Our results imply that cultural proximity mitigates
informational problems that adversely affect lending, which in turn relaxes financial constraints and
improves access to finance.


Raymond Fisman                                      Vikrant Vig
School of Business                                  London Business School
Columbia University                                 Regent's Park
622 Uris Hall                                       London NW1 4S, UK
3022 Broadway                                       vvig@london.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu

Daniel Paravisini
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 416
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dp2239@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Shared codes, language, religion, or culture between potential parties of a transaction can
affect the likelihood that the transaction takes place, and also its outcome. Commonali-
ties in religion and in ethnic origin, for example, are positively associated with trade flows
between countries (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2009). The effect on efficiency of such
cultural proximity between transacting parties is ambiguous, however. On the one hand,
if members of a group tend to do business with one another for preference-based reasons,
this may lead to discrimination or favoritism and result in the misallocation of resources.
Alternatively, if cultural proximity reduces the cost of communication or contract enforce-
ment, in-group transactions may be more efficient. Given these opposing views, the effect
of cultural proximity on loan contracting remains an empirical question, something that
we explore in this paper.
    There are a number of challenges in empirically identifying the extent of preferential
in-group treatment, and distinguishing among the various explanations underlying such
behavior. First, it requires information on the group membership of both transacting
parties. Most studies have relied exclusively on the religion or race of only one side of
the market, and have thus been best set up to detect discrimination against minorities
rather than dyadic preferences for one’s own type. This confounds any beneficial effect of
in-group interactions with statistical or animus-based discrimination, especially when the
in-group advantages are more prevalent within relatively small minority groups. Second,
even when dyadic data are available, matching between parties is driven by the transac-
tions’ expected profitability, which is not observed by the econometrician. Unobservable
profitability differences —for example, in the case where minority agents are relatively
“unprofitable”— may result in finding no in-group preferences within minority groups
even when one exists, or an in-group preference among majority groups even when none
exists. Finally, it is difficult to assess the efficiency of outcomes in most economic trans-
actions —the sale price of an automobile (as in Ayres and Siegelman, 1995), for example,
largely involves the distribution of a fixed pie.


                                              1
       We use data from a large state-owned bank in India that provides a near-ideal setting
for studying the extent and rationales for preferential in-group treatment in individual
interactions with private information. Specifically, the setting makes it possible to ad-
dress the three identification problems highlighted above. Detailed credit and personnel
records allow us to match all borrowers and branch head officers to their religion and
caste, providing a dyadic characterization of the cultural “distance” between transact-
ing parties in the allocation of personal loans for close to three million borrowers over a
five year period. An explicit officer rotation policy among branches provides variation in
the matching between lenders and borrowers. We are thus able to control effectively for
time-invariant attributes of borrowers and lenders, and for time varying credit conditions
within narrowly defined geographic markets. Further, using detailed loan records, we can
measure the effect of cultural proximity on ex ante loan contracting characteristics and
ex post loan performance, and hence characterize the efficiency of transactions as well as
the mechanisms driving the differences between in-group versus out-group interactions.
In addition to the econometric advantages of our setting, the welfare implications of the
relationship between cultural proximity and credit outcomes are likely to be of first order
in an environment characterized by credit rationing and a long history of religious and
caste conflict.1
       We find strong evidence of preferential in-group treatment. In the baseline results we
define two individuals to belong to the same group when both are members of the same
minority religion (Christian; Muslim; Sikh; Parsi; Buddhist) or, conditional on belonging
to the majority religion (Hindu), when both belong to the same official caste (General
caste, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, or Other Backward Classes). On average, the
total amount of credit outstanding to borrowers in a group increases by 18.6% when the
officer assigned to the branch belongs to the same group. Having an in-group officer also
increases the number of borrowers by 6.2% and the probability that the group receives any
credit by 1.6%. The results are robust to the inclusion of district-group-time dummies, and
   1
    For evidence and discussions, see Banerjee, Cole, and Duflo 2004, Banerjee and Duflo 2008, and Field
et al. 2008.


                                                   2
also the simultaneous inclusion of branch-time and group-time dummies. This indicates
that the estimated effects are not driven by unobserved variation in the demand for credit
by any group or at any locality, by policies that direct credit differentially to different
groups and regions over time, or by reverse causality, where officers are transferred to areas
where her group is thriving. The results are also robust to an alternate and independent
classification where we use individuals’ surnames to assign borrowers and officers based
on the religious caste system that prevailed in ancient India. This rules out the possibility
that the results are driven by systematic errors in the classification of individuals in the
bank’s records.
   Having established that borrower-officer cultural proximity has a causal effect on ac-
cess to credit and the amount provided, we explore the economic mechanism behind this
result by analyzing the effect of proximity on loan repayment and other dimensions of
credit supply. Loans made to in-group borrowers have better repayment performance ex
post. The economic magnitude of this effect is large: weighted by loan size, in-group
borrowers are nearly 15% less likely to be late in loan payments, an effect that persists
even after the in-group officer is replaced by an out-group one. This improvement in
credit risk is recognized ex ante, as in-group loans are made with lower collateral ratios.
Additionally, we observe that cultural proximity increases substantially the dispersion of
lending across borrowers, implying that officers increase credit to some borrowers more
than others within their own groups. These findings suggest that cultural proximity miti-
gates problems of asymmetric information in lending and improves the allocation of credit
across borrowers with heterogeneous repayment prospects. These effects dominate any
negative impact of taste-based preferences on loan quality, as taste-based discrimination
would lead —at least weakly— to a decline in average repayment performance.
   Our results all hold for the subsample of borrowers that had already had loans from
the bank when a new officer arrives. Further, our results hold even in isolated locations
with a relative scarcity of other formal lenders. Thus, the patterns we report cannot be
the result of self-selection by borrowers or the switching of borrowers from other banks.



                                              3
This has the further implication that the observed in-group lending increase improves
access to credit or substitutes for informal sources of credit, which are typically more
expensive.2 This implies that cultural proximity not only improves the efficiency of the
bank’s credit allocation, but it also increases borrower welfare.
       Our work has a number of significant economic and policy implications that relate to
several areas of research. First, our findings highlight the fact that the information and
enforcement advantages of cultural proximity can be mistaken for discrimination. For
example, in the context of our paper, Hindu borrowers represent 89.2% of the borrower
population and take out larger loans than minority religion borrowers —presumably be-
cause they are wealthier and in other ways better credit risks than others— yet Hindu
officers do not exhibit in-group preferential treatment based on religion. A naive regres-
sion of loan access on borrower religion would indicate discrimination against minorities
rather than preferential in-group treatment among minorities. This calls for caution in
the interpretation of, and policy prescriptions that can be derived from, a substantial
body of research devoted to studying minority discrimination that identifies differential
treatment based solely on the identity of one of the parties of the transaction.3
       Our findings also suggests a mechanism for the formation of statistical discrimination
against a minority group, arising as a consequence of the documented effect of cultural
proximity on credit outcomes. Even if all groups in the population are ex ante equal, our
results imply that the average minority group borrower will have a worse credit history
and lower access to credit only because of the low probability that she will be matched
with an officer from her own group. If lenders’ priors on borrower creditworthiness are
based on the group’s (unconditional) average past performance, minorities will face higher
borrowing costs in the marketplace due purely to statistical discrimination. This insight
   2
     See Aleem 1990 and Banerjee and Duflo 2010.
   3
     See, for example, Goldin and Rouse 2000, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004 and Charles and Guryan
2008 for evidence in labor markets, and List 2004 for evidence in sportscard trading markets. There
is also evidence of discrimination for different types of credit markets, such as mortgages (see Ross et
al. 2008 for one recent example, and Ladd 1998 for a survey of the evidence), small business lending
(Blanchflower et al. 2003), trade credit (Fafchamps 2000; Fisman 2003), and online person-to-person
lending (Pope and Sydnor 2010).



                                                   4
relates to a body of theoretical work, following Arrow (1973), that rationalizes statistical
discrimination as an equilibrium with self-confirming beliefs, but that is silent about the
origin of these beliefs. A policy that increases the likelihood of a group match between
lenders and borrowers would unambiguously improve efficiency when statistical discrimi-
nation is a consequence of in-group preferential treatment.4
       We contribute to two main empirical literatures. First, our work relates to the set of
studies that examine the role of group identity using dyadic data, with generally mixed
results. Ayres and Siegelman (1995) finds evidence of race and gender discrimination in
an audit study of price bargaining in the U.S. new car market, but finds no evidence of
in-group preferential treatment. In contrast, Parsons et al. (2011) documents that Major
League Baseball strikes are called less often if the umpire and pitcher do not match race
or ethnicity, consistent with preference-based discrimination. Schoar, Iyer and Kumar
(2008) present evidence in a setting similar to ours: bargained prices are lower when the
buyer and seller belong to the same community in a field study in the wholesale market
for pens in India. The key contribution of our study is to provide the first characterization
of potentially efficiency-enhancing mechanisms behind in-group preferential treatment.
       Our paper also relates to the literature on social ties between transacting parties. Be-
cause transacting parties in our setting share a common cultural endowment, but have
most likely never met before the transaction, the impact of cultural proximity that we
document here is distinct from the effects of social ties or networks, which result from
parties’ past interactions.5 Our results indicate that cultural endowments affect the like-
lihood that two individuals will interact. This suggests that the endowment and social
ties effects are typically confounded in existing work that associates endogenous past so-
cial interactions with future market transactions.6 The distinction is important because
   4
     See Kim and Loury 2009 for a discussion of the origin of statistical discrimination, and Coate and
Loury 1993, Norman 2003 and Fryer and Loury 2005, for discussions of optimal policy prescriptions in
such multiple equilibrium settings
   5
     For evidence of the effect of social connections on economic interactions see, for example, Banerjee
and Munshi 2004 and Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul 2009.
   6
     For examples of this work see Cohen, Frazzini and Malloy 2008, 2010, Hwang and Kim 2009, Engel-
berg, Gao and Parsons 2011, Jackson and Schneider 2011, and Li 2012.



                                                   5
cultural endowments, such as religion and caste, are assigned at birth and transmitted
across generations of individuals of the same group, while social ties and connections are
dynamic and often subject to individual choice (Becker 1996). This implies that the eco-
nomic consequences of cultural endowment differences across groups can persist in the
long run, and potentially perpetuate inequality.
    In the next section, we begin by providing an overview of the data and a description
of the Indian bank we study —its organization, the incentives of its officers, and so forth.
In Section 3 we present the baseline empirical specification for the analysis. Section 4
presents our results on lending quantity; Section 5 analyzes default, loan dispersion, and
collateral patterns to distinguish between taste versus information and enforcement based
explanations; Section 6 presents our findings on the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the
effects of cultural proximity. In Section 7 we conclude with some policy implications and
directions for future work.



2     Data

The main variables in the analysis are obtained from the individual loan portfolio and
personnel records of a large state-owned Indian bank, which operates over 2000 geograph-
ically dispersed branches in India (see Figure 1). The sample starts in 1999 Q2 and
ends in 2005 Q1. This section describes in detail the structure and construction of the
dataset from the bank as well as other sources, and relevant background information on
the organization of the bank itself.


2.1    Loans, Borrowers, and Branch Heads

The individual loan portfolio data include loan-level information for every borrower with
a loan outstanding during the sample period (2.92 million individuals), with information
about the loan contracts and repayment status reported on a quarterly basis (1.23 million
borrowers per quarter on average). The main variables for the analysis are the amount of


                                             6
debt outstanding, the collateral posted, and the number of days late in interest payment.
       The median (mean) amount of debt outstanding in the full borrower-quarter panel
is 8,495 (36,086) rupees; excluding borrower-quarter observations with zero balance, the
median (mean) is 14,645 (47,924). Outstanding debt is typically secured: the median
collateral to loan ratio in the full panel is 1.67. The over-collateralizing reflects that fact
that the collateral data in most cases are not updated as a loan is repaid, and reflect the
initial collateral value at the time of contracting. The median interest rate is 12%.
       The median borrower’s interest payments are current. The skewness in days late
results from the stock of past defaulted loans, even those that occurred prior to our
sample period, which are never removed from bank records. Excluding observations with
more than 365 days late in repayment (2.76 million borrower-month observations), the
average days late is 13.4. To eliminate the noise generated by these legacy of defaults,
we retain in the sample only borrowers with less than 365 days late in repayment for the
purposes of the analysis.7
       From the internal personnel records of the bank, we obtain information about employ-
ees at each branch at a quarterly frequency. Each record has a general job description
and the position in the internal hierarchy of the bank. We use these data to identify the
head officer of each branch at each point in time (4,270 distinct officers in total). Loan
officers are classified into six grades, increasing in seniority, and the ability to approve
larger loan amounts. The highest ranked officer in each branch is the branch head. For
smaller branches, the head officer may himself have a relatively low grade. This implies
that any larger loan request that comes through the branch will have to be approved by
a higher grade officer elsewhere in the region. Still, in these cases the decision of whether
to submit the loan for approval at a higher level of the bank hierarchy is under the head
officer’s discretion, and based on information collected at the branch level. Although of-
ficers have control over loan and collateral amounts, they have no discretion over interest
rates, which are determined by headquarters based on loan type. For example, all home
   7
    The conclusions are invariant to the cutoff of days late used to generate our main sample, although
the noise introduced by including the legacy loans generates attenuation bias.


                                                  7
improvement loans pay the same rate, as do all educational loans above Rs.400,000.
      Branch heads —the focus of our analysis here— are evaluated annually on a range
of criteria.8 These include quantitative measures such as the amount and profitability of
lending, as well as qualitative considerations such as employee skill development, effective
customer communication, and other aspects of “leadership competency.” Each officer is
ultimately assigned a numerical grade from zero to one hundred. One specific aspect of
officer performance that will be relevant for our analysis is the extent to which officers
are held accountable for loan defaults after moving branches. Typically, officers are re-
sponsible for loans they approve for three years following their departure, at which point
responsibility is transferred to an officer in the branch where the loan was made.
      While there is limited incentive pay, branch heads may be motivated through possible
promotion to higher grades or better postings. For example, successful branch heads may
be sent to locales with more or better perquisites, such as higher pay (overseas), larger
houses, the use of a car, or control over a larger portfolio (large branches). In the analysis
that follows we evaluate the extent to which such endogenous allocation of officers to
branches affects our estimates.


2.2      Religion, Official Caste, and Religious Caste

The bank data also contain information on the religion and official caste classifications
of each borrower and employee. Individuals are grouped into seven categories based
on the prominent religions in India: Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Parsi, Buddhist
and others. They are also classified into four castes based on the categories explicitly
recognized by the Constitution of India: General Class (GC), Scheduled Castes (SC),
Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Classes (OBC). The SC category comprises
all the castes historically treated as “untouchable” by the upper castes in India. The
ST category includes indigenous, typically geographically isolated, tribal groups. The
  8
    Information on evaluation and compensation of managers within the bank come primarily from
interviews with bank staff.



                                              8
OBC category is a collection of caste groups ranked above untouchables in the ritual
hierarchy, but socially and educationally disadvantaged. Individuals belonging to the
SC, ST, and OBC categories receive targeted government aid and benefit from positive
discrimination policies (subject to means testing) such as reservations in public sector
employment and higher education.9 Although the SC, ST, and OBC categories include a
wide variety of social groups across India, locally they are often relatively homogeneous.
The GC category is essentially a collection of all the individuals not belonging to the
aforementioned “backward” classes.
       In order to obtain a group classification that is independent of the bank’s records, we
use the borrower and officer surnames to generate a group classification based on religious
castes. According to religious texts such as Manusmriti, Hindu society is broadly divided
into four Varnas: the Brahmins (priests and scholars), Kshatriyas (warriors), Vaishyas
(merchants and traders) and Shudras (laborers and artisans). Each Varna is a unification
of several Jatis, or communities (see Buhler 1886), and a person’s surname typically
reflects the Jati she belongs to. We exploit this link with surnames to classify each
individual into her Varna (see Banerjee et al. 2009 for a further discussion of the link
between surnames and castes in India).10
       The following are examples of the name matching and search process using three
common surnames in India:
   9
      The categories of Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) that represented a majority of
lower-status castes as well as tribes were first protected in anti-discrimination laws through the ninth
schedule of the Constitution in 1950 (Article 15, 17, and 46). In 1990, the further caste-based catego-
rization of OBC was added for identifying additional socially and economically deprived communities. A
few years thereafter the category of OBC was extended to include a significant segment of the non-Hindu
population, notably Muslims, Christians, and Sikhs.
   10
      Since the association between individual names and their borrowing and employment records is
proprietary and cannot be disclosed outside the bank, the process of assigning individuals to the Brah-
mins, Kshatriya, and Vaishya groups followed four steps. First, the bank provided us with a list of all
surnames—both borrowers and officers—present in bank records. Second, we searched Google and the
Anthropological Survey of India (Singh, et al., 1998, 2003, 2004) to establish a community association for
each name. Third, we searched Google, Wikipedia, matrimonial websites, and other references (Dahiya
1980, Dudhane 2007, UNP, Marathas 2010, Maheshwari Samaj 2006, Bindu 2008) to establish the link
between communities and Varnas. Finally, the bank linked community and Varna information to bank
records by surname, before removing the borrower and manager identifiers from the data.




                                                    9
   • Example 1. Surname: Birla. A Google search of the surname was found listed
        in one of the matrimonial sites of the Maheshwari Samaj community (Maheshwari
        Samaj 2006). In the Maheshwari Samaj we find information that Birlas belong to
        the Vaishya Varna.

   • Example 2. Surname: Rathod. The name Rathod was found in the Anthropological
        survey of India to be commonly used by the Rajput community (K. S. Singh et al.,
        2004). Following up with K. S. Singh et al. (2004) we find that the Rajputs are
        Kshatriyas according to the Varna system.

   • Example 3. Surname: Deshpande. A Google search showed the surname listed
        under the Deshastha community.11 A search in Kamat.com showed this community
        as belonging to the Brahmin Varna.

      Classifying borrowers and officers by religious caste using surnames comes at the cost
of additional noise and imprecision. One source of noise results from the fact that many
surnames can be classified into two or more Varnas. For example Saxena is grouped
under both Brahmins and Kshatriyas. Similarly Desai is grouped under both Brahmins
and Vaishyas. We created three special categories for individuals where this ambiguity
arises (Kshatriya-Brahmin, Kshatriya-Brahmin-Vaishya, and Kshatriyas-Vaishyas). We
note, however, that once we condition on region — as we do throughout our analysis —
there is a clearer link between names and communities. Second, it was unclear how to
categorize individuals into the Shudra Varna according to their community affiliations,
which precluded using surnames for individuals outside of the General Classes. Finally,
in a large fraction of cases, the surname-based classification conflicted with the bank
classifications assigned to loan officers and borrowers. For example, many bank-classified
Muslims had “Hindu” surnames, and vice-versa. Still, exploring the effect of proximity
along the Varna dimension is interesting it its own right, and will allow us to ascertain
whether the results based on bank classifications are driven by systematic misclassification
of officers and borrowers in the bank records.
 11
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of Deshastha Brahmin surnames.


                                                 10
2.3        Descriptive Statistics - Group Composition

The religion, official caste, and Varna compositions of the borrowers and officers popu-
lations are shown in Table 1. By religion, Hindus represent the majority of borrowers
(89.4%) and officers (93.8%). The largest group of minority borrowers is Muslim (6.33%),
and the largest officer minority is Christian (2.1%). Hindus are over-represented and
Muslims under-represented in the borrower and officer populations relative to the total
population (80.5% Hindu and 13.4% Muslim according to the 2001 census). Most bor-
rowers and officers do not receive any official designation and are classified as General
Class (66.7% and 74.3% respectively). The largest borrower minority is the OBC cate-
gory (16.6%), while the largest officer minority is ST (15.7%). SCs are under-represented
in the borrower sample and STs under-represented in the officer sample, relative to the
population (16.2% SC and 8.2% ST in the 2001 census).12
       We are able to match surnames to Varnas for a subsample of the population; a total
of 502,723 borrowers (18.3% Brahmin, 60.5% Kshatriya, 6.6% Vaishya, 1.7% mixed cate-
gories, and 5.72% in other categories) and 1,689 officers (23.0% Brahmin, 43.4% Kshatriya,
11.7% Vaishya, 15.5% mixed categories, and 6.4% in other categories) have Varna assign-
ments. All the identifiable Varnas in our sample belong to the General Class according
to official caste definitions.


2.4        Descriptive Statistics - Branches and Groups

Table 2, Panel 1, shows branch-quarter level statistics. The median branch has a total
of 13.5 million rupees of debt outstanding and lends to 334 borrowers. The borrower
composition is generally quite heterogeneous: the median branch lends to borrowers of
four different religions and three different official castes. The median branch is small,
with two loan officers including the head officer, and the modal branch has only a single
officer.
  12
       The 2001 India Census does not keep track of OBCs.




                                                  11
       The unit of analysis is the branch-group-quarter level (indexed by b, g, and q, re-
spectively) where group refers to the cultural group of the borrower.13 In our main
specification we use the full set of religion and caste information to group borrowers into
9 categories: 5 minority religions, and 4 official castes conditional on religion being Hindu.
In other specifications we consider group definitions based on religion, caste, and Varna
independently. The panel employing our main group classifications has 339,366 branch-
group-quarter observations and we present the descriptive statistics in Table 2, Panel 2.
The average group-branch has around 2 million rupees of total debt outstanding and 43
borrowers, with an average of 16 days late in repayment. 8.1% of borrowers are more
than 60 days late in their loan repayments. However, only 2% of total debt is in default,
reflecting the fact that larger debts are much less likely to be behind in repayment.
       We merge the branch-level personnel information to this panel to obtain our main
explanatory variable, SAMEGROUP bgq , a dummy variable that is equal to one for the
branch-group-quarter loan cells where the branch head officer belongs to group g, and
zero otherwise. For example, if the head officer of branch b in quarter q is Muslim, then
SAMEGROUP bgq = 1 for loans from group g if g = Muslim, and zero for the other groups
in that branch-quarter.


2.5       Officer Rotation

The bank follows an explicit policy of geographical officer rotation, with the stated ob-
jective of reducing opportunities for corruption, nepotism, and other perverse incentives
in the allocation of loans. As a result, branch turnover is high: we observe an average of
127 head officer reallocations per quarter, and the median branch has one officer change
during our sample period. The mean (median) spell of a head officer in a branch is 8.3 (8)
quarters, with standard deviation of 4.1. Head officers are always assigned to branches
  13
    We do not perform our analysis at the level of the individual borrower for two reasons. First,
the relevant individual-level decisions in our context are at the head officer level, which is the level of
aggregation we use. More practically, it would be very difficult —in some cases impossible, as when
we study the effect of proximity on group lending variance— to implement some of our analyses using
individual-level data.


                                                    12
that are located away from their home town, and the average officer reallocation assigns
the officer to a new branch that is 250 kilometers from the previous assignment. This im-
plies that although officers generally stay within the same region, it is unlikely that they
have had any prior interaction with any of the potential borrowers in their new location.
    In Appendix Table A.1 we report the empirical distribution of branch transitions by
religion (panel 1), official caste (panel 2), and Varna (panel 3). We highlight in boldface
the transition frequencies that are different from those that would result from assigning
officers at random from the population of officers described in Table 1. For religion and
Varna, the empirical transition frequencies are statistically indistinguishable from a policy
of random officer allocation. However, for the subsample of Hindu officers the empirical
transition rates deviate from the random benchmark when officers are grouped by official
caste. For example, the observed probability of a GC to GC transition is 61.0%, while
the random benchmark is 55.4%, and the difference is statistically significant at the 1%
confidence level. This indicates that there are some branches that tend to receive General
Class officers too often relative to random assignment. This is consistent with the existence
of reservations for SC, ST, and OBC official posts in some regions, since this would lead
to a higher observed proportion of transitions in the diagonal of the matrix. We discuss
the potential consequences of policy-driven distortions in officer allocation in the context
of our empirical estimation in the sections that follow.



3     Empirical Specification

Our baseline empirical specification takes the following form:




                          ygbq = βSameGroup bgq + αgb + τq + bgq                        (1)


    The dependent variable is a loan outcome (i.e., total lending, number of loans, fraction
of loans past 60 days late, etc.) at the branch-group-quarter level; g indexes the group

                                             13
—caste, religion, or pooled partition; b indexes the branch; and q indexes the quarter.
SameGroup is an indicator variable denoting whether the branch head in branch b belongs
to group g in quarter q. The two fixed effects —agb and τq — capture time-invariant
attributes of each group within each branch (i.e., a group times branch set of fixed effects),
and aggregate shocks to all branches. The error term bgq allows for clustering at the
branch level.
   We also consider augmented specifications where we saturate the branch-time, group-
                                                                                 Branch
time, state-group-time, and district-group-time variation. Branch-time dummies, τbq     ,
account for all changes in the demand for credit in a particular location, as well as changes
in directed credit policies aimed at certain localities. Since there is one head loan officer
per branch at any time, the branch-time dummies also account for all unobserved branch
head heterogeneity, whether time invariant (different officer skills) or time varying (officer
learning about the job or the environment), and also for any effect that the change of an
                                                                          Group
officer may have on average lending in a branch. The group-time dummies, τgq    , account
for aggregate changes in the credit demand from, or supply to, specific groups. The state-
group-time (district-group-time) dummies, δ State-Group (δ District-Group ), absorb any changes
                                              bgq          bgq

in the demand or supply of credit that are specific to a group in any given region, such as
secular borrowing trends affecting particular groups in a location. We show in the next
section that these saturated models produce estimates of the coefficient on SameGroup, β,
that are statistically indistinguishable from those of the baseline. This represents strong
evidence that officer group transitions are orthogonal to other determinants of credit at
the group-location-quarter level (i.e., E[SameGroup.] = 0), and that the β estimates
from specification (1) are consistent.
   The coefficient on SameGroup is a difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of
cultural proximity between a lender and a borrower on loan outcomes. Consider, for
example, the regression with the log of total lending as the dependent variable and,
for simplicity, suppose there are only three groups: Hindus, Muslims, and Christians.
Suppose that a branch has a Hindu officer during the first half of the sample, and a Muslim



                                              14
officer during the second half. The coefficient on SameGroup captures the difference
between the log debt of Hindu borrowers in the branch when the officer is a Hindu (in-
group) officer relative to when the officer is a Muslim. It also captures the difference
between the log debt of Muslim borrowers with a Muslim officer relative to a Hindu one.
    Our main results show the average effect across all groups. In the last section of the
paper we explore whether there are differential in-group effects across group definitions.
Specifically, we include the interaction of SameGroup and a dummy for each group g.
We also explore the heterogeneity of the effect along other branch and branch location
characteristics.



4     Results: Loan Amounts

We begin with a graphical description of (unconditional) lending patterns around officer
transitions. First we classify borrowers into two categories based on whether they have
the same group identity as the outgoing officer: in-group borrowers are those belonging to
the same group as the officer, and all others are categorized as out-group borrowers. For
example, in a branch where the outgoing officer is Hindu, the Hindu borrowers are in-group
before the officer change, and all minority religion borrowers are classified as out-group.
Each of these borrower groups may or may not experience a change in their in-group/out-
group status after the officer change. For example, suppose the Hindu officer is replaced
by a Muslim one. Then, Hindu borrowers transition from in-group to out-group, Muslim
borrowers transition from out-group to in-group, and other non-Muslim minority religions
remain as out-group. Alternatively, if the replacement officer is also Hindu, then Hindu
borrowers remain as in-group and all minority borrowers remain as out-group.
    We use these borrower classifications to construct “event study” plots around officer
transitions. The horizontal axis of the plots in Figure 2 measures time in quarters since
the officer change in a branch. Time 0 represents the first quarter a new officer appears
as the branch head in the personnel files. Given that our analysis is based on quarterly


                                            15
data, the new officer may arrive up to 11 weeks before the observed entry time. Below, we
discuss the bias that this measurement error may introduce. The vertical axis measures
the average debt of borrowers that experience a change in in-group/out-group status,
relative to those that do not. Panel (a) shows the average debt of out-group borrowers
that become in-group after the officer change, minus the average debt of borrowers that
remain out-group. Panel (b) shows the average debt of in-group borrowers who become
out-group, relative to in-group borrowers that remain in-group. All averages are taken at
the group-branch level using the caste-religion group definition, and both plots include
the 95% confidence interval of the mean difference.
       The plots show a shift in the composition of lending as a function of cultural ties
when there is a change in head officer. In Panel (a), the average debt of borrowers
that switch from out-group to in-group status increases by approximately 1.5 million
rupees (approximately USD$35,000), relative to borrowers that remain out-group after
the officer change. A parallel pattern appears in Panel (b): the average debt of borrowers
that switch from in-group to out-group status drops by 4 million rupees during the four
quarters following the change in status, relative to borrowers that remain in-group.14
       The plots in Figure 1 also suggest that the relationship between cultural proximity
and lending may be causal, since the relative debt change occurs immediately around
the officer transition and does not appear to be driven by pre-existing differential lending
trends across the two groups in each panel. The plots provide some validation for the
identification assumptions behind the difference-in-difference estimator of the in-group
effect in specification (1).
       There is a small and statistically insignificant increase in the relative amount of lending
at time -1 in Panel (a), the period prior to the recorded quarter of arrival of the new officer.
This is likely driven by the aforementioned measurement error in the time of arrival of
the new officer. Such measurement error will tend to bias towards zero our estimates of
  14
    The asymmetry in the magnitudes of the jumps across the two plots is driven by the fact that the
groups of borrowers compared in the two plots are different in size and average debt. In the formal
empirical analysis these differences are accounted for by the branch-group dummies.



                                                 16
the in-group effect in specification (1).


4.1    In-Group Effect on Credit

We present in Table 3 the effect of having an in-group branch head on credit, estimated
using specification (1). Outcomes are measured at the level of group g in branch b in
quarter q. To capture both the intensive and extensive margins of lending, we use as
dependent variables the log of total debt, the log of the number of borrowers, and a
dummy variable equal to one if debt is greater than zero. The log transformation of the
first two variables reduces their skewness, and facilitates an elasticity interpretation of
the coefficients. However, it also creates an unbalanced panel, as zero loan cells become
missing values. The effect on the group-level extensive margin —i.e. the probability that
a group receives some credit— is captured by the last specification in a linear probability
model. In unreported specifications we used a ln(1+x) transformation to reduce the skew-
ness of the dependent variable. Although this alternate transformation does not allow a
ready interpretation of the magnitudes of estimated coefficients, it generates qualitatively
identical results to those reported below.
   The estimated coefficients on the SameGroup indicator variable are positive and sig-
nificant across all three specifications. The magnitudes imply that lending to a group
increases by 18.6% when an in-group officer is assigned to the branch (Table 3, column
1), the number of borrowers increases by 6.2% (3, column 4), and the probability that
the group receives any debt increases by 1.5 percentage points (3, column 7), or around
2.5% of the baseline probability of having positive credit.
   Because cultural proximity affects the likelihood that a group receives any credit, the
coefficient estimates on total lending and number of borrowers are consistent estimators
for a local average treatment effect (LATE) of cultural proximity on branch-group cells
that have positive debt both with and without an in-group officer. The LATE and the
average treatment effect are likely to be close in our setting, because the effect of proximity
on a group’s probability of borrowing is low. To confirm this we estimate the bounds of


                                              17
the average treatment effect using the procedure in Lee (2008), estimating the total debt
and number of borrower specifications after trimming the 1.5-percent upper and lower
tails of the outcome for the branch-group-quarter cells in which SameGroup equals one
(1.5 percent is the estimated treatment effect on the probability of receiving any credit).
In both cases, the bounds are relatively tight around the LATE estimate, as the difference
between the LATE and the lower bound is less than one fifth of a standard deviation of
the LATE estimate (Table 3, columns 2, 3, 5, and 6). For example, the average treatment
effect of cultural proximity on total debt ranges from 0.183 to 0.229, while the LATE
estimate is 0.186. Thus, in what follows, we present LATE estimates and interpret them
as the lower bound on the average treatment effect of cultural proximity on loan outcomes.
   Table 4 presents the estimates of specification (1) augmented with branch-quarter,
group-quarter, state-group-quarter, and district-group-quarter dummies.15 To reduce the
number of nuisance parameters to be estimated in these specifications, we remove the
branch-group means from all variables in the panel rather than including branch-group
fixed effects, and adjust the standard error estimation accordingly. Neither the magni-
tude nor the significance of the estimated parameters changes in any of the saturated
models. This represents strong evidence that our variable of interest, SameGroup, is un-
correlated with the error term in the baseline specification (1), and that the estimated
coefficient on SameGroup has a causal interpretation. The saturated specifications rule
out, for example, an alternative reverse causality interpretation of the coefficient in which
a positive association between lending to a group and the identity of the officer is driven
by an endogenous allocation of officers into areas where their own group is thriving. The
district-group-quarter dummies account for localized shocks and trends to the demand
for credit of specific groups in narrowly defined geographical areas (the median district
has three bank branches in our sample).
   Table 5 repeats the estimation using the group definitions based on the traditional
religious caste system (Varna), obtained through surname matching. The estimated ef-
  15
     There are 43,974 branch-quarter dummies, 216 group-quarter dummies, 4,760 state-group-quarter
dummies, and 52,406 district-group-quarter dummies


                                               18
fect of cultural proximity on lending is again positive across all outcomes, although the
estimates are noisier (e.g. the effect on the number of borrowers is not significant). The
point estimates are of the same order of magnitude as those obtained using our main
group definitions based on religion and government-sanctioned caste (Table 3). The point
estimates imply, for example, an in-group effect on total credit of 14% when groups are de-
fined using Varnas (18.6% when defined using religion and government sanctioned caste).
The Varna grouping is constructed independently of the bank’s classification of officers
and borrowers, indicating that the observed in-group effects are not driven by systematic
misclassification of borrowers. Also, since it is implausible (and illegal) that the bank
uses Varnas to allocate credit or assign jobs, the Varna-based results provide an indepen-
dent validation of the identification assumption that the group identity of the officer in
a branch is uncorrelated with directed lending policies targeted to borrowers of the same
group.


4.2      Intensive and Extensive Margins

The results so far focus on lending outcomes at the group level. In Table 6 we explore
the effect of cultural proximity on the borrower-level intensive and extensive margins of
lending. To do this we partition the borrower sample into two groups: 1) borrowers that
established a credit relationship with the bank prior to the arrival of the current officer,
and 2) borrowers that receive credit from the bank for the first time with the current
officer. Panel 1 shows the estimates on the first subsample, which includes every branch-
group-quarter bgq where there exist borrowers that had positive credit at any time before
the officer in charge of branch b in quarter q arrived. The estimates indicate that the
average debt by existing borrowers increases by 11.6% with the arrival of an in-group
branch head.
   The coefficient on the number of borrowers in this subsample measures exit, because
all entrants are removed by construction. The effect on the number of borrowers is a
tightly estimated zero, indicating that cultural proximity has no effect on the probability


                                            19
that preexisting borrowers cease to borrow from the bank. These results imply that the
estimated effect of cultural proximity on the total number of borrowers from Table 3 is
solely due to its effect on entry.
   Collectively, the results on the existing borrower subsample imply that the effect of
proximity on credit is positive holding the borrower pool constant. The estimated effect
on the probability that a group receives any credit is positive, indicating that proximity
increases the likelihood that borrowers that had borrowed and repaid their loans start to
borrow again.
   Table 6, Panel 2, shows the estimated effects for the complementary subsample of
borrowers that obtain credit from the bank for the first time with the current officer.
The estimated effects indicate that cultural proximity increases the flow of total lending
to new borrowers by 16.9% and the number of new borrowers by 13.3%; the difference
between the two estimates indicates that the average size of in-group loans is larger.
   The effect of cultural proximity on entry can occur through two different, not mu-
tually exclusive, channels. First, cultural proximity may increase the likelihood that an
officer approves a loan application from an in-group borrower. Second, it may affect the
likelihood that in-group borrowers apply: borrowers with rational expectations about the
higher likelihood of having an application approved by an in-group officer are more likely
to request a loan. For example, a Muslim borrower may decide to save on the cost of the
loan application if she knows that the branch head officer is non-Muslim, but choose to
apply once a Muslim officer is in place.
   The data do not contain information on loan applications, so we cannot estimate the
effect of officer identity on applications directly. We adopt an indirect approach and
analyze the dynamics of the in-group effect on the intensive and extensive margins. If
entry increases because officers approve more in-group applications, then the in-group
effect on the number of borrowers should occur immediately after the officer’s arrival. In
contrast, the effect of an in-group officer on the inflow of new applications should be more
gradual, as it takes time for the news that there is an in-group officer in the branch to


                                            20
spread. We estimate specification (1) augmented with interactions between SameGroup
and a set of indicator variables for the officer’s first quarter at the branch, his second
quarter, and so on. The coefficients on the interaction terms represent how the effect of
cultural proximity on loan outcomes changes during his tenure.
   Figure 3 plots the estimated interaction coefficients and 95% confidence interval bounds
using the log of total credit and number of loans as dependent variables. Given that cul-
tural proximity affects only the entry margin, we present estimates on the full sample and
interpret the effect on the number of loans as the effect on entry. Panel (a) shows that
the effect of cultural proximity on the amount of credit is immediate: credit to in-group
borrowers increases by close to 10% during the first quarter the officer is assigned as
branch head. In contrast, the effect on the number of borrowers, although positive, is not
statistically different from zero when the officer arrives in the branch (Panel (b)). The
effect of cultural proximity on borrower entry becomes significant only six months after
the officer’s arrival.
   The distinct dynamic patterns in the two plots suggest that the effect of cultural
proximity on the intensive and extensive margins is driven by different economic phe-
nomena. For the intensive margin, the officer increases lending immediately to existing
in-group borrowers. The effect on the extensive margin takes time to build, and is con-
sistent with officers attracting more in-group borrower applications. We discuss further
the implications of these patterns after presenting the results on loan performance.
   Our main conclusion thus far is that cultural proximity between lenders and borrowers
leads to an increase in lending. The magnitudes of the estimated effects on access to credit
and the amount borrowed are substantial. The next section investigates the potential
mechanisms behind this preferential treatment of in-group borrowers.




                                            21
5     Preferences, Enforcement and Screening

The key identification challenge in understanding the causes and consequences of prefer-
ential in-group treatment is whether it is due to favoritism or reduced frictions in loan
transactions. Distinguishing amongst causes is critical to understanding the efficiency
implications of preferential in-group lending. It is possible to narrow down the set of
explanations by studying the impact of in-group lending on ex post loan performance and
on other dimensions of lending.
    We consider three main models of preferential in-group treatment: (a) pure favoritism,
i.e., taste-based preferences, with no difference in lending frictions; (b) reduced ex ante
frictions (i.e., better screening); and (c) reduced ex post frictions (i.e., improved enforce-
ment). We will refer to the frictions in (b) and (c) collectively as asymmetric information.
There are various mechanisms that may allow in-group officers to mitigate the effects of
information asymmetries. For example, loan officers may be better able to enforce repay-
ment by borrowers that belong to her own group because it lowers the cost of imposing
penalties thorough social sanctions. In a similar vein, social norms or altruism may in-
crease borrowers’ utility cost of defaulting when the issuing officer belongs to their own
group. Cultural proximity may also reduce ex ante information frictions by, for example,
providing the screening officer a better signal of a borrower’s creditworthiness.
    In general, if loan officers can mitigate the effects of asymmetric information for in-
group borrowers, we expect the expansion of in-group credit access – already documented
above – to be accompanied by improved repayment. By contrast, if favoritism is the
dominant source of within-group preferences, the increase in lending will be the result
of credit expansion to (lower-quality) marginal borrowers, leading to a deterioration in
average lending quality.
    We may distinguish between the most straightforward models of ex ante and ex post
information frictions. If enforcement were the dominant mechanism for improved re-
payment performance, we would expect no change in the distribution of loan size, since
enforcement primarily affects ex post outcomes. Further, enforcement takes place through

                                             22
sanctions imposed by the loan officer himself, we expect the performance of in-group loans
to decline after an in-group officer’s departure.
          We find that in-group loans have higher repayment performance, evidence that fa-
vors screening and enforcement models, and implying that on balance in-group lending
reduces information frictions. Further, we find that the effect of cultural proximity on
loan repayment persists even after an in-group branch head is replaced by an outgroup
one, and that loan size dispersion is higher for in-group loans. These findings suggest that
the higher repayment performance of in-group loans can be attributed at least in part to
better in-group screening.


5.1          In-Group Effect on Loan Performance

We examine the impact of cultural proximity on loan performance by estimating specifi-
cation (1) using the fraction of borrowers and debt that are more than 60 days past due;
the results are almost identical when we use 30 and 90 days past due (see Appendix Table
A.2).16 As before, the unit of analysis is the branch-group-quarter level, and our outcomes
of interest are calculated over all loans that are active and due in branch b, group g, quar-
ter q. We calculate the fraction of loans past 60 days overdue, which weights borrowers
equally, and also the fraction of debt overdue, which is a loan-size weighted statistic. In
some specifications we look at the 12-month forward default figures, that is, the fraction
of loans more than 60 days overdue in quarter q + 3 of all loans active and due in quarter
q.
          The estimated coefficients on SameGroup are presented in Table 7. The point es-
timates of the effect of cultural proximity on the fraction of loans more than 60 days
overdue —contemporaneous and 12 months forward— are negative and significant at the
1% level (columns 1 and 2). For the contemporaneous default specification the coefficient
     16
     We also employed specifications that used the log of one plus the number of days late as the outcome
variable, including both specifications that weighted days late by loan size and specifications that weighted
all borrowers equally. These regressions generated qualitatively very similar results to those we report in
the text, but do not have any clear economic interpretation.



                                                     23
of -0.0057 implies a 7% reduction in default relative to the mean of 8.1% for in-group
loans. The effect on default 12 months forward, -0.0097, implies an even larger effect of
cultural proximity on loan performance. We obtain similar results when fraction of loans
more than 60 days overdue is weighted by loan size, both for the specification using con-
temporaneous repayment status and also repayment status 12 months forward (columns
(4) and (5)). The coefficient in column (4) is -0.0029, implying a 14.5% reduction in
default relative to the mean debt-weighted default rate of 2.0% for in-group loans. Again,
the 12 months forward specification is somewhat larger in magnitude, with a coefficient
of -0.0054.
   A taste-based model of higher in-group lending that would also lead to higher repay-
ment rates is one where cultural proximity causes loan officers to extend additional loans
to insolvent in-group borrowers to make payments on past loans. This “ever-greening”
explanation also implies that the impact on loan performance should be relatively short-
lived, and in particular that it should disappear when an in-group officer is replaced by an
out-group one. We test whether the positive effect of cultural proximity on performance
dissipates when the in-group officer is replaced with an out-group one by augmenting our
specifications in columns (3) and (6) with the 12 month lead of SameGroup. The coef-
ficient on this variable represents the difference in future default across borrowers that
still have an officer from the same group relative to those that experienced a change. In
(3), which weights all borrowers equally, the coefficient on SameGroup remains large in
magnitude and significant at the 1% percent level. The coefficient on the 12 month lead
of SameGroup is negative, suggesting an additional further effect of SameGroup in the
future; however, it is half the magnitude of the coefficient on the lead of SameGroup and
statistically indistinguishable from zero. In column (6), which weights default status by
loan size, the coefficient on the 12 month lead of SameGroup is a precisely estimated zero,
and the coefficient on the contemporaneous SameGroup is unchanged. Overall, these
results argue against an ever-greening explanation for our loan size and repayment per-
formance results. Further, the absence of any SameGroup effect in the future evidence



                                            24
that the improvement in loan repayment results from better ex ante screening, as opposed
to better ex post monitoring or enforcement, since the cost of direct ex post monitoring
or application of social sanctions should increase after the in-group officer’s departure.
   The patterns in Table 7 are qualitatively similar for the borrower subsamples limited
to (a) those who previously borrowed from the bank, and (b) those who borrowed from
the bank for the first time in quarter q. The point estimates are uniformly negative for the
coefficients of interest, though somewhat larger for the sample of of preexisting borrowers.
This suggests that the performance improvement associated with in-group lending is not
the result of borrower self-selection.
   We refer back to our results on the dynamics of the effect of cultural proximity as
one additional pattern in the data that helps to rule out borrower self-selection as an
explanation for improved loan performance. As we note in the previous section, the
increase in lending to borrowers that had already obtained credit from the bank occurs
within the same quarter of the in-group officer’s arrival. Combined with the improvement
in the performance of these loans, this indicates better screening and monitoring, holding
the set of borrowers constant.


5.2    Loan Dispersion and Collateral

The view that in-group lending reduces information frictions and improves allocative
efficiency yields further predictions on the ex ante characteristics of in-group lending.
   First, lower default rates should reduce the average cost of borrowing. Since loan
interest rates are fixed in our setting, we focus instead on the collateral as a proxy for the
borrowing cost (higher risk borrowers will post more collateral holding the interest rate
constant), and examine whether collateral to loan ratios are lower for in-group loans.
   Second, improved ex ante screening in particular should increase the dispersion in
lending, as in the screening discrimination model of Cornell and Welch (1996). The
intuition for this prediction is that the precision of the signal that the loan officer receives
about a borrower’s quality is more precise for in-group transactions. As a result the

                                              25
variance of the prior distribution of default probabilities is larger. In our setting, this
implies a higher dispersion for lending to in-group borrowers. Note that, by contrast,
enforcement-based explanations do not make strong predictions about the ex ante loan
distribution.
   Focusing first on effect of cultural proximity on collateral, we employ our baseline
specification baseline specification (1), using two separate measures of collateral intensity
—the logarithm of total collateral, and the logarithm of the ratio of total collateral to loan
amount. The estimated in-group effects are presented in Table 8. Column (1) indicates
that the point estimate of the effect of cultural proximity on collateral is 0.136, smaller
than the estimated coefficient for total debt (0.185). The estimated in-group effect on
collateral to loan ratios is -0.0474, significant at the 1% level, again indicating a lower
collateral rate for in-group loans.
   To assess the effect of cultural proximity on loan dispersion, we estimate the baseline
specification (1) in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, using two measures of loan dispersion
within the group: the standard deviation and the interquartile range of the loans issued
in branch b, group g, quarter q. The estimated in-group effects, presented in Table
8, are positive and significant for both measures. The point estimates indicate that
cultural proximity increases the standard deviation (inter-quartile range) of the loans by
18.3% (8.8%). These findings are most consistent with ex ante information asymmetries
accounting for the higher level of lending and performance of in-group borrowers.


5.3    Discussion

The results taken together rule out several standard rationales for the observed effect of
cultural proximity on lending. First, the most straightforward taste-based models cannot
explain why cultural proximity both increases the supply of credit and improves repayment
performance. Preference-based explanations are only consistent with our results if in-
group favoritism affects information collection or enforcement. For example, officers may
spend more time with borrowers of their own group solely due to preferences and, as


                                             26
a by-product, collect better ex ante information about them. Alternatively, they may
feel greater offense by default from in-group borrowers, compelling them to extract higher
repayment rates ex post. This class of explanation departs substantially from any standard
preference-based discrimination models, since it implies that discrimination may lead to
efficiency improvements.
   Second, simple ex-post enforcement models cannot explain why the repayment per-
formance improvement persists after the in-group officers leaves the branch, replaced by
an out-group one. Only an enforcement model in which the improvement in repayment
does not stem from a direct ex post action by the officer can be consistent with the re-
sults, since the marginal cost of such direct actions is very likely to increase substantially
with the geographical distance between the officer and the borrower. For example, the
borrower may feel guilt or remorse for defaulting on someone from their own community.
Given that there is no ex post action required by the lender, this type of model is not
different from a standard ex ante screening model in which there are borrower types (e.g.
remorseful and immoral), but one where the type of the borrower is contingent on the
type of the lender.
   Third, simple enforcement models with homogeneous agents cannot explain why cul-
tural proximity increases the heterogeneity of lending in a group. Continuing with the
example above, it would require that there are remorseful and immoral borrowers in every
group, but an in-group officer is able to tell them apart. This type of explanation can be
easily rationalized with an ex ante screening model where the officers have more precise
signals of borrower creditworthiness when the borrower belongs to his own group, as in
Cornell and Welch (1996).
   Overall, the results strongly suggest that cultural proximity reduces asymmetric in-
formation problems in credit allocation and may lead to efficiency improvements. We
discuss the efficiency consequences further in the next section.




                                             27
6     Efficiency and Heterogeneity

Because the results so far pertain to credit received from only one source, they do not
allow for inferences about the welfare and efficiency consequences of cultural proximity.
Further, the results on the average effect of proximity may hide substantial heterogeneity
that can be informative about the nature of the in-group advantage. In this section
we attempt to shed some light on these two issues by characterizing the cross sectional
heterogeneity of the effect of cultural proximity along observable dimensions of borrowers,
branches, and locations.


6.1    Branch Density

If credit from the bank in our data substitutes rupee-per-rupee for credit obtained from
other sources at the same cost, then the in-group effect on credit outcomes does not have
any consequences for credit access. This is a priori unlikely because the cost of borrowing
from the government bank in our data is subsidized, and is either the lowest or amongst
the lowest cost available sources of funding from any formal or informal institution in
India. To study formally whether substitution is present, we analyze how the in-group
effect varies in the cross-section of districts classified by the density of bank branches,
which serves as a measure of the availability of outside borrowing opportunities.
    Branch density in a district is measured as the total number of branches from all
financial institutions per 1,000 inhabitants. The number of branches per district is ob-
tained from the website of the Reserve Bank of India and the number of inhabitants per
district from the India Census, both from 2001. The average number of branches per
1,000 inhabitants is 0.81 across the 357 districts with a branch from the bank in our data.
There is substantial heterogeneity across districts, with 0.18, 0.54, and 1.88 as the 1st,
50th and 99th percentiles respectively. The districts with the highest branch densities
typically correspond to urban areas and the lowest densities to rural ones.
    We estimate specification (1) adding interactions between SameGroup and indicators


                                            28
for whether the branch is located in the districts in the second, third, or fourth quartile
of branch density (interactions between the quarter dummies and the district quartiles
are also included). Table 9, panel 1, presents the estimated coefficients for different loan
outcomes. The estimated coefficient on SameGroup without interactions corresponds to
the in-group effect in branches located in districts with the lowest branch density. For
total debt, number of borrowers, and debt variance (columns 1, 2 and 3), the estimates
are positive and statistically significant, and the magnitudes are close to those obtained
on the full sample. The estimated in-group effect on loan performance is also close to
that of the full sample. This implies that the documented effect of cultural proximity on
credit outcomes is present even in locations where there are few opportunities for outside
credit.
   Across all outcomes, the coefficient estimates for the interaction terms imply a stronger
effect of cultural proximity in more isolated areas. This is the opposite of what one would
expect if the results were driven largely by substitution of credit from other formal bor-
rowing sources. Except for the loan performance specification, however, none of the
interaction term coefficients is statistically significant. Thus, the evidence suggests that
cultural proximity increases borrowers’ overall access to credit and reduces the cost of bor-
rowing, since the alternative sources of credit in isolated areas are informal moneylenders
or micro-lenders that charge higher interest rates.


6.2       Hierarchical Distance

Although the modal branch in our sample has one loan officer and the median branch has
two (including the head officer), there are branches that are much larger. The bulk of the
information collection process is performed by the head officer in smaller branches, while
some of the screening and enforcement activities are likely delegated to other officers in
larger ones. We would therefore expect to observe proximity to have a smaller effect in
larger branches.
   Table 9, panel 2, illustrates how the effect of cultural proximity varies as a function of


                                             29
the number of officers at a branch. It presents the estimated coefficients of specification (1)
augmented with interactions between SameGroup and indicators for whether the branch
has two, and more than two officers (and interactions with the quarter dummies). All the
results in the previous subsection are confirmed for the modal branch, which has only one
officer (coefficient on SameGroup with no interaction). The point estimates indicate that
the magnitude of the effect is larger in these branches relative to the average. The point
estimates on the interaction terms are quite noisy across all specifications, but broadly
point towards less of an effect of cultural proximity on loan size, dispersion, and default
in larger branches.


6.3    Homogeneity and Size

In this final subsection we explore the heterogeneity of the effect of cultural proximity
across religions, castes, and group sizes. We do this to assess the robustness of the results
to different group definitions, and to examine, for a given group definition, how the effects
of cultural proximity are affected by the relative prevalence of groups in the population,
since an in-group officer’s informational advantage may be relatively small in cases where
the in-group represents a high fraction of the total population. The analysis in this section
also sheds light on the consequences of using highly aggregated group definitions.
   We first focus on religion. To do so we build the branch-group-quarter panel by
grouping borrowers into Hindus and each of the five minority religions based on the
bank’s classifications. The difference between this panel and the one employed to this
point in the analysis is that now loan outcomes for Hindu borrowers are grouped in a
single cell. With the religion-based group definition, we define a new variable of interest,
SameReligion, equal to one for the borrowers of religion g in branch b in quarter q when
the head officer in the branch belongs to the same religion g. In Table 10, panel 1, we
show the estimated coefficients for SameReligion interacted with indicators for religion
equal to Hindu, and religion equal to Minority Religion (we show the heterogeneity within
minority religions in the Appendix Table A.3). The point estimates indicate that the in-


                                              30
group effect on all lending outcomes is a tightly estimated zero for Hindus, when caste
heterogeneity within Hindus is ignored (odd numbered columns). For minority religions,
the in-group effect on all outcomes has the same sign and a considerably larger magnitude
than the average effect documented using SameGroup as a covariate. For example, having
a minority religion officer in a branch leads to a 43% expansion in lending to same-minority
religion borrowers and reduces the fraction of debt more than 60 days overdue by 0.86
percentage points, or 43% relative to the baseline rate of 2%.
   We explore two potential explanations for this cross sectional variation of the in-group
effect. First, the in-group effect may vary with group size: minority religion borrowers
represent, by definition, the smallest groups in the population. Second, the in-group
effect may vary with group heterogeneity: the Hindu grouping combine borrowers of a
wide array of culture, codes, and language.
   To explore the group size dimension while holding the group definition constant, we
augment the religion specification with an additional interaction term using a dummy
for whether the state where the branch is located has an above median population of
minority religion inhabitants in the 2001 India census (the fraction of minority religion
population in the median state is 0.174). The interaction term with the large minority
state dummy has the opposite sign to the term with no interaction for all credit outcomes
(even numbered columns). This indicates that the in-group effect for minority religions is
smaller in those states where the minority religion population is larger. For example, the
effect of cultural proximity for minority religions on total credit is 29 percentage points
smaller in states with above median minority religion populations.
   To explore the group heterogeneity dimension holding the group constant, we focus
on the subsample of Hindu borrowers and construct a branch-group-quarter panel group-
ing Hindu borrowers by their government sanctioned caste classification. Analysis in this
panel also allows us to focus on cultural proximity along the caste dimension, holding
religion constant. We define the indicator variable SameCaste as equal to one for bor-
rowers of caste g in branch b in quarter q when the head officer in the branch belongs


                                              31
to the same caste g. The estimated caste-based in-group effects are presented in Table
10, panel 2. We show the estimated coefficients for SameCaste interacted with indicators
for caste equal to SC/ST and General/OBC. This partition of the groups is necessary to
explore the effects of group prevalence below, since the 2001 Census does not distinguish
OBC from General caste individuals (the interactions for each caste separately are shown
in Appendix Table A.3). The point estimates of the in-group effect is significant in al-
most every credit outcome for both SC/CT and General/OBC castes. The total credit
specification estimates imply that having an in-group officer increases credit by 25% for
SC/ST borrowers and by 4% for General/OBC borrowers. As before, when we augment
the specification using an interaction with an indicator for whether the state’s fraction
of SC/ST population is above the median (0.227), in most specifications the interaction
term has the opposite sign of the main effect.
   Three conclusions arise from this analysis. First, the effect of cultural proximity be-
tween members of a group exhibits substantial heterogeneity across group definitions.
Cultural proximity has a very large effect on transactions when occurring between mem-
bers of a minority religion, or between members of the same backward caste (SC/ST). In
contrast, when Hindus are considered as a single group, the effect of cultural proximity
on borrowing is weak and does not affect transaction outcomes.
   Second, much of this heterogeneity is driven by the coarseness of the grouping. Esti-
mations based on broad group classifications that collect individuals with distinct cultural
backgrounds can fail to capture the existence of in-group preferential treatment even when
it is present in smaller partitions of the group. There are strong in-group effects once we
look at more homogeneous groups within the Hindu religion, based on government sanc-
tioned caste classifications. We show in the Appendix tables A.4 and A.5 that the same
occurs for General Class borrowers. The in-group effect on total credit for General Class
borrowers is 4% when considered as a single group, but it is much higher once General
Class borrowers are partitioned into more homogeneous groups based on Varna member-
ship (e.g. 17.4% for Brahmins).



                                            32
    Finally, there is a negative correlation between the magnitude of the in-group effect
and group size in the population, holding group definition constant. Although there are
many potential interpretations for this equilibrium relationship, there are explanations
consistent with the existence of information advantages for in-group loans. One potential
explanation is that the screening advantage of an in-group officer relative to an out-group
one diminishes with the officers’ exposure to the specific cultural traits of other groups.
For example, Hindu officers are more likely to be exposed to the cultural traits of Muslims
in West Bengal (over 25% Muslim) than in Punjab (1.5% Muslim). As a result, it is likely
that the relative advantage of Muslim officers in screening Muslim borrowers is larger
in the latter case, consistent with our findings. Explanations related to enforcement
and search costs are also consistent with these patterns. For example, Muslim officers
may have an advantage in tracking down and censuring Muslim borrowers that default
(relative to Hindu officers), but this advantage may diminish if relative the size of the
Muslim population is large. (Although this enforcement-based explanation is possible
in theory, it requires that in-group officers have an advantage in direct enforcement, a
mechanism that is at odds with some of our findings.)



7     Conclusion

In this paper, we have measured the extent of differential treatment in the loan market
of those with a shared cultural background. Our empirical context provides a near-
ideal setting for assessing differential in-group treatment: since we have data on both
lender and borrower group affiliations, we may distinguish between own-group preferences
versus differential treatment of minorities. Further, exogenous officer rotation allows us to
identify in-group preferences from changes in officer branch assignments. Finally, since we
focus on credit markets we may distinguish between explanations based on information,
enforcement, and collusion by analyzing loan outcomes. Overall, our findings indicate
that better screening and enforcement explain in-group preferential treatment.



                                             33
   Our study has a number of implications for theories of discrimination as well as eco-
nomic policy. First, we note that the preferential treatment we uncover can itself per-
petuate income inequality among minorities. In our context, 74.4% of the officers belong
to the General Class category. This implies that the probability that a backward caste
borrower (SC, ST, or OBC) will face unfavorable loan conditions is nearly 75%, purely
for reasons of cultural affiliation.
   Further, our findings suggest one possible mechanism through which statistical dis-
crimination against minorities can arise. Minorities will be infrequently “matched” with
a loan officer of their own group and hence have inferior loan outcomes on average. As a
result lenders may form what are ultimately self-confirmatory beliefs about the creditwor-
thiness of minorities if they rely on past average group performance to generate lending
rules (Kim and Loury, 2009).
   Finally, our findings have several policy implications. In the Indian context, targeted
reservation policies that impose a larger proportion of backward caste officers in regions
with a high concentration of backward caste borrowers may improve efficiency and reduce
inequality of loan allocation. The reason, however, is different than the preference-based
rationales for political reservations (see, for example, Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004).
Our analysis suggests that reservations may improve contracting outcomes because they
reduce information asymmetries between bureaucrats and their communities. Further,
policies aimed at reducing cultural differences across groups - for example, by teaching
a common language - may lead to improvements in cross-group contracting. However,
further research is required to identify which dimensions of cultural heterogeneity have a
first-order effect on reducing the ability to exchange information across group boundaries.




References
 [1] Agarwal, Sumit and Robert Hauswald, 2010, “Distance and Private Information in
     Lending,” Review of Financial Studies, 23(7), pages 2757-2788.



                                            34
 [2] Aleem, Irfan, 1990, “Imperfect Information, Screening, and the Costs of Informal
     Lending: A Study of a Rural Credit Market in Pakistan,” The World Bank Economic
     Review, 4(3), pages 329-349.

 [3] Ayres, Ian and Peter Siegelman, 1995, “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargain-
     ing for a New Car,” The American Economic Review, 85(3), pages 304-21.

 [4] Banerjee, Abhijit, Marianne Bertrand, Saugato Datta, and Sendhil Mullainathan,
     2009, “Labor market discrimination in Delhi: Evidence from a field experiment,”
     Journal of Comparative Economics, 37(1), pages 14-27.

 [5] Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo, 2010, “Giving Credit Where It Is Due,” Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, 24(3), pages 61-80.

 [6] Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole and Esther Duflo, 2004, “Banking Reform in India,”
     India Policy Forum, vol. 1, pages 277-302.

 [7] Banerjee, Abhijit, and Kaivan Munshi, 2004, “How Efficiently is Capital Allocated?
     Evidence from the Knitted Garment Industry in Tiripur,” Review of Economic Stud-
     ies, 71, pages 19-42.

 [8] Becker, Gary, [1957] 1971, “The Economics of Discrimination,” 2nd ed. Chicago:
     Univ. Chicago Press.

 [9] Becker, Gary (1996), “Preferences and Values,” in Becker Gary (ed.), Accounting for
     Taste, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.

[10] Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul, 2009, “Social Connections and
     Incentives in the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data,” Econometrica, 77(4),
     pages 1047-94.

[11] Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul, 2005, “Social Preferences and
     the Response to Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 120(3), pages 917-62.

[12] Berger, Allen, Leora Klapper and Gregory Udell, 2001, “The Ability of Banks to Lend
     to Informationally Opaque Small Businesses,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25,
     pages 2127-2167.

[13] Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004, “Are Emily and Greg More
     Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Dis-
     crimination,” American Economic Review, 94(4), pages 991-1013.

[14] Beteille, Andre, 1981, The backward classes and the new social order, Oxford Uni-
     versity Press, Delhi.



                                          35
[15] Beteille, Andre, 1992, The backward classes in contemporary India Delhi, Oxford
     University Press.

[16] Beteille, Andre, 1996, Caste, class and power. Changing patterns of stratification in
     a Tanjore village, Oxford University Press, (2nd edn).

[17] Bharat Matrimony. India Matrimonials. http://www.bharatmatrimony.com

[18] Bindu.    Kapu     surname     and    gotralu.    Kapu    sangam              forum.
     Last    modified   April   29,     2009.    Accessed   June    20,              2010.
     http://www.kapusangam.com/forum/index.php?topic=25.0.

[19] Blanchflower, David G., Levine, Phillip B. and David J. Zimmerman, 2003, “Dis-
     crimination in the Small-Business Credit Market,” The Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 85(4), pages 930-943.

[20] Buhler, G., 1886, “Sacred Books of the East: The Laws of Manus,” (Vol. XXV).

[21] Burchardi, Konrad B. and Tarek A. Hassan, 2010, “The Economic Impact of Social
     Ties: Evidence from German Reunification,” Chicago Booth Working Paper.

[22] Chandigarhiya, posting to Khatri Surnames List,             UNP, Feb 10,          2010.
     http://www.unp.co.in/f16/khatri-surnames-68440/

[23] Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo, 2004, “Women as Policy Makers:
     Evidence from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India,” Econometrica, 72(5),
     pages 1409-1443.

[24] Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, “The Small World
     of Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 116(5), pages 951-979.

[25] Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2010, “Sell Side School
     Ties,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

[26] Cornell, Bradford, and Ivo Welch, 1996, “Culture, Information, and Screening Dis-
     crimination,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3), pages 542-571.

[27] Dahiya, B.S. Jats, the ancient rulers, a clan study. New Delhi: Sterling, 1980.

[28] Dudhane, V.P., 1996, “Maratha Clans.” Last modified Oct 19, 2007. Accessed June
     20, 2010. http://bluwiki.com/go/96 Maratha Clans.

[29] Engelberg, Joey, Pengjie Gao and Chris Parsons, 2011, “Friends with Money,” forth-
     coming, Journal of Financial Economics.

[30] Fafchamps, Marcel, 2000, “Ethnicity and credit in African manufacturing,” Journal
     of Development Economics, 61(1), pages 205-235.

                                           36
[31] Field, Erica, Matthew Levinson, Rohini Pande, Sujata Visaria, 2008, “Segregation,
     Rent Control, and Riots: The Economics of Religious Conflict in an Indian City,”
     American Economic Review P&P, 98(2), pages 505-510.

[32] Fisman, Raymond J., 2003, “Ethnic Ties and the Provision of Credit: Relationship-
     Level Evidence from African Firms,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and
     Policy, Berkeley Electronic Press, 1(1).

[33] Fryer, Roland and Loury, Glenn, 2005, “Affirmative action in winner-take-all mar-
     kets,” Journal of Economic Inequality, 3(3), pages 263-280.

[34] Fuller, C.J., 1992, The camphor flame. Popular Hinduism and society in India,
     Princeton, Princeton University Press.

[35] Goldin, Claudia, Rouse, Cecilia, 2000. “Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of
     blind auditions on female musicians,” American Economic Review, 90(4), pages 715-
     741.

[36] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2009, “Cultural Biases in Economic
     Exchange?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), pages 1095-1131.

[37] Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun and Seoyoung Kim, 2009, “It Pays to Have Friends,” Journal
     of Financial Economics, 93(1), pages 138-158.

[38] Jackson, Kirabo and Henry Schneider, 2011, “Do Social Connections Reduce Moral
     Hazard? Evidence from the New York City Taxi Industry,” American Economic
     Journal: Applied Economics, 3(July), pages 244-267.

[39] Jeevan Sathi. Matrimonials. http://www.jeevansathi.com. Accessed June 24, 2010.

[40] Kamat, V. A List of Brahmin Communities. The Brahmins. Last modified Jan 4
     2011. http://www.kamat.com/kalranga/people/brahmins/list.htm.

[41] Kaul, A.. Kashmiri Surnames Database. Kashmir Pundit Surnames. Accessed June
     23, 2010. http://kauls.net/surnames/

[42] Khare, R.S 1984, The untouchable as himself. Ideology, identity and pragmatism
     among the Lucknow Chamars, Cambridge,Cambridge University Press.

[43] Kofi Charles, Kerwin and Guryan, Jonathan, 2008, “Prejudice and Wages: An Em-
     pirical Assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 116(5), pages 773-809.

[44] Kolenda, Pauline 1983, Caste, cult and hierarchy. Essays on the culture of India,
     New Delhi, Manohar.




                                           37
[45] Kolenda, Pauline, 1986, Caste in India since Independence in D. K. Basu and R.
     Sissons (eds.), Social and economic development in India Delhi: Sage Publications,
     pages 106-28.

[46] Ladd, Helen F, 1998, “Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending,” Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, 12(2), pages 41-62.

[47] Lerner, Josh and Ulrike Malmedier, 2011, “With a Little Help from My (Random)
     Friends: Success and Failure in Post-Business School Entrepreneurship,” Manuscript,
     Harvard University and U.C. Berkeley.

[48] List, John A., 2004, “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace:
     Evidence From the Field,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), pages 49-89.

[49] Maganti,     V.,       “Brahmins”.    Accessed            June      25,         2010.
     http://www.maganti.org/PDFdocs/brahmins.pdf

[50] Maheshwarisamaj. Maheshwari Samaj- Khap. Accessed                June     23,   2010.
     http://www.maheshwarisamaj.com/origin/khap.aspx

[51] Marathas.    Kshatriyas    and     Jainism.    Accessed      June       25,     2010.
     http://marathas.tripod.com/kshatrijainism.html

[52] Mian, Atif, 2006, “Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor
     Economies,” Journal of Finance, 61(3), pages 1465-1505.

[53] Mohanty, P.K., 2004,Encyclopaedia of primitive tribes in India, Volume 2, Kalpaz.

[54] NCBC, Central list of OBCs. Accessed June 20, 2010, http://ncbc.nic.in/backward-
     classes/index.html.

[55] Norman, Peter, 2003, “Statistical Discrimination and Efficiency,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, 70(3), pages 615-627.

[56] Parry, Jonathan, 1980, “Ghosts, greed and sin: The occupational identity of the
     Benares funeral priests,” Man, 15(1), pages 88-111.

[57] Parsons, Christopher, Johan Sulaeman, Michael Yates and Daniel Hamermesh, 2011,
     “Strike Three: Discrimination, Incentives, and Evaluation,” American Economic Re-
     view, 101(4), pages 1410-1435.

[58] Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Lending Relation-
     ships: Evidence from Small Business Data,” Journal of Finance, 49(1), pages 3-37.

[59] Phelps, E., 1972, “The statistical theory of racism and sexism,” American Economic
     Review, No. 62, pages 659-661.



                                          38
[60] Pope, Devin G., and Justin R. Sydnor, 2010, “What’s in a Picture? Evidence of
     Discrimination from Prosper.com,” Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

[61] Schoar, Antoinette, Raj Kamal Iyer and Sandya Kumar, 2008, “Importance of Ethnic
     Networks for Business Transactions of the Small Enterprises,” Institute for Financial
     Management and Research Small Enterprise Finance Centre Working Paper.

[62] Shue, Kelly, 2011, “Executive Networks and Firm Policies: Evidence from the Ran-
     dom Assignment of MBA Peers,” Chicago Booth Working Paper.

[63] Singh, K.S., Lavanta, B.K., Samanta, D.K., Mandal, S.K., and Vyas, N.N., 1998,
     People of India-Rajasthan, Popular Prakashan, Part I Volume XXXVIII .

[64] Singh, K.S and Bhanu, B.V., 2004, People of India-Maharashtra, Popular Prakashan,
     Part II Volume XXX.

[65] Singh, K.S. and Lal, R.B., 2003, People of India-Gujarat, Popular Prakashan, Part I
     Volume XXII.

[66] Stein, Jeremy C., 2002, “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentral-
     ized versus Hierarchical Firms,” Journal of Finance, 57(5), pages 1891-1921.

[67] Surfindia. Agarwal Caste Agarwal Matrimonials. Accessed June 20,               2010.
     http://www.surfindia.com/matrimonials/agarwal.html.

[68] Tajfel, H. (1982). Social identity and intergroup relations. Cambridge, England: Cam-
     bridge University Press.




                                           39
       Figure 1: Geographical Distribution of Branches, Weighted by Total Lending




The centers of the circles indicate the location of the branches. The area represents the total amount of lending in the
branch in 2002.




                                                          40
                 Figure 2: Average (Relative) Debt by Time since Officer Change


                           (a) Borrowers that Transition from Out-Group to In-Group
                           Officer, Relative to Borrowers that Transition from Out-
                           Group to Out-Group Officer
                                                               upees)       2 500
                                                                            2,500

                                                                            2 000
                                                                            2,000
                                                 nce (x110000 Ru




                                                                            1 500
                                                                            1,500

                                                                            1 000
                                                                            1,000
                                         Diffferen




                                                                              500
                             A age Deebt D




                                                                                0
                                                                                     -6
                                                                                          -5
                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                     -3
                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                            6
                             Avera




                                                                             -500

                                                                            -1,000
                                                                                                    Quarters since Officer Change



                           (b) Borrowers that Transition from In-Group to Out-Group
                           Officer, Relative to Borrowers that Transition from In-Group
                           to In-Group Officer
                                                                            4,000
                                                                            4 000
                                                                  upeees)




                                                                            2,000
                                           Diffferencee (x110000 Ru




                                                                                0
                                                                                     -6
                                                                                          -5
                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                     -3
                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                     -
                                                                                          -
                                                                                               -
                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                               -




                                                                            -2,000
                                                                             2 000
                             A ragee Deebt D




                                                                            -4,000


                                                                            -6,000
                                                                             6 000
                             Aver




                                                                            -8,000
                                                                                                    Quarters since Officer Change


The horizontal axis measures time, in quarters, since the officer transition (0 represent the first quarter of the new officer).
The vertical axis measures the average debt difference calculated based on a classification of borrowers and officers into
five minority religions and four government sanctioned castes (conditional on Hindu). The dashed lines indicate the 95%
confidence interval of the mean differences by quarter.




                                                                                                          41
                    Figure 3: Intensive and Extensive Margin Effect Dynamics


                                                      (a) Effect of Cultural Proximity on Total Credit

                                                           0.30

                            Estimated in-group effect on

                                                           0.20
                                  ln(Total Debt)




                                                           0.10




                                                           0.00
                                                                   0   1   2   3    4    5    6    7    8   9    10 11 12
                                                                           Quarters since Officer Arrived in Branch




                           (b) Effect of Cultural Proximity on Number of Borrowers

                                                           0.15
                            Estimated in-group effect on




                                                           0.10
                                  ln(Total Debt)




                                                           0.05



                                                           0.00
                                                                   0   1   2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9   10 11 12


                                                           -0.05
                                                                           Quarters since Officer Arrived in Branch




The horizontal axis measures time, in quarters, since the officer arrived in the branch (0 represent the first quarter of the
new officer). The vertical axis plots the point estimates and 95% confidence interval of the estimated in-group effect by
tenure of the officer in the branch (using specification (1) augmented with interactions between SameGroup and a set of
indicator variables for the time of the officer in the branch).




                                                                                        42
 Table 1: Borrower and Head Officer Composition, by Religion and Caste
Group refers to the religion and caste conditional on Hindu religion the borrower belongs to. There
are nine groups: five minority religions and, conditional on Hindu religion, four government sanctioned
castes.

                                                 Borrowers (%)     Head Officers (%)

                                         Panel 1: by Religion
                  Hindu                              89.36               93.79
                  Muslim                              6.33                1.84
                  Christian                           1.81                2.06
                  Sikh                                1.95               1.76
                  Parsi                               0.13                0.05
                  Buddhist                            0.19               0.25
                  Other                               0.23                0.25

                                      Panel 2: by Official Caste
                  General                            66.66               74.31
                  SC                                 10.67               15.68
                  ST                                  6.02                5.12
                  OBC                                16.64                4.89

                  Panel 3: by Varna
                  Brahmin                             18.28              23.01
                  Kshatriya                           60.52              43.43
                  Vaishya                             6.59               11.67
                  Kshatriya/Brahmin                   1.72               10.77
                  Kshatriya/Brahmin/Vaishya           6.76                3.48
                  Kshatriya/Vaishya                   0.41                1.29
                  Other                               5.72                6.35




                                                 43
                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics
    Panel 1 presents statistics of the panel aggregated at the branch-quarter level. Panel 2 presents statistics
    of the panel aggregated at the branch-quarter-group level, where group refers to the religion and caste
    conditional on Hindu religion the borrower belongs to (there are nine groups: five minority religions
    and, conditional on Hindu religion, four government sanctioned castes). We report, the mean, standard
    deviation, 1st percentile, median and 99th percentile for all variables.


                                                                    Mean      Std. Dev.     p1       p50      p99

                                  Panel 1. Branch-Quarter Statistics, N = 46,753
Total Credit (millions of rupees)                                  19.25      20.14         1.14    13.52    101.55
# of Borrowers                                                     416.9      362.0         22.0    334.0    1,777.0
# of Different Borrower Religions                                   3.47       0.72         1.00    4.00       4.00
# of Different Borrower Castes                                      3.25       1.18         1.00    3.00       6.00
# of Different Borrower Groups (5 minority religions, 4 castes)     5.67       1.49         2.00     6.00     9.00
# of Loan Officers (Including Head Officer)                         3.53       4.20         0.00    2.00      16.00
# of Clerks                                                         6.41       7.12         0.00    4.00      31.00

                             Panel 2. Group-Branch-Quarter Statistics, N = 339,366
Sum Debt (1,000s of rupees)                                     2006.0     7068.0           0.0      42.0   31307.0
Std. Dev. Debt (1,000s of rupees)                                 47.0       121.0          0.0      10.0    395.0
IQR Debt (1,000s of rupees)                                       31.0      131.0           0.0       0.0    380.0
Dummy = 1 if Debt > 0                                            0.578         0             0         1        1
Sum Collateral (1,000s of rupees)                               12,267     792,107            0      100    113,062
Std. Dev. Collateral (1,000s of rupees)                           745       70,603            0       18      1,163
IQR Collateral (1,000s of rupees)                                82.00     1100.00         0.00      0.00    865.00
# of Borrowers                                                   43.40     127.00          0.00      2.00    544.00
Fraction of Borrowers with Over 60 Days Late                     0.081      0.172          0.000    0.000    1.000
Fraction of Debt with Over 60 Days Late                          0.020      0.116          0.000    0.000    1.000
SameGroup                                                        0.11        0.31           0.00     0.00     1.00




                                                        44
                   Table 3: Effect of Cultural Proximity on Credit: LATE and ATE Bounds
                 In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on the log debt amount (column 1), log
                 number of borrowers (column 4) using specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter,
                 where group is defined by combining religion and caste based measures of cultural proximity (five minority
                 religions and four government designated castes conditional on Hindu religion). The variable SameGroup
                 is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are of the same group. Standard errors
                 are clustered at the branch level. Column 7 shows the a linear probability model estimate of the effect
                 of proximity on receiving any credit. Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6, presents the upper and lower bounds of the
                 local average treatment effect, estimated as in Lee (2009): specification (1) is estimated after trimming
                 the upper and lower 1.5 percentiles (estimated treatment effect on the linear probability model) of the
                 observations in the treatment group (SameGroup = 1) by the dependent variable. * significant at 10%;
                 ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable                        ln(Total Debt)                          ln(# of Borrowers)                Dummy = 1 if
                                                                                                                         Total Debt > 0
     Trim Percentile                 None           1.5           98.5          None           1.5          98.5             None
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)               (7)

     SameGroup                     0.1856***     0.1826***      0.2293***     0.0619***    0.0596***    0.0785***             0.0155***
                                    (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.019)       (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)               (0.004)
     Branch-Group Fixed Effects       Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes                   Yes
     Quarter Dummies                  Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes                   Yes




45
     Observations                   225,543       224,900        224,900       234,451      233,806      233,923               385,293
     R-squared                       0.883         0.881          0.884         0.947        0.946        0.947                 0.809
                                              Table 4: Identification Test: Saturated Specifications
                               In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on lending outcomes using the specifica-
                               tion (1) augmented with branch-quarter, group-quarter, State-group-quarter and district-group-quarter
                               dummies. The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by combining religion
                               and caste based measures of cultural proximity. The variable SameGroup is an indicator denoting that
                               borrowers and the branch manager are of the same group. Standard errors are clustered at the branch
                               level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable                         ln(Total Debt)                                     ln(# of Borrowers)                                  Dummy = 1 if Total Debt > 0
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)           (10)       (11)           (12)

     SameGroup                 0.1711***   0.1734***     0.1809***    0.1800***     0.0580***    0.0603***    0.0612***     0.0556***    0.0148***        0.0140***   0.0129***      0.0116**
                                (0.021)     (0.021)       (0.019)      (0.022)       (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.004)          (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.005)
     Demeaned: Branch-Group       Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes            Yes
     Dummies:
      Branch-Quarter             Yes           Yes                                     Yes          Yes                                       Yes            Yes
      Group-Quarter                            Yes                                                  Yes                                                      Yes
      State-Group-Quarter                                   Yes                                                   Yes                                                    Yes
      District-Group-Quarter                                             Yes                                                   Yes                                                     Yes
     Observations               225,543      225,543      220,900      221,187       234,451      234,451       229,584      229,885         385,293       385,293     375,927       376,377
     R-squared                   0.317        0.323        0.115        0.339         0.415        0.432         0.169        0.390           0.143         0.147       0.032         0.200




46
Table 5: Robustness Test: Alternate Group Definition Based on Surnames (Varnas)
    In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on loan outcomes using specification (1).
    The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by Varna, the caste system that
    was prevalent in ancient India. Individuals are assigned to Varnas using a surname-matching algorithm.
    Individuals classified by the algorithm into more than one Varna are allocated to three mixed groups:
    Kshatriya-Brahmin, Kshatriya-Brahmin-Vaishya, and Kshatriyas-Vaishyas. Individuals that are not in
    the General Class category are excluded, because the algorithm cannot correctly identify individuals
    from the Shudra Varna. The variable SameGroup is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch
    manager are of the same group. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%;
    ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


             Dependent Variable              ln(Total Debt)     ln(# of Borrowers)     Dummy = 1 if
                                                                                       Total Debt > 0
                                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)

             SameGroup (Varna)                  0.1407***             0.0231              0.0226**
                                                 (0.035)              (0.015)              (0.009)
             Branch-Group Fixed Effects             Yes                 Yes                  Yes
             Quarter Dummies                        Yes                 Yes                  Yes
             Observations                         67,202              70,760              108,947
             R-squared                             0.863               0.950                0.831




                                                         47
Table 6: Intensive and Extensive Margins: Existing and First Time Borrowers
 In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on lending patterns (specification (1))
 separately for existing borrowers (Panel 1) and first time borrowers (Panel 2). Existing borrowers are
 those that obtained credit at any time in our sample prior to the arrival of the current officer in charge of
 the branch. First time borrowers receive their first credit from the Bank under the current officer. The
 unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by combining religion and caste based
 measures of cultural proximity. The variable SameGroup is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the
 branch manager are of the same group. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant
 at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


        Dependent Variable               ln(Total Debt)     ln(# of Borrowers)       Dummy = 1 if
                                                                                     Total Debt > 0
                                               (1)                  (2)                    (3)

           Panel 1. Borrowers that had obtained Credit from Bank prior to Officer’s Arrival
        SameGroup                       0.1158***            0.0029             0.0162***
                                         (0.026)            (0.017)               (0.005)
        Branch-Group Fixed Effects         Yes                 Yes                  Yes
        Quarter Dummies                    Yes                 Yes                  Yes
        Observations                     196,928            209,507               397,923
        R-squared                         0.828               0.905                0.820

        Panel 2. Borrowers that Obtain Bank Credit for the First Time with the Current Officer
        SameGroup                       0.1693***          0.1327***              0.0107
                                         (0.030)             (0.023)             (0.007)
        Branch-Group Fixed Effects         Yes                 Yes                  Yes
        Quarter Dummies                    Yes                 Yes                  Yes
        Observations                     184,386             190,128             397,035
        R-squared                         0.786               0.841                0.732




                                                     48
                                  Table 7: Effect of Cultural Proximity on Loan Repayment
                       In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on loan repayment using specification
                       (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by combining religion and
                       caste based measures of cultural proximity. Repayment is measured as the fraction of loans (columns 1
                       through 3) and fraction of debt (columns 4 through 6) that is more than 60 days overdue. The variable
                       SameGroup is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are of the same group.
                       Average repayment performance is included as the dependent variable contemporaneously in columns 1
                       and 4, and with a one-year lead in the rest. Columns 5 and 6 include the one year lead of the SameGroup
                       variable in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%; **
                       significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


     Dependent Variable                       Fraction of Borrowers Late Over 60 Days                 Fraction of Debt Late Over 60 Days
                                            Contemporaneous          One Year Forward            Contemporaneous          One Year Forward
                                                  (1)                 (2)         (3)                  (4)                 (5)         (6)

                                                               Panel 1. All Borrowers
     SameGroup                                 -0.0057***          -0.0097***    -0.0080**           -0.0029***           -0.0054***   -0.0055***
                                                 (0.002)             (0.003)      (0.003)              (0.001)              (0.001)      (0.002)
     SameGroup One Year Forward                                                   -0.0042                                                -0.0008
                                                                                  (0.003)                                                (0.001)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies              Yes                 Yes          Yes                  Yes                 Yes           Yes
     Observations                                225,543             210,906      167,733              225,543             210,906       167,733




49
     R-squared                                    0.339               0.558        0.586                0.359               0.580         0.610

                         Panel 2. Subsample of Borrowers that had obtained Credit from Bank prior to Officer’s Arrival
     SameGroup                               -0.0041*            -0.0066*     -0.0046           -0.0026**              -0.0047**       -0.0051**
                                              (0.002)             (0.004)     (0.004)            (0.001)                (0.002)         (0.002)
     SameGroup One Year Forward                                               -0.0045                                                   -0.0015
                                                                              (0.004)                                                   (0.002)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies           Yes                 Yes         Yes                Yes                    Yes             Yes
     Observations                            209,114              194,577     144,950            196,928                184,581         144,950
     R-squared                                 0.377               0.586       0.622              0.415                  0.619           0.646

                  Panel 3. Subsample of Borrowers that Obtain Credit from the Bank for the First Time with the Current Officer
     SameGroup                                -0.0032*           -0.0091**     -0.0080*            -0.0012            -0.0045*          -0.0040
                                               (0.002)            (0.004)       (0.004)            (0.001)             (0.003)          (0.003)
     SameGroup One Year Forward                                                 -0.0033                                                 -0.0025
                                                                                (0.004)                                                 (0.002)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies
     Observations                             134,227             134,227      132,788             134,227             134,227          132,788
     R-squared                                  0.322              0.537         0.538              0.330               0.545            0.546
               Table 8: Effect of Cultural Proximity on the Dispersion of Lending and Collateral
                   In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on the log standard deviation and inter-
                   quartile range of debt (columns 1 and 2), and the log total, standard deviation, and inter-quartile range
                   of collateral (columns 3, 4 and 5) using specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter,
                   where group is defined by combining religion and caste based measures of cultural proximity (five minority
                   religions and four government designated castes conditional on Hindu religion). The variable SameGroup
                   is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are of the same group. Standard errors
                   are clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable                      ln(Total Collateral)    ln(Average Collateral/Loan)        ln(Std. Dev. Debt)       ln(IQR Debt)
                                                     (1)                         (2)                            (3)                   (4)

                                                              Panel 1. All Borrowers
     SameGroup                                    0.1364***                   -0.0474***                     0.1832***            0.0879***
                                                   (0.019)                      (0.012)                       (0.018)              (0.016)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies                Yes                          Yes                           Yes                  Yes
     Observations                                  232,126                      223,621                       197,094              195,321
     R-squared                                      0.916                        0.583                         0.712                0.668

                      Panel 2. Subsample of Borrowers that had obtained Credit from Bank prior to Officer’s Arrival
     SameGroup                                0.0739***                 -0.0493***                    0.1597***                   0.0722***
                                                (0.024)                   (0.015)                       (0.022)                    (0.021)




50
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies             Yes                       Yes                           Yes                        Yes
     Observations                              207,412                    195,360                      170,212                     165,297
     R-squared                                   0.889                     0.584                         0.709                      0.642

               Panel 3. Subsample of Borrowers that Obtain Credit from the Bank for the First Time with the Current Officer
     SameGroup                                  0.1859***                   0.0144                     0.1197***             0.0298
                                                 (0.033)                   (0.014)                      (0.024)             (0.022)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies              Yes                       Yes                          Yes                 Yes
     Observations                                187,396                   182,005                      155,096             154,258
     R-squared                                    0.808                     0.499                        0.640               0.586
                                Table 9: Heterogeneity: Branch Density in District and Branch Size
                           In this table we report the heterogeneity of the estimated effect of cultural proximity on lending outcomes
                           using specification (1) across districts of different branch density, defined as the number of branches per
                           1,000 inhabitants (panel 1), and by number of officers in the branch (panel 2). The unit of analysis is a
                           branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by combining religion and caste based measures of cultural
                           proximity. The variable SameGroup is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are
                           of the same group. Its interactions with an indicator for whether the branch is located in a district with
                           the second, third or fourth quartiles of branch density (panel 1), and with two dummies for whether the
                           branch has two officers, and more than two officers (panel 2). Standard errors are clustered at the branch
                           level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable                                      ln(Total Debt)    ln(# of Borrowers)     Dummy = 1 if       ln(IQR Debt)     Fraction of Debt
                                                                                                      Total Debt > 0                     Late Over 60 Days
                                                                   (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)

                                    Panel 1: Effect Heterogeneity by Branch Density in the District
     SameGroup                                                0.2239***          0.0948***                 0.0069          0.1033***        -0.0092***
                                                                (0.049)           (0.034)                 (0.009)           (0.036)           (0.003)
     SameGroup ×                                                -0.0582           -0.0238                  0.0187           -0.0542            0.0057
     Branches per 1000 inhabitant in District = quartile 2      (0.073)           (0.049)                 (0.015)           (0.051)           (0.004)
     SameGroup ×                                                -0.0346           -0.0265                  0.0050           -0.0363          0.0086***
     Branches per 1000 inhabitant in District = quartile 3      (0.060)           (0.042)                 (0.011)           (0.047)           (0.003)




51
     SameGroup ×                                                -0.0436           -0.0452                  0.0082           -0.0024          0.0078**
     Branches per 1000 inhabitant in District = quartile 4      (0.059)           (0.040)                 (0.012)           (0.046)           (0.003)
     Branch-Group Fixed Effects                                   Yes               Yes                      Yes              Yes                Yes
     District Quartile-Quarter Dummies                            Yes               Yes                      Yes              Yes                Yes
     Observations                                               214,436           222,508                 362,736           185,819           214,436
     R-squared                                                   0.884             0.947                    0.811            0.671              0.360

                                 Panel 2: Effect Heterogeneity by Number of Officers in the Branch
     SameGroup                                               0.2300***          0.0600**           0.0252***               0.1309***        -0.0042***
                                                               (0.041)           (0.025)            (0.008)                 (0.031)           (0.002)
     SameGroup ×                                               -0.0214            0.0130            -0.0031                 -0.0390           0.0021
     # of Officers in branch = 2                               (0.052)           (0.036)            (0.012)                 (0.042)           (0.002)
     SameGroup ×                                              -0.0870*           -0.0019           -0.0197**               -0.0828**          0.0017
     # of Officers in branch > 2                               (0.050)           (0.032)            (0.010)                 (0.039)           (0.002)
     Branch-Group Fixed Effects                                  Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes               Yes
     Branch Size-Quarter Dummies                                 Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes               Yes
     Observations                                              220,600           229,110            377,248                 190,844           220,600
     R-squared                                                  0.883             0.946              0.809                   0.671             0.354
                                             Table 10: Heterogeneity by Religion, Caste, and Group Size
                                  In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity through religion (panel 1) and caste (panel
                                  2) on lending patterns using specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group
                                  is defined by religion in panel 1 (Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Parsi, and Buddhist), and by government
                                  designated caste in the subsample of Hindu borrowers in panel 2 (General Class/SC/ST/OBC). The
                                  variable SameReligion (SameCaste) is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are
                                  of the same religion (caste). The variables Hindu and Minority Religion are dummies equal to one if the
                                  borrower is of the corresponding religion. The variables SC/ST and OBC/General are dummies equal to
                                  one if the borrower belongs to the corresponding caste. OBC and General Class individuals are grouped
                                  together because these two groups are not distinguished in the 2001 India Census. Standard errors are
                                  clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable                       ln(Total Debt)               ln(# of Borrowers)               Dummy = 1 if                    ln(IQR Debt)          Fraction of Debt
                                                                                                            Total Debt > 0                                       Late Over 60 Days
                                             (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)              (5)         (6)                (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)

                                                                          Panel 1: Effect Heterogeneity by Religion
     SameReligion × Hindu                   0.0148       0.0153           -0.0183       -0.0292         0.0003      -0.0005             0.0387       0.0266      -0.0000      0.0000
                                           (0.025)      (0.032)           (0.024)       (0.033)        (0.002)      (0.003)            (0.029)       (0.036)     (0.000)     (0.000)
     SameReligion × Minority Religion     0.4307***    0.5981***         0.1497***     0.1412**       0.0643***    0.1032***          0.1927***    0.3871***    -0.0085**    -0.0076
                                           (0.066)      (0.112)           (0.041)       (0.065)        (0.015)      (0.025)            (0.055)       (0.108)     (0.004)     (0.006)
     SameReligion × Hindu                               -0.0035                         0.0190                       0.0015                          0.0238                  -0.0001




52
     × Large Minority State                             (0.049)                         (0.048)                     (0.005)                          (0.057)                 (0.000)
     SameReligion × Minority Religion                  -0.2942**                         0.0173                    -0.0711**                       -0.3331***                -0.0016
     × Large Minority State                             (0.135)                         (0.083)                     (0.030)                          (0.119)                 (0.008)
     Branch-Group Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
     Quarter Dummies                         Yes                            Yes                          Yes                              Yes                     Yes
     State-Quarter Dummies                                 Yes                            Yes                          Yes                            Yes                     Yes
     Observations                          130,849       130,849          137,130      137,130         264,372      264,372             109,507     109,507     130,849     130,849
     R-squared                              0.924         0.924            0.973         0.973          0.814         0.814              0.687       0.687       0.369       0.369

                                                   Panel 2: Effect Heterogeneity by Government Sanctioned Caste (Hindu subsample)
     SameCaste × SC/ST                    0.2514***   0.2455***        0.1066***   0.1617***      0.0241*     0.0409**       0.1123**               0.0759      -0.0074**   -0.0088**
                                           (0.060)     (0.066)          (0.038)      (0.047)      (0.013)      (0.017)        (0.056)               (0.068)      (0.003)     (0.004)
     SameCaste × OBC/General              0.0414**     0.0461*         0.0419**     0.0420**       0.0001      -0.0005        0.0040                0.0074       -0.0003     -0.0001
                                           (0.021)     (0.024)          (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.003)      (0.004)        (0.018)               (0.021)      (0.001)     (0.001)
     SameCaste × SC / ST                                0.0116                      -0.1769**                 -0.0556**                             0.1136                    0.0042
     × Large SC / ST State                             (0.141)                       (0.079)                   (0.023)                              (0.118)                  (0.005)
     SameCaste × OBC/General                           -0.0164                       -0.0066                    0.0003                              -0.0091                  -0.0008
     × Large SC / ST State                             (0.047)                       (0.037)                   (0.006)                              (0.039)                  (0.001)
     Branch-Group Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes
     Quarter Dummies                         Yes                          Yes                        Yes                        Yes                               Yes
     State-Quarter Dummies                                Yes                          Yes                        Yes                                 Yes                     Yes
     Observations                          150,250     150,250          152,719      152,719      176,248      176,248       140,633                140,633     150,250     150,250
     R-squared                              0.889        0.890           0.936        0.936        0.734         0.734         0.689                 0.689       0.334       0.335
               Table A.1: Empirical Officer Group Transition Frequencies
    In this table we report the empirical branch officer transition probabilities, by officer religion (panel 1),
    caste (panel 2), and Varna (panel 3), and the results of the χ2 test of equality between empirical and the
    theoretical transition probabilities officers are randomly allocated to branches. * significant at 10%; **
    significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


                       Panel 1: Empirical Distribution of Branch Transitions, by Religion
                                                           Fom Religion:
                      Hindu      Muslim      Christian         Sikh               Parsi           Buddist     Others
To religion:
Hindu                87.173%      1.712%        2.423%           1.454%             0.032%         0.291%     0.129%
Muslim                1.842%      0.097%        0.032%                                                        0.032%
Christian             2.003%      0.065%        0.452%                              0.032%
Sikh                  1.389%                                     0.323%             0.032%
Parsi                 0.032%
Buddist              0.194%                                                                                   0.032%
Others               0.162%                                                                                   0.065%

                        Panel 2: Empirical Distribution of Branch Transitions, by Caste
                                        From Caste:
                       SC         ST          OBC             General
To caste
SC                    3.70%        0.70%        0.73%            9.87%
ST                    0.63%        0.80%        0.35%            2.48%
OBC                  0.73%         0.31%        0.70%            3.52%
General              8.37%*        2.34%        3.73%          61.03%***

                        Panel 3: Empirical Distribution of Branch Transitions, by Varna

                                                  From Varna:
                    Brahmin      Kshatriya     Vaishya   Multiple Matches        Not Matched
To Varna:
Brahmin               3.01%        5.37%        1.55%             2.03%              5.40%
Kshatriya             5.37%        9.57%        2.76%             3.62%              9.62%
Vaishya               1.55%        2.76%        0.79%             1.04%              2.77%
Multiple Matches      2.03%        3.62%        1.04%             1.37%              3.64%
Not Matched           5.40%        9.62%        2.77%             3.64%              9.68%




                                                         53
             Table A.2: Effect of Cultural Proximity on Loan Repayment, Alternative Default Horizons
                      In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity on loan repayment using specification
                      (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by combining religion and
                      caste based measures of cultural proximity. Repayment is measured as the fraction of loans (columns 1
                      through 3) and fraction of debt (columns 4 through 6) that is more than 30 or 90 days overdue (panels
                      1 and 2 respectively). The variable SameGroup is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch
                      manager are of the same group. Average repayment performance is included as the dependent variable
                      contemporaneously in columns 1 and 4, and with a one-year lead in the rest. Columns 5 and 6 include the
                      one year lead of the SameGroup variable in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the branch
                      level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


     Dependent Variable                             Fraction of Borrowers Late                             Fraction of Debt Late
                                           Contemporaneous          One Year Forward            Contemporaneous         One Year Forward
                                                 (1)                 (2)         (3)                  (4)                (5)         (6)

                                                            Panel 1. Late Over 30 Days
     SameGroup                                -0.0057***           -0.0098***   -0.0080**           -0.0029***           -0.0054***   -0.0054***
                                                (0.002)              (0.003)     (0.003)              (0.001)              (0.001)      (0.002)
     SameGroup One Year Forward                                                  -0.0042                                                -0.0008
                                                                                 (0.003)                                                (0.001)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies             Yes                  Yes         Yes                  Yes                 Yes           Yes
     Observations                               225,543              210,906     167,733              225,543             210,906       167,733




54
     R-squared                                   0.340                0.558       0.587                0.359               0.581         0.611

                                                            Panel 2. Late Over 90 Days
     SameGroup                                -0.0057***           -0.0097***   -0.0080**           -0.0029***           -0.0054***   -0.0055***
                                                (0.002)              (0.003)     (0.003)              (0.001)              (0.001)      (0.002)
     SameGroup One Year Forward                                                  -0.0041                                                -0.0008
                                                                                 (0.003)                                                (0.001)
     Branch-Group and Quarter Dummies
     Observations                               225,543             210,906       167,733             225,543             210,906      167,733
     R-squared                                   0.339               0.558         0.586               0.359               0.580        0.610
                                          Table A.3: Heterogeneity by Religion
                In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity through religion on lending patterns
                using specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by religion
                (Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Parsi, and Buddhist). The variable SameReligion is an indicator
                denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are of the same religion. The variables Hindu, Muslim,
                Christian, Sikh, Parsi, Buddhist, and Minority Religion are dummies equal to one if the borrower is of
                the corresponding religion. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%; **
                significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable               ln(Total Debt)    ln(# of Borrowers)     Dummy = 1 if       ln(IQR Debt)      Fraction of Debt
                                                                               Total Debt > 0                      Over 60 Days Late
                                            (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)                 (5)

     SameReligion × Hindu                 0.0149              -0.0182               0.0003             0.0386            -0.0000
                                         (0.025)              (0.024)               (0.002)           (0.029)            (0.000)
     SameReligion × Muslim              0.6059***            0.1538**              0.0285**          0.2244**           -0.0193**
                                         (0.129)              (0.078)               (0.011)           (0.098)            (0.009)
     SameReligion × Christian           0.3008***            0.1079**             0.0803***          0.1907**            -0.0020
                                         (0.095)              (0.054)               (0.026)           (0.088)            (0.004)
     SameReligion × Sikh                0.3535***            0.1410*                0.0648             0.1860            -0.0055
                                         (0.127)              (0.084)               (0.040)           (0.116)            (0.005)
     SameReligion × Parsi               0.8076***              0.0286               0.1340          1.1044***            -0.0005




55
                                         (0.185)              (0.145)               (0.130)           (0.011)            (0.003)
     SameReligion × Buddhist             0.5573*              0.5312*              0.1427**           -0.0159            -0.0015
                                         (0.295)              (0.281)               (0.061)           (0.195)            (0.002)
     Branch-Religion Fixed Effects         Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes               Yes
     Quarter Dummies                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes               Yes
     Observations                        138,619             145,350               280,500            115,983            138,619
     R-squared                            0.924                0.974                 0.815              0.686             0.370
                      Table A.4: Heterogeneity by Caste, Hindu Borrower Subsample
              In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity through caste on lending patterns using
              specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by govern-
              ment designated caste, and conditioning on Hindu borrowers (General Class/SC/ST/OBC). The variable
              SameCaste is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager are of the same caste. The
              variables General Class, SC, ST, OBC, and SC/ST/OBC are dummies equal to one if the borrower be-
              longs to the corresponding caste. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant at 10%;
              ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable           ln(Total Debt)    ln(# of Borrowers)     Dummy = 1 if       ln(IQR Debt)      Fraction of Debt
                                                                           Total Debt > 0                      Over 60 Days Late
                                        (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)

     SameCaste × General              0.0404**             0.0252             0.0036**            0.0226              -0.0003
                                       (0.020)            (0.017)              (0.002)           (0.017)              (0.000)
     SameCaste × SC                  0.1883***             0.0258              0.0049           0.1009***             -0.0007
                                       (0.039)            (0.027)              (0.006)           (0.034)              (0.001)
     SameCaste × ST                   0.2500**             0.0129             0.0411*           0.2337**             -0.0075*
                                       (0.099)            (0.044)              (0.023)           (0.093)              (0.004)
     SameCaste × OBC                 0.2941***           0.2130***             0.0119             0.0371            -0.0076**
                                       (0.067)            (0.054)              (0.013)           (0.063)              (0.004)
     Branch-Caste Fixed Effects          Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes




56
     Quarter Dummies                     Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Observations                      159,761            162,350             187,000            149,678             159,761
     R-squared                          0.890              0.935                0.736              0.689               0.337
                                         Table A.5: Heterogeneity by Varna
              In this table we report the estimated effect of cultural proximity through Varna on lending patterns
              using specification (1). The unit of analysis is a branch-group-quarter, where group is defined by
              Varna, the caste system that was prevalent in ancient India. Individuals are assigned to Varnas us-
              ing a surname-matching algorithm. Individuals classified by the algorithm into more than one Varna
              are allocated to three mixed groups: Kshatriya-Brahmin, Kshatriya-Brahmin-Vaishya, and Kshatriyas-
              Vaishyas. The variable SameVarna is an indicator denoting that borrowers and the branch manager
              are of the same Varna. The variables Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, B-K (Brahmin-Kshatriya), B-K-V
              (Kshatriya-Brahmin-Vaishya), and K-V (Kshatriyas-Vaishyas) are dummies equal to one if the borrower
              belongs to the corresponding Varna. Standard errors are clustered at the branch level. * significant at
              10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     Dependent Variable           ln(Total Debt)   ln(# of Borrowers)    Dummy = 1 if       ln(IQR Debt)     Fraction of Debt
                                                                         Total Debt > 0                     Over 60 Days Late
                                        (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)

     SameVarna × Brahmin             0.1744**             0.0231             0.0256*           0.0814            -0.0091*
                                      (0.081)            (0.039)             (0.015)          (0.068)             (0.005)
     SameVarna × Kshatriya            0.0213              0.0310             -0.0028          -0.0042             0.0015
                                      (0.043)            (0.025)             (0.002)          (0.040)             (0.001)
     SameVarna × Vaishya              0.1080             -0.0053             0.0478*           0.0702             0.0015
                                      (0.136)            (0.054)             (0.025)          (0.131)             (0.009)




57
     SameVarna × B-K                0.5148***             0.0064              0.0201         0.6145***             0.0073
                                      (0.152)            (0.073)             (0.043)          (0.236)             (0.024)
     SameVarna × B-K-V              0.4229***             0.0159              0.0152         0.4887**             -0.0120
                                      (0.157)            (0.068)             (0.041)          (0.208)             (0.016)
     SameVarna × K-V                 1.3311**             0.1428             0.1863*         1.6186***            -0.0126
                                      (0.523)            (0.136)             (0.098)          (0.558)             (0.008)
     Branch-Varna Fixed Effects         Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
     Quarter Dummies                    Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
     Observations                     67,202              70,661             108,947           57,458              67,202
     R-squared                         0.864              0.950               0.831             0.668              0.404
