NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGING CURRENCY PEGS
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Martín Uribe
Working Paper 18092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18092
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Managing Currency Pegs
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 18092
May 2012
JEL No. F41
ABSTRACT
The combination of a fixed exchange rate and downward nominal wage rigidity creates a real rigidity.
In turn, this real rigidity makes the economy prone to involuntary unemployment during external
crises. This paper presents a graphical analysis of alternative policy strategies aimed at mitigating
this source of inefficiency. First- and second-best monetary and fiscal solutions are analyzed. Second-best
solutions are found to be prudential, whereas first-best solutions are not.
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu
Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu

When confronted with the current crisis in peripheral Europe, many specialists in emergingmarket macroeconomics feel that it is déjà vu all over again. An implication of this feeling
is that in order to understand the current situation in southern Europe, one should dust off
the theories of exchange-rate crises that were motivated by the economic experience under
fixed exchange rates in Latin America in the 1980s and 1990s.
We quarrel with this view. The models of the 1980s and 1990s were built around the
premise that the fixed exchange-rate regime was unsustainable in the long run, primarily
because of structural fiscal deficits. Celebrated examples of this body of work are Krugman’s
(1979) model of balance-of-payments crises and Calvo’s (1986) temporariness hypothesis. In
both of these models the emphasis is on the macroeconomic dynamics during the initial and
terminal stages of finite-lived exchange-rate pegs.
In our view, the world is currently witnessing an entirely new breed of currency pegs.
Unlike in the Latin American experience, in the European one countries joined a currency
union as part of a much larger political and economic integration program with a group
of countries that includes two of the largest and most developed economies in the globe,
namely, Germany and France. As a consequence, for many of the emerging countries that
are part of the eurozone, and for reasons that may exceed economic considerations, breaking
away from the currency union may not be a viable option.
The policy challenges arising for this new generation of peggers call for at least three pieces
of new theory. One piece is concerned with the characterization of economic fluctuations in
emerging countries with fixed exchange rate regimes that are expected to be permanent.1 In
the presence of rigidities in nominal product or factor prices, these fluctuations are bound to
be inefficient. For the combination of price rigidity and a fixed exchange rate amounts to two
nominal rigidities, and, consequently, to a real rigidity. This real rigidity motivates the need
for a second piece of new theory concerned with how to attain the first-best allocation when
1

There exists an earlier literature on permanent pegs for emerging countries known as the supply-side
hypothesis of exchange-rate-based stabilization (see Roldós, 1995; Uribe, 1997; and Lahiri, 2001). However,
the scope of this literature is limited to the initial dynamics of permanent currency pegs.

1

the central bank’s hands are tied by a currency peg. Finally, because the policy instruments
necessary to achieve the first-best allocation may not always be available to the policymaker,
the third piece of theory needed is the study of second-best policy interventions that can be
realistically implemented within a currency union.
In this paper, we summarize recent contributions of ours to these three theoretical issues
(Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011 and 2012). For pedagogical reasons, here we employ a
simple graphical approach.

1

The Theoretical Framework

Consider a small open economy that produces tradable and nontradable goods. The supply
of exportable goods, denoted T OTt qt , is exogenous and stochastic. It represents a source of
aggregate fluctuations which can be interpreted as disturbances either to the terms of trade,
denoted T OTt , or to the physical abundance of the tradable endowment, denoted qt .
Nontraded goods are produced using labor with the production function F (ht ), where F
is increasing and concave, and ht denotes labor input. Let pt ≡ PtN /PtT denote the relative
price of nontradables in terms of tradables, where PtN and PtT denote, respectively, the
domestic-currency prices of nontraded and traded goods. We assume that the law of one
price holds for traded goods and that the foreign-currency price of traded goods is constant
and normalized to unity. Then, we have that PtT = Et , where Et denotes the nominal
exchange rate, defined as the domestic-currency price of foreign currency.
The labor cost faced by the firm, in terms of tradables, is given by wt ≡ Wt /Et , where Wt
denotes the nominal wage rate. The firm is a price taker in product and factor markets. It
chooses the amount of labor input to maximize profits, given by, pt F (ht )−wt ht , taking pt and
wt as given. The first-order optimality condition of the firm’s profit maximization problem
is pt =

Wt /Et
.
F 0 (ht )

Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of this optimality condition in

the space (ht , pt ). An increase in the relative price of nontradables raises the value of the

2

Figure 1: The Supply Schedule

p

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

h

marginal product of labor, inducing firms to expand employment.
Suppose now that the government devalues the domestic currency by increasing the
nominal exchange rate from E0 to E1 > E0 . Suppose also that the nominal wage is held
fixed at W0 . Then, firms experience a decline in the real cost of labor from W0 /E0 to W0 /E1 ,
which gives them an incentive to expand employment for any given level of the relative price
pt . Figure 2 illustrates this effect with a dashed line. In response to the devaluation , the
supply schedule shifts down and to the right.
The desired aggregate absorption of nontradables, denoted cN
t , can be derived from the
household’s optimization problem. It is summarized by the expression cN
t = A(pt ; rt , dt , T OTt qt , . . . ),
where rt and dt denote, respectively, the country’s interest rate and external debt. The function A is decreasing in pt , reflecting substitutability between tradable and nontradable goods
in consumption. Any factor that changes the household’s perceived permanent income or
intertemporal price of consumption will in general affect the desired consumption of nontradables. In particular, the demand for nontradables is decreasing in rt (assuming that the
country is a net external debtor) and in dt and increasing in T OTt qt . Combining this demand
function with the market clearing condition in the nontraded sector, given by cN
t = F (ht ),
3

Figure 2: A Devaluation Shifts The Supply Schedule Down and To the Right

p

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

W0 /E1
F 0 (h)

h
(E1 > E0 )

we obtain the relationship ht = D(pt ; rt , dt , T OTt qt , . . . ), where, like A, the function D is
decreasing in pt , rt , and dt , and increasing in T OTt qt . We will refer to D, somewhat improperly, as the demand schedule. Figure 3 displays a downward sloping locus, indicating that,
as the relative price of nontradables increases, households reduce their demand for this type
of goods. In turn, the diminished absorption of nontradables requires fewer hours of work
to be produced.
Suppose now that the country experiences an increase in the interest rate charged by
foreign lenders from r0 to r1 > r0 . Under our maintained assumption that the country is a
net external debtor, the increase in the country premium causes the permanent income of
households to fall. Because consumers feel poorer, they cut their demand for nontradables.
As a result, the demand schedule shifts down and to the left as shown with a dashed line in
figure 4.
The central friction in the present model is downward nominal wage rigidity. Specifically,
we assume that Wt ≥ γWt−1 , where γ ≥ 0 is a parameter measuring the degree of downward
wage rigidity. The higher is γ, the higher is the downward rigidity in nominal wages. In

4

Figure 3: The Demand Schedule

p

D(p; r0 , . . .)

h

Figure 4: An Increase in the Interest Rate Shifts the Demand Schedule Down

p

D(p; r0 , . . .)

D(p; r1 , . . .)

h
r1 > r0

5

Figure 5: Adjustment Under Optimal Exchange-Rate Policy
p

D(p; r0 , . . .)

D(p; r1 , . . .)
p0
pbust

A

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

C

W0 /E1
F 0 (h)

B

p1

hbust

h̄

h

Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011), we present empirical evidence suggesting that nominal
wages are downwardly rigid and that, for business-cycle analysis, a conservative value for γ
is 0.99 when the length of a period is one quarter. We assume that workers supply h̄ > 0 units
of labor inelastically each period. However, worker will sometimes find that they cannot sell
all of the h̄ hours and therefore in those periods, they will be involuntarily underemployed.
Thus, we have that the constraint ht ≤ h̄ must hold at all times. Finally, the labor market
closes with the slackness restriction (ht − h̄)(Wt − γWt−1 ) = 0. This condition states that if
in any given period there is underemployment (ht < h̄), then the lower bound on nominal
wages must bind. The slackness condition also states that if this constraint is not binding
(Wt > γWt−1 ), then the economy must be at full employment.

2

Pegs and Crisis Amplification

Having introduced the demand and supply schedules and described how the labor market
closes, we can analyze the macroeconomic effects of negative external shocks. Figure 5
illustrates the adjustment process. The original position is at point A, where the supply and
demand schedules intersect and the economy is operating at full employment (ht = h̄). Now
6

suppose that the country interest rate increases from r0 to r1 > r0 . As discussed above, this
causes the demand schedule to shift down and to the left as shown by the downward sloping
dashed line. Because the nominal exchange rate is pegged and because nominal wages are
downwardly rigid (we are assuming for simplicity that γ = 1), the supply schedule does
not move. As a result, the new intersection occurs at point B. At this point, involuntary
unemployment emerges in the magnitude h̄ − hbust . At the level of the individual firm,
the problem is that it experiences a fall in the price of the good it sells (from p0 to pbust ),
but no change in labor cost (the real wage remains constant at W0 /E0 ). To avoid losses,
the firm must reduce employment, thereby cutting marginal costs (from (W0 /E0 )/F 0 (h̄) to
(W0 /E0 )/F 0 (hbust )).
The combination of a fixed exchange rate and downwardly rigid wages causes a spillover
effect by which an external crisis, which could have been circumscribed to the traded sector,
spreads its deleterious effects to the nontraded sector. A natural question is what policies
can help the economy ameliorate these negative spillover effects. In our analysis, we take the
downward rigidity in nominal wages as given. Of course, if the government could somehow
implement policies that render the nominal wage fully flexible, then full employment would
obtain at all times. The related empirical and theoretical literature, however, suggests
the existence of important nonpolicy factors, such as morale, causing downward rigidity in
nominal wages (see, for instance, Bewley, 1999).

3

First-Best Policy Interventions

We consider four policies that can achieve the Pareto optimal allocation. One is monetary
in nature and the other three are fiscal.

7

3.1

Optimal Exchange-Rate Policy

In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011), we show that in the present model there exists an
optimal exchange-rate policy that achieves the Pareto optimal allocation. This policy calls
for a devaluation whenever the real wage consistent with full employment in any period t
falls below γWt−1 /Et−1 . Figure 5 illustrates how the optimal devaluation rate ensures full
employment at all times. As explained earlier, in the absence of a devaluation, the increase
in the interest rate pushes the economy from point A, where the labor market operates at full
employment, to point B, where involuntary unemployment equals h̄ − hbust . Suppose now
that the government devalues the domestic currency from E0 to E1 > E0 . The devaluation
shifts the supply schedule down and to the right as shown by the dashed upward sloping
line. If the size of devaluation is at least as large as the vertical fall in the demand schedule
measured at ht = h̄, then full employment reemerges. The new equilibrium is at point C.
At this point, firms voluntarily choose to continue to hire h̄ units of labor because although
the price of the good they sell fell (from p0 to p1 ), their labor cost falls by exactly the same
proportion (from W0 /E0 to W0 /E1 ).

3.2

Optimal Fiscal Policy

For emerging countries that are part of a currency union, such as those in the periphery of
the eurozone, devaluations are not an option. In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011), we show
that there is an array of fiscal policies that can bring about the Pareto optimal allocation
without having to resort to movements in the nominal exchange rate. One such instrument
is a labor subsidy. Suppose that the government decides to subsidize employment at the
firm level at the proportional rate sht per hour employed. In this case, the firm’s optimality
t /Et
condition becomes pt = (1 − sht ) W
. This expression states that for a given relative price,
F 0 (ht )

pt , and for a given real wage, Wt /Et , the larger is the subsidy sht , the lower is the marginal
cost of labor perceived by the firm, and therefore the larger the amount of hours it is willing
to hire.
8

Figure 6: Adjustment Under Optimal Labor Subsidy Policy
p

D(p; r0 , . . .)

D(p; r1 , . . .)
p0
pbust

A

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

C

(1−sh )W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

B

p1

hbust

h̄

h

Figure 6 shows how labor subsidies can bring about the efficient allocation. Again, we
consider a situation in which an external shock (in the example, an interest-rate increase
from r0 to r1 ) brings the economy from an initial situation with full employment (point A)
to one with involuntary unemployment in the amount h̄ − hbust (point B). The labor subsidy
causes the labor supply schedule to shift down and to the right, as shown by the dashed
upward sloping line. The new intersection of the demand and supply schedules is at point
C, where full employment is restored. We note that, unlike what happens under the optimal
devaluation policy, the real wage does not fall during the crisis under the optimal labor
subsidy. Specifically, the real wage received by the household remains constant at W0 /E0 .
Once the negative external shock dissipates (i.e., once the interest rate falls back to r0 ), the
fiscal authority can safely remove the subsidy, without compromising its full employment
objective.
Another fiscal alternative to achieve an efficient allocation at all times is to subsidize
sales in the nontraded sector. Let syN
be a proportional subsidy on sales in the nontraded
t
sector. An increase in the sales subsidy increases the marginal revenue of the firm. The
profit-maximization condition of the firm becomes pt =

Wt /Et
1
.
F 0 (ht )
1+syN
t

Like a wage subsidy,

a sales subsidy shifts the supply schedule down and to the right. The graphical analysis is
9

Figure 7: Adjustment Under Optimal Taxation of Nontradable Consumption
p

D(p; r0 , . . .) = D((1 − scN )p; r1 , . . .)

D(p; r1 , . . .)
A

p0
pbust

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

B

hbust

h̄

h

therefore qualitatively identical to that used to explain the workings of the optimal wage
subsidy shown in figure 6.
A third fiscal instrument that can be used to ensure full employment at all times in
a pegging economy with downward nominal wage rigidity is a proportional subsidy to the
consumption of nontradables. Specifically, assume that the after-subsidy price of nontradable goods faced by consumers is (1 − scN
t )pt . The nontraded-consumption subsidy makes
nontradables less expensive relative to tradables. It can therefore be used by the government
during a crisis to facilitate an expenditure switch toward nontraded consumption and away
from tradable consumption. With nontraded-consumption taxes, the demand schedule is
given by D(pt (1 − scN
t ); rt , . . . ). Figure 7 illustrates how the consumption subsidy can be
optimally used to ensure the efficient functioning of the labor market. Again, the increase
in the interest rate from r0 to r1 shifts the demand schedule down and to the left. As
discussed before, in the absence of any intervention, our pegging economy would be stuck
at the inefficient point B. The introduction of the nontraded-consumption subsidy shifts
the demand schedule back up and to the right. If the magnitude of the subsidy is chosen
appropriately, the demand schedule will cross the supply schedule exactly at point A, where

10

the labor market returns to full employment.
A criticism that can be made against all three of the fiscal alternatives considered here
is that the implied tax policies inherit the stochastic properties of the underlying sources of
uncertainty (e.g., rt , qt T OTt , etc.). This means that tax rates must change at business-cycle
frequencies. To the extent that changes to the tax code are subject to legislative approval,
the long and uncertain lags involved in this process might render the implementation of the
optimal tax policy impossible.

4

Second-Best Policy Intervention

We now consider capital controls as a way to mitigate the inefficient adjustment of economies
with fixed exchange rates and downward nominal wage rigidity. The present analysis draws
from Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012). Suppose that the government imposes a tax τtd on
external borrowing. Negative values of τtd correspond to a subsidy to external borrowing.
This type of capital control raises the effective interest rate on external debt from rt to
rt + τtd . The demand schedule then becomes D(pt ; rt + τtd , . . . ). In principle, the government
could use capital controls to fully offset any changes in the interest rate with changes in
τtd . In this case, the effective interest would be constant, and the demand schedule would
not shift in response to disturbances in rt . Consequently, full employment in the nontraded
sector would be preserved at all times. Such a policy, however, would not be optimal. For
the effective interest rate rt + τtd governs the intertemporal price of tradable consumption.
Thus, the capital control rate τtd represents a wedge in the relative price of future and present
consumption that distorts the intertemporal allocation of expenditure. In determining the
optimal value of τtd , the benevolent government, therefore, faces a trade off between an
intertemporal distortion in consumption and a static distortion in the labor market. As a
result of this tradeoff, the tax rate τtd will adjust over the business cycle but will not fully
stabilize the effective country interest rate.

11

Figure 8: Optimal Capital Controls and an Interest Rate Increase
p

A
B

W0 /E0
F 0 (h)

D
D(p; r0 , . . .)
D(p; r1 + τ d , . . .)
D(p; r1 , . . .)

hbust

hocc

h̄

h

Figure 8 illustrates the role of optimal capital controls. As in the previous policy experiments, the starting point is A, where the economy enjoys full employment. Under free
capital mobility, an increase in the country interest rate from r0 to r1 shifts the demand
schedule down and to the left and brings the economy to point B, where the unemployment rate is h̄ − hbust . Suppose now that the fiscal authority subsidizes external borrowing
by setting τtd at a negative value. This policy move incentivates external borrowing and
aggregate absorption, causing the demand schedule to shift up and to the right as shown
by the dashed-dotted line. The new intersection is at point D. At this point, the level of
employment is higher than at point B (corresponding to the outcome associated with free
capital mobility), but still less than at point A, indicating that some unemployment remains
even under optimal capital controls.
In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012), we stress the fact that the optimal capital control
policy is prudential. That is, unlike what happens under the other fiscal and monetary
instruments considered earlier in this paper, under the optimal capital control policy the
government acts preemptively during booms to curb aggregate spending via capital controls.
Figure 9 illustrates the use of optimal capital controls during booms. In the graph, a fall

12

Figure 9: Optimal Capital Controls and an Interest Rate Decrease
(b) An decrease in r from r0 to r2

p
D(p; r2 , . . .)
D(p; r2 + τ1d , . . .)
D(p; r0 , . . .)

W 1 /E 0
F 0 (h)

D
F

W 0 /E 0
F 0 (h)

A

h

h̄

in the country interest rate from r0 to r2 < r0 shifts the demand schedule up and to the
right, as shown with a dashed line. Under free capital mobility, the new equilibrium is at
point D, where the economy is at full employment. As a result of the boom, the nominal
wage increases from W0 to W1 . This wage adjustment materializes frictionlessly, because
nominal wages are assumed to be upwardly flexible. The reason why the government has an
incentive to put sand in the wheels of expenditure in this phase of the cycle is that when the
shock dissipates and aggregate demand falls back to its normal level, the required fall in real
wages will not occur quickly enough because of the downward rigidity of nominal wages and
the fixity of the nominal exchange rate. The government therefore imposes capital controls
(τ1d > 0), which cause the demand schedule to shift down and to the left, as shown with a
dashed-dotted line. The new intersection is point F , where the unemployment rate is zero,
the nominal wage is lower than at point D, but higher than at point A, and the aggregate
absorption of tradables is smaller than under free capital mobility.
While achieving only a second-best allocation, capital controls have the advantage over
income or consumption taxes that in many countries they can be much more swiftly implemented.

13

5

Conclusion

An important policy issue is how to finance the various subsidies discussed in this and the
previous section. In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011, 2012), we show that they can be
financed in a nondistorting fashion with a proportional tax on labor income of households.
The reason why labor income taxes are nondistorting in a crisis is that in these circumstances
households find themselves off their supply schedule (i.e., they are willing to work longer
hours at the going wage than they are actually working).
To conclude, we would like to stress that because the central friction in the present
model is nominal (downward nominal wage rigidity), the natural instrument to correct it is
monetary policy. All of the fiscal alternatives discussed above (including capital controls)
are likely to be significantly harder to implement in practice for the simple reason that the
monetary authority has the capacity to intervene at a speed far exceeding that at which
the fiscal authority can alter the tax code or impose capital controls. Finally, while an
individual country in the periphery of the eurozone is powerless when it comes to changing
monetary policy, the union’s monetary authority could help the unemployment problem of
ailing members by engineering an increase in the eurozone’s overall rate of inflation.

References
Bewley, Truman F., Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1999.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Temporary Stabilization: Predetermined Exchange Rates,” Journal
of Political Economy 94, December 1986, 1319-1329.
Krugman, Paul, “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 11, August 1979, 311-325.
Lahiri, Amartya, “Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations Under Real Frictions: The Role of
Endogenous Labor Supply,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25, August
14

2001, 1157-1177.
Roldós, Jorge, “Supply-Side Effects of Disinflation Programs,” IMF Staff Papers 42, March
1995, 158-183.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martı́n Uribe, “Pegs and Pain,” working paper, Columbia
University, 2011.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martı́n Uribe, “Prudential Policy For Peggers,” Columbia
University, 2012.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: The Initial Real Effects of
Credible Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, June 1997, 197-221.

15

