NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISENTANGLING THE CHANNELS OF THE 2007-2009 RECESSION
James H. Stock
Mark W. Watson
Working Paper 18094
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18094
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

Prepared for the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, March 22-23, 2012. We thank John Driscoll,
Lutz Kilian, Valery Ramey, Eric Swanson, Egon Zakrajšek, and Tao Zha for providing and/or helping
us construct their shock series and for comments. We also thank Alan Blinder, Nick Bloom, Markus
Brunnermeier, Marty Eichenbaum, Jon Faust, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Karel Mertens, Salil Mehta,
Neil Shephard, Chris Sims, Mike Woodford, Tom Zimmerman, and the editors for helpful comments
and/or discussions. Replication files and the Supplement are available on Watson’s Web site. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Recession
James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 18094
May 2012, Revised July 2012
JEL No. E24,E32,E37,E44
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the macroeconomic dynamics of the 2007-09 recession in the United States and
the subsequent slow recovery. Using a dynamic factor model with 200 variables, we reach three main
conclusions. First, although many of the events of the 2007-2009 collapse were unprecedented, their
net effect was to produce macro shocks that were larger versions of shocks previously experienced,
to which the economy responded in an historically predictable way. Second, the shocks that produced
the recession primarily were associated with financial disruptions and heightened uncertainty, although
oil shocks played a role in the initial slowdown and subsequent drag was added by effectively tight
conventional monetary policy arising from the zero lower bound. Third, while the slow nature of the
recovery is partly due to the shocks of this recession, most of the slow recovery in employment, and
nearly all of the slow recovery in output, is due to a secular slowdown in trend labor force growth.
James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M27
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
James_Stock@harvard.edu
Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
mwatson@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The recession that began in the fourth quarter of 2007 was unprecedented in the postwar
United States for its severity and duration. Following the NBER-dated peak of 2007Q4, GDP
dropped by 5.5 percent and nearly 8.8 million jobs were lost. Based on the most recent
revisions, the previous peak in GDP was not achieved for 15 quarters, in 2011Q3, and as of this
writing only 3.5 million jobs have been regained. All this suggests that the 2007Q4 recession
and recovery were qualitatively, as well as quantitatively, different from previous postwar
recessions. The recession also seems unprecedented in its precipitating sources: the first nationwide persistent decline in real estate values since World War II, a financial sector that was
unusually vulnerable because of recent deregulation and little-understood derivatives, and a
collapse in lending that dampened the recovery.1
The aim of this paper is to take an empirical look at this recession and recovery, with an
eye towards quantifying the extent to which this recession differs from previous postwar
recessions, the contributions of various shocks to the recession, and the reasons for the slow
recovery from this recession. More specifically, we consider three questions. First, beyond its
severity, how did this recession differ from previous postwar recessions? Second, what
specifically were the economic shocks that triggered this recession and what were their
quantitative contributions to the collapse of economic activity? Third, to what extent does the
current jobless recovery constitute a puzzle, something out of line with historical patterns and
thus requiring a new explanation2?
The organizing framework for our analysis of these three questions is a high-dimensional
dynamic factor model (DFM). Like a vector autoregression (VAR), a DFM is a linear time
series model in which economic shocks drive the comovements of the variables; the main
difference between a dynamic factor model and a VAR is that the number of macro shocks does
1

The view that financial recessions and recoveries are different than “normal” recessions has
been articulated most notably by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); see also Reinhart and Reinhart
(2010), Hall (2010), Mishkin (2010), Bank of Canada (2011), and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor
(2011).
2
Various reasons have been proposed why this recovery is exceptional, including deleveraging
after a financial crisis (e.g. Mian and Sufi (2011)), regional or industry job mismatch (e.g. Şahin,
Song, Topa, and Violante (2011)), changes in labor management practices (e.g. Berger (2011)),
and monetary policy rendered ineffective because of the zero lower bound.
1

not increase with the number of series. Also like a VAR, some properties, such as stability and
forecasts, can be studied using a “reduced form” DFM that does not require identifying factors or
structural shocks; however, attributing movements in economic variables to specific economic
shocks requires identifying those shocks as in structural VAR analysis.
Our empirical model has 200 macro variables driven by six macro factors. These six
factors drive the macro comovements of all the variables. Shocks that affect only a handful of
series, such as a sectoral demand shock that affects a small number of employment and
production series, would not surface as a macro factor but would instead imply idiosyncratic
variation in those series. Using this model, we can address the question of whether this recession
had new shocks by examining whether the 2007-09 recession is associated with new factors.
Our three main findings follow the three questions posed above.
First, a combination of visual inspection and formal tests using a DFM estimated through
2007Q3 suggests that the same six factors which explained previous postwar recessions also
explain the 2007Q4 recession: no new “financial crisis” factor is needed. Moreover, the
response of macro variables to these “old” factors is, in most cases, the same as it was in earlier
recessions. Within the context of our model, the recession was associated with exceptionally
large movements in these “old” factors, to which the economy responded predictably given
historical experience. Of course, this recession did have new and unprecedented failures of the
financial plumbing (e.g. Lehman) and novel, aggressive policy responses (e.g. TARP, the Fed’s
various facilities); our results suggest, however, that the net effect of these failures and responses
on the macro economy was not qualitatively different than past disturbances – just larger. What
the results here suggest is that the shocks arising from these extraordinary events had ordinary
impacts: from a macro perspective these shocks had the same effect as previously observed
shocks, so the shocks surface in our model as large movements in the “old” factors.
Second, identifying what, precisely, were these large economic shocks requires an
exercise similar to structural VAR identification. We consider six shocks: oil, monetary policy,
productivity, uncertainty, liquidity/financial risk, and fiscal policy. We identify these shocks
using a novel method in which we treat shocks constructed elsewhere in the literature as
instrumental variables; for example, one of the three instruments we use to identify the oil shock
is Kilian’s (2008a) series on war-driven OPEC oil production shortfalls. In all, we have 17 such
external instruments with which to estimate our six shocks. The results of this exercise are
2

mixed, in large part because the instruments produce estimates of purportedly different shocks
that are correlated. In particular, uncertainty shocks and liquidity/risk shocks are highly
correlated, which makes their separate interpretation problematic. Despite these drawbacks, the
structural analysis is consistent with the recession being caused by initial oil price shocks
followed by large financial and uncertainty shocks.
Third, focusing on the recovery following the 2009Q2 trough, we estimate that slightly
less than half of the slow recovery in employment growth since 2009Q2, compared to 1960-1982
recoveries, is attributable to cyclical factors (the shocks, or factors, during the recession). Most
of the slow recovery, however, is attributable to a long-term slowdown in trend employment
growth. Indeed, the slowdown in trend employment growth is dramatic: according to our
estimates, trend annual employment growth slowed from 2.4% in 1965 to 0.9% in 2005. The
explanation for this declining trend growth rate which we find the most compelling rests on
changes in underlying demographic factors, primarily the plateau in the female labor force
participation rate (after rising sharply during the 1970s through 1990s) and the aging of the U.S.
workforce. Because the net change in trend productivity growth over this period is small, this
slower trend growth in employment translates into slower trend GDP growth. These
demographic changes imply continued low or even declining trend growth rates in employment,
which in turn suggest that future recessions will be deeper, and will have slower recoveries, than
historically has been the case.
There are a vast number of papers on the financial crisis, but relatively few that tackle the
empirical macro issues discussed here. Some related papers that look at aspects of the
shocks/propagation problem include Lettau and Ludvigson (2011) on permanent wealth shocks;
the related paper by Campbell, Giglio, and Polk (2010) on reasons for the stock market collapse;
Gilchrist, Yankov, and Zakrajšek (2011) on credit spreads and their role as measures of financial
distress in this and previous recessions; and Hall (2011, 2012) on the post-crisis dynamics.
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011) and Bordo and Haubrich (2011) look at the relation
between depth and duration of recessions with a focus whether financial crises are exceptional
and reach opposite conclusions. We are not aware of a comprehensive treatment along the lines
discussed here, however.
The DFM and the data set are described in Section 2. Section 3 presents a counterfactual
exercise of how well the historical shocks and model do at predicting the 2007Q4-2011
3

experience, along with stability tests. Section 4 discusses identification of the structural shocks
and provides empirical analysis of the identified structural shocks. Section 5 focuses on the slow
recovery, and Section 6 concludes. Detailed data description and additional empirical results are
contained in the Supplement.
2. Empirical Methods and Data
2.1 Empirical Methods
Dynamic factor models capture the notion that the macroeconomy is driven by a handful
of unobserved macro shocks. There is considerable empirical evidence that a DFM with a small
number of factors describes the comovements of macroeconomic time series (e.g. Sargent and
Sims (1977), Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala (2004)). Sargent (1989) and Boivin and Giannoni
(2010) develop this idea formally, starting from a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model
in which the driving variables are observed with measurement error. There is now a rich set of
econometric methods for inference in DFMs (see Stock and Watson (2011) for a survey).
Applications of these methods include forecasting (see Eickmeier and Ziegler (2008)) and the
factor-augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) method of Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz
(2005).
Because the comovements of the observed series stem from the factors, it is not necessary
to model directly the dynamics among observed variables, thus avoiding the proliferation of
coefficients found in VARs. Because a DFM has relatively few factors compared to observed
variables, it allows a tractable simultaneous empirical analysis of very many variables in a single
internally consistent framework.
The dynamic factor model. Let Xt = (X1t,…, Xnt) denote a vector of n macroeconomic
time series, where Xit is a single time series, where all series have been transformed to be
stationary and to have mean zero (details below), and let Ft denote the vector of r unobserved
factors. The DFM expresses each of the n time series as a component driven by the factors, plus
an idiosyncratic disturbance term eit:
Xt = Ft + et,

(1)

4

where et = (e1t,…, ent) and  is a nr matrix of coefficients called the factor loadings. The term
Ft is called the “common component” of Xt.
The factors are modeled as evolving according to a vector autoregression (VAR):
(L)Ft = t,

(2)

where (L) is a rr matrix of lag polynomials with the vector of r innovations t.3 Because the
factor VAR (2) is assumed to be stationary, Ft has the moving average representation, Ft =
(L)–1t. The idiosyncratic errors et can be serially correlated, but the methods used here do not
require a parametric model of the et dynamics.
Estimation of factors and DFM parameters. The key insight that makes high
dimensional DFM modeling practical is that, if the number of series n is large, the factors can be
estimated by suitable cross-sectional averaging. This is most easily seen in the special case of a
single factor with a nonzero cross-sectional average value of the factor loadings. Let X t denote
the cross-sectional average of the variables at date t, X t = n1  i 1 X it , and similarly let  and
n

et respectively denote the cross-sectional average factor loading and the cross sectional average

of the idiosyncratic term. By (1), the cross-sectional average of the data satisfies, X t =  Ft +
et . But by assumption the idiosyncratic terms are only weakly correlated, so by the weak law of

large numbers et tends to zero as the number of series increases. Thus, when n is large, X t
consistently estimates Ft , that is, X t estimates the factor up to scale and sign. In this special
case, picking the arbitrary normalization  = 1 yields the estimated factor time series, Fˆt , and
the individual factor loadings can be estimated by regressing each Xit onto Fˆt . If in fact there is
a single-factor structure and n is sufficiently large, Fˆt estimates Ft precisely enough that Fˆt can
be treated as data without a “generated regressor” problem (Bai and Ng (2006)).

3

Equations (1) and (2) are the static form of the dynamic factor model, so-called because the
factors Ft enter with no leads or lags in (1). For a discussion of the relation between the dynamic
and static forms of the DFM see Stock and Watson (2011).
5

With multiple factors and general factor loadings, this simple cross-sectional averaging
does not produce a consistent estimate of the factors, but the idea can be generalized using
principal components analysis (Stock and Watson (2002)). We use principal components here to
estimate the factors; details are discussed in Section 2.4.
The principal components estimator of the factors consistently estimates Ft up to
premultiplication by an arbitrary nonsingular rr matrix (the analogue of  in the single-factor
example); that is, the principal components estimator consistently estimates not the factors, but
rather the space spanned by the factors when n and T are large. This means that the principal
components estimator of Ft has a normalization problem, which is “solved” by the arbitrary
restriction that  = Ir, the rr identity matrix. This arbitrary normalization means that the
individual factors do not have a direct economic interpretation (such as an “oil factor”). The
analysis of Sections 3 and 5 works with the reduced-form DFM in equations (1) and (2), so this
normalization is inconsequential. The analysis of Section 4 requires identification of specific
economic shocks, and our identification procedure is discussed there.
2.2 The Data and Preliminary Transformations
The data set consists of quarterly observations from 1959Q1-2011Q2 on 200 U.S.
macroeconomic time series (vintage November 2011). The series are grouped into 13 categories
(number of series in parentheses): NIPA variables (21); industrial production (13); employment
and unemployment (46); housing starts (8); inventories, orders, and sales (8); prices (39);
earnings and productivity (13); interest rates and spreads (18); money and credit (12); stock
prices and wealth (11); housing prices (3); exchange rates (6); and other (2).
The series were subject to a preliminary screen for outliers then transformed as needed to
induce stationarity. The transformation used depends on the category of series. Real activity
variables were transformed to quarterly growth rates (first differences of logs), prices and wages
were transformed to quarterly changes of quarterly inflation (second differences of logs), interest
rates were transformed to first differences, and interest rate spreads appear in levels. The 200
series and their transformations are listed in the Supplement.

6

2.3 Local Means and Detrending
All series were detrended to eliminate very low frequency variation. Specifically, after
transforming to stationarity, each series was deviated from a local mean estimated using a
biweight kernel with a bandwidth of 100 quarters. The local means estimated using the biweight
kernel are approximately the same as those computed as the average of the transformed data over
a centered moving window of 30 quarters, except that the biweight filter means are less noisy
because they avoid the sharp cutoff of a moving window.4 We refer to these local means as the
trend in the series, although it is important to note that these are trends in transformed series; for
example, for GDP the estimated trend is the local mean value of GDP growth.
For some series, these trends exhibit considerable variation. Figure 1 plots the quarterly
growth rates of GDP, employment, employee-hours, and labor productivity, along with their
trends. We estimate the trend GDP growth rate to have fallen 1.2 percentage points, from 3.7%
per year in 1965 to 2.5% per year in 20055, and for the trend annual employment growth rate to
have fallen by 1.5 percentage points, from 2.4% in 1965 to 0.9% in 2005. On the other hand,
trend productivity (output per hour) has recovered from the productivity slowdown of the 1970s
and 1980s and shows essentially no net change over this period. These trends are discussed
further in Section 6.
2.4 Estimation Details
The data set contains both high-level aggregates and disaggregated components. To
avoid double-counting, in these cases only the disaggregated components were used to estimate
the factors; for example, durables consumption, nondurables consumption, and services
4

Endpoints are handled by truncating the kernel and renormalizing the truncated weights to add
to one. This approach desirably makes no assumption about reversion of the local mean, in
contrast to the mean reversion imposed by the standard approach of using a stationary time series
model to pad the series with forecasts and backcasts. We alternatively computed the local means
using a Baxter-King (1999) high-pass filter with a pass band of periods with  200 quarters, and
using the trend implied by a “local level” model (the sum of independent random walk and white
noise with a ratio of disturbance standard deviations of 0.025) and obtained similar results. The
weights for these different filters are given in the Supplement.
5
Our procedure produces a smooth but not necessarily monotonic trend. Kim and Eo (2012)
model the trend decline in the growth rate of GDP as a single Markov switching break and
estimate a decline of 0.7 percentage points over this period, less than our estimate of 1.2
percentage points . If the trend is in fact smoothly declining one would expect their stepfunction approximation to estimate a smaller average decline than our local mean.
7

consumption were used to estimate the factors, but total consumption was not. Of the 200 series,
132 were used to estimate the factors; the series used to estimate the factors are listed in the
Supplement. No top-level macro aggregates (including GDP, consumption, investment, total
employment, the total unemployment rate) were used to estimate the factors.
Using these 132 series, the factor loadings  were estimated by principal components
over 1959-2007Q3. These pre-2007Q4 factor loadings were then used to estimate the six linear
combinations of Xt over the full 1959Q-2011Q2 sample which correspond to the estimated
factors. For the 1959-2007Q3 sample, these are the principal components of the factors; for the
post-2007Q4 period, these are the pre-2007Q3 principal components factors, extended through
the 2007Q4-2011Q2 sample. We refer to these six factors as the “old” factors because they are
the factors for the “old” pre-2007Q4 DFM, extended post-2007Q4.6 These “old” factors are used
throughout the paper, and, with the single exception of a sensitivity check in Section 3.2, the
“old” DFM coefficients, estimated over 1959-2007Q3, are also used throughout.7

6

Specifically, let X t denote the vector of 132 disaggregated time series used to estimate the

factors, and let  denote their corresponding factor loadings. These factor loadings  are
estimated by principal components using data on X t over 1959Q1-2007Q3 (modified for some
series having missing observations, see the Supplement). Denote the resulting estimates of 
ˆ 5907 , normalized so that 
ˆ 5907
ˆ 5907 = I. The estimated “old” factors are computed using
by 

ˆ 5907 as ˆ 5907 = ˆ 5907 X , t = 1959Q1,…, 2011Q2. The values of ˆ 5907 post-2007Q4 are

Ft
Ft
t
those of the “old” factors in the sense that they are based on the pre-2007Q4 linear combinations
of X t . The factor loadings for the remaining 68 series (the high-level aggregates) are obtained

by regressing each series against Fˆt 5907 using data through 2007Q3; these estimates, combined
ˆ 5907 , yield the estimated “old” factor loadings, 
ˆ 5907 . The vector of common
with 

components of the full vector of time series associated with these “old” factors and “old” factor
ˆ 5907 Fˆ 5907 .
loadings is 
t
7
The assumption that the factors and DFMs can be estimated with no breaks over the 19592007Q3 period is only partially consistent with the empirical evidence. On the side of stability,
in Stock and Watson (2009) we use a similar data set and find that the space spanned by the fullsample (no-break) factors spans the space of the factors estimated using pre- and post-1984
subsamples; against this, there we also find breaks in some factor loadings in 1984Q1. These
apparently contradictory findings can be reconciled by the property of DFMs that the space
spanned by the factors can be estimated consistently even if there is instability in  (Stock and
Watson (2002, 2009), Bates, Stock, and Watson (2012)). These findings suggest that, in the
current study, we can ignore the 1984Q1 break when estimating the factors, however tests of
coefficient stability might be sensitive to whether the comparison sample includes pre-1984Q1
8

The DFM is estimated with six factors, a choice consistent with Bai-Ng (2002) tests for
the number of factors, visual inspection of the scree plot, and the number of distinct structural
shocks we examine in Section 5.8 As discussed below and shown in the Supplement, there is
little sensitivity to our main results as the number of factors is varied over a reasonable range.
3. A Structural Break in 2007Q4?
This section investigates the extent to which the 2007Q4 recession exhibited new
macrodynamics, relative to the 1959-2007Q3 experience. This analysis has three parts. First,
we examine whether the factors in the 2007Q4 recession were new or, alternatively, were
combinations of “old” factors seen in previous recessions. Second, to the extent that at least
some of the shocks have historical precedents, we examine whether these “old” factors have
different dynamic impacts pre-2007Q4 than in 2007Q4-2011. Third, we examine the volatility
of these “old” factors over the recession. The analysis in this section uses the reduced-form
factors and does not require identifying individual structural shocks.
3.1. Post-2007 Simulation Using the pre-2007 DFM
We begin by considering the following experiment: suppose you had in hand our 6factor, 200-variable DFM estimated using data through 2007Q3, and you were told the time path
of the six factors from 2007Q4 – 2011Q2. Using the pre-2007Q4 model and the post-2007Q4
values of the old factors, you compute predicted values for all 200 series in our data set. How
well would these predicted values track the actuals over the recession and recovery? If there
were an important new factor not seen in the 1959-2007Q3 data, say a seventh “financial crisis”
factor, that factor would end up in the error term and the R2 of the old factors would go down
post-2007Q4, relative to pre-2007Q4. Similarly, if the “old” factors had new effects, that is, if

data. We therefore consider a DFM with a break in 1984Q1 as a sensitivity check. Additional
sensitivity checks, with breaks in 1984Q1, are reported in the Supplement.
8
The Bai-Ng (2002) ICP1 and ICP2 criteria selects either 3 or 4 factors, depending on the sample
period, while their ICP3 criterion selected 12 factors. The scree plot (the plot of the ordered
eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix of Xt) drops sharply to 4 or 5 factors then declines
slowly.
9

their factor loadings changed, then again the R2’s computed using the pre-2007Q4 factor
loadings would drop.
The results of this exercise are summarized in Figure 2 and in Tables 1 and 2. Figure 2
plots old model/old factors predicted common components (computed as described in footnote
6), along with actual values of the series, for 24 selected time series. For activity variables and
inflation, the figure plots the 4-quarter growth rate (that is, the 4-quarter average of quarterly
GDP growth) to smooth over quarterly measurement error, while for financial variables the
figure plots quarterly changes to provide a better picture of the financial market volatility of
2008-09.
Table 1 summarizes the patterns observed in Figure 2 by reporting the subsample R2 of
the common component of the 24 selected series, computed over two split-sample periods and
over the 15-quarter stretches following all postwar NBER peaks. These R2’s are computed
imposing a zero intercept and unit slope on the predicted values over the indicated subsample
and thus cannot exceed one but can be negative.9 The R2’s in Table 1 all pertain to quarterly
values whereas some plots in Figure 2 are 4-quarter values.
The results in Figure 2 and Table 1 suggest that knowledge of the historical DFM and
future values of the old factors explains most – for some series, nearly all – of the movements in
most of the 200 macroeconomic time series. The predicted values in Figure 2 capture the
initially slow decline in early 2008, the sharp declines during 2008Q4-2009, the prolonged
trough, and the muted recovery since 2010 in GDP, total consumption, nonresidential fixed
investment, industrial production, employment, and the unemployment rate. The pre-2007Q3
model and historical factors predict the prolonged, accelerating decline of housing starts,
although the anemic recovery of housing is slightly overpredicted. Given these factors there are
no major surprises in overall inflation or even energy price inflation. The historical factors even
explain the general pattern of interest rate spreads (the TED spread and the Gilchrist-Zakrajšek
(2011) excess bond premium spread), the bear market in stocks, and the sharp rise in uncertainty
as measured by the VIX, and even the sharp decline and recovery of lending standards reported
in the loan officers survey. The DFM correctly predicts the decline in commercial and industrial
9

ˆ 5907 Fˆ 5907 be the prediction error using the old
Using the notation of footnote 6, let eˆt = Xt – 
t

model/old factors. The subsample R2 for series i I s computed as R2 = 1    t eˆit2 
where the sums are computed over the column subsample.
10

 X  ,
t

2
it

loans during the early part of the recession, although it underpredicts the depth of their
contraction or their long delay in recovering10. These qualitative impressions from Figure 2 are
confirmed quantitatively by the R2’s in Table 1. For these series, the post-2007Q4 R2’s are well
within the range of R2’s for previous recessions. The post-2007Q4 R2 for GDP growth is
somewhat lower than in previous episodes because the DFM misses some high-frequency
variation, but as seen from Figure 1a the year-over-year match is very strong. On the other hand,
for some series (of those in Table 1, consumption of services, PCE inflation, and the VIX), the
post-2007Q4 R2’s are substantially greater than their historical averages. One interpretation of
this improved fit during 2007Q4-2011 is that the movements in the common component of these
series, computed using the pre-2007Q4 factors, was so large during this recession that the
fraction of the variation it explains increased.
There are a few series that are less well explained by the historical factors. Most notably,
the model predicts the Fed Funds rate to decline by more than it did, but this is unsurprising
because the model is linear and does not have a zero lower bound; we return to this point below.
The model also confirms that the Fed’s expansion of reserves was unprecedented. Although the
historical factors predict house prices in 2007Q4-2011 as well as in previous recessions, they do
not fully explain the boom in house prices in 2004-2006 and slightly underpredict the speed of
their crash.
Table 2 summarizes the subsample R2’s for all 200 series, by series category (the Figure
2/Table 1 results for all series are provided in the Supplement). For most categories the median
R2 over the 2007Q4 period is comparable to or greater than previous recessions. The only
categories for which the actual paths diverge systematically from the predicted paths are earnings
& productivity, interest rates, and money & credit. The divergence in interest rates is due mainly
to zero lower bound problems, not to failures to match liquidity spikes in the spreads, and the
divergence in money and credit is associated with the unprecedented expansion of monetary
aggregates. Closer inspection of the divergence in earnings & productivity suggests that these

Giannone, Lenza, and Reichlin (2012) examine the stability of the relation between various
loans and macroeconomic indicators in the Eurozone during and after the crisis, relative to a precrisis benchmark; they find no surprising behavior of loans to nonfinancial corporations,
conditional on aggregate activity, although there are departures from historical patterns for
household loans.
10

11

divergences do not seem to reflect breaks associated with this recession, compared with the two
other post-1984 recessions.11
3.2. Tests for a break in the factor loadings, 2007Q4-2011
The results in the previous subsection suggest that the DFM did not suffer a structural
break or regime shift in the 2007Q4 recession. We now provide turn to two tests of this
hypothesis.
The first test is of the hypothesis that the factor loadings are constant, against the
alternative that they suffered a break in 2007Q4-2011. We do this using Andrews’ (2003) test
for end-of-sample instability.12 As discussed above, there is evidence of a break in 1984Q1 in a
substantial fraction of the factor loadings. We therefore consider two versions of the Andrews
(2003) test, one testing the hypothesis of stability of a break in 2007Q4, relative to the 19602007Q3 values of the loadings, and the other testing for a break in 2007Q4 relative to the values
of the factor loadings over 1984Q1-2007Q3.
Rejection rates of this test for a break in 2007Q4 at the 5% level are summarized by
category of series in Table 3. When the post-2007 values are compared with the full sample
factor loadings, 15% of series reject at the 5% level, while 12% reject at the 5% level when the
comparison is to the 1984Q1-2007Q3 factor loadings (final column of Table 3). This slightly
higher rejection rate for the tests against the full pre-2007Q4 sample is consistent with a break in
the factor loadings in 1984Q1 found in Stock and Watson (2009).
When evaluated against the 1984Q1-2007Q3 loadings, all but a handful of rejections are
concentrated in three areas: commodity and materials producer price inflation indexes, the
durational composition of unemployment, and monetary aggregates. Some examples are shown
in Figure 2 (see panels j and p). The small number of rejections provides little evidence of a
systematic or widespread break in the factor loadings in 2007Q4, relative to their Great
Moderation values.
11

The negative quarterly R2’s for output per hour reflect a timing mismatch and 4-quarter growth
in productivity is well-predicted. The predicted values for average hourly earnings growth
change from procyclical to countercyclical in the mid-1980s, and the negative R2 reflects this
apparent instability in the factor loadings in 1984, not something special to the 2007Q4
recession.
12
The Andrews (2003) test is based on an analogue of the usual (homoskedasticity-only) Chow
break-test statistic, with a p-value that is computed by subsampling.
12

As a second test, we examine evidence for a new factor by testing whether the
idiosyncratic disturbances, computed relative to the pre-2007Q4 factors, show unusual evidence
of common structure in the current recession. Specifically, we used the pre-2007Q4 factors to
compute the vector of idiosyncratic disturbances for the eight quarters following 07Q4 (in the
ˆ 5907 Fˆ 5907 ). The sample second moment matrix of
notation of footnote 6, this vector is Xt – 
t

these disturbances has rank 8, and the ratio of the first eigenvalue of this matrix to the sum of all
eight nonzero eigenvalues is a measure of the correlation among the idiosyncratic disturbances
during these eight quarters. A new common factor would produce an unusually large value of
this ratio. It turns out that this eigenvalue ratio following 2009Q2 is less than it was during the
1960Q2 and 1973Q4 recessions. The p-value testing the hypothesis that this ratio is the same as
its pre-2007Q4 mean, computed by subsampling consecutive 8-quarter periods, is 0.59.
Modifying the subsampling test to examine the 15 quarters following 07Q4 yields a p-value of
0.90. This test therefore provides no evidence of a missing factor.
3.3 Increased variance of factors
The findings of Sections 3.1 and 3.2 suggest that the severity of the recession was
associated with large unexpected movements in the factors, not with some new factor or with
changes in macroeconomic dynamics (changes in coefficients). Indeed, the factors were highly
volatile over this period. Table 4 summarizes the standard deviations of selected variables over
the pre-1983 period, the Great Moderation period, and post-2005, along with the standard
deviations of their factor components computed using pre-2007Q3 coefficients and the “old”
factors. For these (and other) macro aggregates, volatility post-2005 has returned to or exceeds
pre-Great Moderation levels. As the second block of Table 4 shows, this increased volatility is
associated with increased volatility of the factor components, which (because the coefficients are
constant) derives from increased volatility of the factors themselves.
Table 5 takes a closer look at the factor innovations were over this period. Because the
factors are identified by the arbitrary normalization of principal components analysis, the
innovations to individual factors are hard to interpret. Table 5 therefore examines linear
combinations of the factor innovations determined by the factor loadings for various macro
variables, so that the entries are the innovation in the common component, by series, by quarter,

13

from 2007Q4-2001Q2, reported in standard deviation units.13 For the series in Table 5, the
factor component of oil prices experienced moderate then large standardized innovations in
2007Q1 and 2008Q2 (1.7 and 3.4, respectively), and the TED spread, the VIX, and housing
starts experienced large, then extremely large (approximately 8 standard deviations) innovations
in 2008Q3 and 2008Q4. Oil prices experienced a very large negative factor innovation in
2008Q4, then large positive innovations in the next three quarters. Throughout 2007Q1-2009Q1,
the factor component innovations for the real variables were moderate by comparison and were
generally within the range of pre-2007Q3 experience. By 2009Q4, all the innovations had
returned to their normal range, which is consistent both with the large economic shocks having
passed and with the pre-2007Q3 model coefficients continuing to describe the macrodynamics.
The picture of the recession that emerges from Table 5 is one of increases in oil prices
through the first part of the recession, followed in the fall of 2008 by financial sector volatility, a
housing construction crash, heightened uncertainty, and a sharp unexpected drop in wealth.
Notably, there are few large surprise movements in the common components of the real
variables, given the factors through the previous quarter.
3.4 Discussion
The results of this section suggest three main findings. First, there is little evidence of a
new factor associated with the 2007Q4 recession and its aftermath; rather, the factors associated
with the 2007Q4 recession are those associated with previous recessions and with economic
fluctuations more generally from 1959-2007Q3. Second, for most of the series in our data set
and in particular for the main activity measures, the response to these “old” factors seems to have
been the same post-2007Q4 as pre-2007Q4. Third, there were large innovations in these “old”
factors during the recession, especially in the fall of 2008.
We believe that the most natural interpretation of these three findings is that the 2007Q4
recession was the result of one or more large shocks, that these shocks were simply larger
versions of ones that had been seen before, and that the response of macro variables to these
13

Rewrite the factor VAR (1) as Ft = ( L)Ft 1 + t, so from (2), Xt = Ft + et = ( L)Ft 1 +

t + et . Then ( L)Ft 1 is the contribution of the past factors and t is the innovation in the
common component. The innovations in Table 5 are the residuals from a 4-lag VAR estimated
using the “old” factors over 1959-2011Q2.
14

shocks was almost entirely in line with historical experience. The few series for which behavior
departed from historical patterns have natural explanations, in particular the DFM predicts
negative interest rates because it does not impose a zero lower bound and the DFM does not
predict the Fed’s quantitative easing.
The foregoing interpretation comes with caveats. First, the stability tests in Section 3.2
are based on 15 observations post-2007Q4, so their power could be low; however the plots in
Figure 2 and the R2’s in Tables 1 and 2 provide little reason to suspect systematic instability that
is missed by the formal tests.
Second, although the results concern the factors and their innovations, our interpretation
shifts from factor innovations to shocks. A new shock that induced a new pattern of macro
dynamics would surface in our DFM as a new factor, but we find no evidence of a missing or
new factor. However, the possibility remains that there was a new shock in 2007Q4 that has the
same effect on the factors as previously observed shocks. Indeed at some level this must be so:
the Lehman collapse was unprecedented and the “Lehman shock” was new, and so were TARP,
quantitative easing, the auto bailout, and the other extraordinary events of this recession. Our
point is that while all these particulars were new, their dynamic effect on the economy was not.
4. Structural Shocks: Identification and Contribution to the 2007Q4 Recession
The analysis of Section 3 suggests that the shocks precipitating the 2007Q4 recession
were simply larger versions of shocks experienced by the U.S. economy over the previous five
decades. We now turn to the task of identifying those shocks and quantifying their impact,
starting with our general approach to identification.
4.1 DFM shock identification using instrumental variables
The identification problem in structural VAR analysis is to go from the moving average
representation in terms of the innovations (the one step ahead forecast errors of the variables in
the VAR) to the moving average representation in terms the structural shocks, which is the
impulse response function with respect to a unit increase in the structural shocks. This is
typically done by first assuming that the innovations can be expressed as linear combinations of
the structural shocks, then by imposing economic restrictions that permit identification of the
15

coefficients of those linear combinations. The coefficients of those linear combinations in turn
identify the shocks and the impulse response function of the observed variables to the shocks.
This approach can be used to identify all the shocks, a subset of the shocks, or a single shock.
Most identification schemes for structural VAR analysis have an instrumental variable
interpretation. When the economic restrictions take the form of exclusion restrictions on the
impulse response function (shock A does/does not affect variable B within a quarter; shock C
does/does not have a long-run effect on variable D), the restrictions turn certain linear
combinations of the innovations into instrumental variables that in turn identify the structural
impulse response functions. We refer to such instruments as “internal” instruments because they
are linear combinations of the innovations in variables included in the VAR. An alternative
method, pioneered by Romer and Romer (1989), is to use information from outside the VAR to
construct exogenous components of specific shocks directly. These exogenous components are
typically treated as exogenous shocks, however technically they are instrumental variables for
the shocks: they are not the full shock series, rather they measure (typically with error) an
exogenous component of the shock, so that the constructed series is correlated with the shock of
interest but not with other shocks. We refer to these constructed series as external instruments,
because they use information external to the VAR for identification. For example, one of our
external instruments for the monetary policy shock is the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary
shock series; in Romer and Romer (2004) this series was treated directly as a monetary policy
shock, whereas here it is taken instead to be correlated with the monetary policy shock and
uncorrelated with all other structural shocks. More generally, in a structural VAR, an external
instrument is a variable used for identification which is not itself included in the VAR; in a
structural DFM, an external instrument is a variable used for identification which is not itself a
factor. With one exception (a productivity shock instrument identified by a Gali (1999)-type
long run exclusion restriction discussed below), all the instruments used in this paper are external
instruments.
Identification and inference using external instruments14. The basic idea of SVAR
identification with external instruments is that the structural shock is identified as the predicted

14

The approach to structural VAR identification laid out here, including the estimator in the justidentified case, was originally presented in Stock and Watson (2008). This approach was also
developed independently by Mertens and Ravn (2012), which we became aware of after
16

value in the population regression of the instrument, say Zt, on the VAR innovations t. For this
result to hold, the instrument needs to be valid, that is, it must be relevant (correlated with the
structural shock of interest) and exogenous (uncorrelated with all other structural shocks), and
the structural shocks must be uncorrelated. We now summarize the math of this identification
argument for the case of a single instrument, which is the relevant case for this paper because we
estimate shocks using one instrument at a time. This discussion is written in terms of structural
DFMs but the argument applies directly to structural VARs with the interpretation that t are the
reduced form VAR innovations. For technical details, the extension to multiple instruments,
system and subsystem estimation, and inference with weak and strong instruments, see Montiel
Olea, Stock, and Watson (2012).
As is standard in the structural VAR literature, we assume that the r innovations t are
linear combinations of r structural shocks t, so that

t = Hεt =  H1

 1t 
H r    ,
 
 rt 

(3)

where H1 is the first column of H, 1t is the first structural shock, and so forth. Thus  =
HH, where  = E(tt) and  = E(tt). We also assume, as is standard in the structural
VAR literature, that the system (3) is invertible so that the structural shocks can be expressed as
linear combinations of the innovations:

t = H–1t .

(4)

A key object of interest in structural VAR/DFM analysis is the impulse response function
with respect to a structural shock. From (2) and (3), we have that Ft = (L)–1Hεt which, when
substituted into (1), yields

presenting the conference draft of this paper. The idea of using constructed exogenous shocks
(what we call external instruments) as instruments in SVARs dates at least to Hamilton (2003),
also see Kilian (2008a, b).
17

Xt = (L)–1Hεt + et.

(5)

The impulse response function of Xt with respect to the ith structural shock thus is (L)–1Hi. As
discussed in Section 2,  and (L) are identified from the reduced form, so it remains only to
identify Hi.
We consider the problem of identifying the effect of a single shock, which for
convenience we take to be the first shock 1t, using the single instrumental variable Zt. The
instrument and shocks are assumed to satisfy three conditions:
(i) E  1t Zt  =   0 (relevance)





(ii) E  jt Zt = 0, j = 2,…, r (exogeneity)

(6)

(iii)  = D = diag(  21 ,…,  2r ) (uncorrelated shocks)
where D in (iii) is a rr diagonal matrix. Condition (i) says that Zt is correlated with the shock of
interest, 1t, that is, Zt is a relevant instrument. Condition (ii) is the exogeneity condition stating
that Zt is uncorrelated with the other structural shocks. By (i) and (ii), Zt is correlated with t
only because it is correlated with 1t. Condition (iii) is the standard structural VAR assumption
that the structural shocks are uncorrelated. Condition (iii) does not fix the shock variance, and
normalization of the shocks is discussed below.
Conditions (i) and (ii) imply that

E t Zt  = E  H  t Zt  =  H1

 E (1t Zt ) 
 = H 
H r  
1

 E ( Z ) 
rt t 


where the first equality follows from (3) and the final equality follows from (i) and (ii). The
instrument Zt thus identifies H1 up to scale and sign.

18

(7)

The shock 1t is identified (up to scale and sign) by further imposing (iii), which implies
that  = HDH. Define  to be the matrix of coefficients of the population regression of Zt on

t. Then, under (i) – (iii),
1
t =  H1 ( HDH )1t =  ( H1H 1 )D 1 ( H 1t ) = ( /  21 )1t 
t = E ( Ztt )

(8)

where the second equality follows from (7) and the final equality follows from (4) and H–1H1 =
e1, where e1 = (1 0 … 0) so that  ( H1H 1 ) D 1 = ( /  21 )e1 . Equation (8) displays the result in
the opening sentence of this subsection: the shock identified using the instruments Zt is the
predicted value from the population regression of Zt on the innovations t, that is, t, up to
scale and sign. Additional intuition for this result is as follows. Suppose you observed t, so you
could regress Zt on t; then by (i), the population coefficient on 1t would be nonzero, while by
(ii) and (iii) the coefficients on the other t’s would be zero, so the predicted value would be 1t
up to scale. But by (3) and (4), the projection of Zt on t has the same predicted value as the
regression of Zt on t, so the predicted value from the population regression of Zt on t is 1t.
The scale and sign of 1t and H1 are set by normalizing the shock to have unit impact on a
given variable, for example, an oil price shock is normalized so that a one unit positive shock
increases the (log) oil price by one unit.
Estimation and tests of overidentifying restrictions. The structural shock is estimated
using the sample analogue of (8), that is, ˆ1t is computed as the predicted value of the sample
regression of Zt on ˆt , where ˆt is the vector of residuals from the reduced-form VAR estimated
using Fˆt . If Zt is only available for a subperiod, the coefficients of this regression are used to
compute the predicted values for the span for which ˆt is available but Zt is not. All subsequent
calculations of interest here (decompositions, correlations, etc.) are made using ˆ1t .
Correlations among identified shocks. Suppose we have two instruments which
purportedly identify different shocks. If the instruments are both valid, then in population these
identified shocks will be uncorrelated. But the population projection (8) does not impose that the
two shocks be uncorrelated, in fact if one or both instruments are not valid then in general the
19

two shocks will be correlated. Similarly, two valid instruments that identify the same shock will
produce identified shocks that are perfectly correlated in population. The sample correlation
between two estimated shocks therefore provides insight into the joint validity of the two
instruments. Note that in general the correlation between the two identified shocks differs from
the correlation between the two instruments themselves.
4.2 Instruments
We now turn to a discussion of the 18 instruments we use to identify structural shocks.
We consider six structural shocks: oil, monetary policy, productivity, uncertainty, financial
market liquidity and risk, and fiscal policy. While this list is not exhaustive, these shocks feature
prominently in discussions of the crisis and recovery and each has substantial literatures upon
which we can draw for their identification. The instruments are summarized here; specific
sources and calculation details are provided in the Supplement.
Oil shock. We use three external instruments for the oil shock. The Hamilton (2003) oil
shock is a quarterly version of Hamilton’s (1996) monthly net oil price increase, constructed
over a three-year window as in Hamilton (2003) as the percentage amount by which the oil price
in a quarter exceeds the previous peak over the past three years (constructed from the PPI for oil,
available 1960Q1-2011Q4). The Kilian (2008a) oil shock is his OPEC production shortfall
stemming from wars and civil strife (1971Q1-2004Q3). The Ramey-Vine (2010) instrument is
the residual from a regression of adjusted gasoline prices on various lagged macro variables as
described in Ramey and Vine (2010), which we recomputed using the most recent data vintage.
See Kilian (2008a, b) and Hamilton (2009, 2010) for discussions of various oil shock measures.
Monetary policy shock. We use four external instruments for the monetary policy shock.
The first is the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock, which they computed as the
residual of a constructed Fed monetary intentions measure on internal Fed forecasts (quarterly
sums of their monthly variable, demeaned, 1969Q1-1996Q4). The second is the shock to the
monetary policy reaction function in the Smets-Wouters (2007) dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model, as recomputed by King and Watson (2012) (1959Q1-2004Q4). The
third is the monetary policy shock from the Sims and Zha (2006) structural VAR allowing for
shifts in shock variances but constant VAR coefficients (quarterly average of their monthly
money shock,1960Q1-2003Q4). The final instrument is the “target” factor of Gürkaynak, Sack,
20

and Swanson (2005), which measures surprise changes in the target Fed Funds rate (quarterly
sums of daily data, 1990Q1-2004Q4).15
Productivity shock. We use one internal and two external instruments for the
productivity shock. The first external instrument is the Basu, Fernald and Kimball
(2006)/Fernald (2009) series on quarterly total factor productivity adjusted for variations in
factor utilization, as updated by John Fernald (1959Q1-2011Q2). The second external
instrument is the productivity shock in the Smets-Wouters (2007) DSGE, as recomputed by King
and Watson (2012) (1959Q1-2004Q4). The internal instrument is constructed using Galí’s
(1999) identification scheme. Specifically this internal instrument is the permanent shock to the
factor component of output per hour in nonfarm businesses. In the notation of the DFM, let

OPH denote the row of  corresponding to output per hour; then this internal instrument is
OPH(1)–1t (1959Q1-2011Q2). Galí’s (1999) identification scheme is controversial and has
generated a large literature, see Mertens and Ravn (2010) for a recent discussion and references.
Uncertainty shock. We use two external instruments for the uncertainty shock. The
first, motivated by Bloom (2009), is the innovation in the VIX, where we use Bloom’s (2009)
series that links the VIX to other market uncertainty measures before the VIX was traded (the
innovation is computed as the residual from an AR(2); 1962Q3-2011Q2).16 The second is the
innovation in the common component of the Baker, Bloom and Davis (2012) policy uncertainty
index, which is based on news media references to uncertainty in economic policy (1985Q12011Q2). The construction of measures of uncertainty is relatively new and finding exogenous
variation in uncertainty is challenging; for discussions see Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca
(2010) and Bachman, Elstner, and Sims (2010).
Liquidity/risk shock. We use three external instruments for a liquidity/risk shock. The
first two are unadjusted and adjusted term spreads: the TED spread (1971Q1-2011Q2) and
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek’s (2011) excess bond premium (GZ; 1973Q3-2010Q3). Both
instruments aim to measure risk in financial markets not associated with predictable default
probabilities. The GZ spread is a bond premium which has been adjusted to eliminate
predictable default risk. For an early discussion of credit spreads as measures of market
15

Other candidate instruments include the market announcement movements of Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2002) and Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004).
16
Lee, Rabanal, and Sandri (2010) take the uncertainty shock to be the innovation to the VIX.
21

liquidity, see Friedman and Kuttner (1993); for more recent discussion see Gilchrist, Yankov and
Zakrajšek (2009) and Adrian, Colla and Shin (2012). The third instrument is Bassett, Chosak,
Driscoll, and Zakrajšek’s (2011) bank loan supply shock, which they computed as the
unpredictable component of bank-level responses to the Fed’s Senior Loan Officer Survey
(1992Q1-2010Q4).
Fiscal policy shock. We use three external instruments for fiscal policy shocks: Ramey’s
(2011a) federal spending news instrument (demeaned, 1959Q1-2010Q4), Fisher and Peters’
(2010) excess returns on stocks of military contractors (1959Q1-2008Q4), and Romer and
Romer’s (2010) tax changes relative to GDP (“all exogenous”, demeaned, 1959Q1-2007Q4).
The first two of these are instruments for federal government spending changes while the RomerRomer (2010) instrument is an instrument for federal tax changes. For additional discussion see
Parker (2011) and Ramey (2011b).
4.3 Empirical estimates of the contribution of various shocks
With these instruments in hand, we now undertake an empirical analysis of the
contributions of the identified shocks to the 2007Q4 recession. This analysis additionally
requires a VAR for the factors, which we estimate using the “old” factors (see footnote 6). The
VAR has four lags and is estimated over the full 1959Q1-2011Q2 sample.
Historical contributions and correlations. Table 6 summarizes the contributions to
quarterly GDP growth of the 18 individually identified shocks (one shock per instrument) over
the same subsamples as Table 1. Whereas the R2’s in Table 1 measure the fraction of the
variation in GDP growth attributed to all the factors, the R2’s in Table 6 measure the fraction of
the variance attributed to current and past values of the individual row shock.17 As in Table 1,
the R2 is negative over subsamples in which the factor component arising from the identified
shock covaries negatively with GDP growth. Additionally, the first column of Table 1 reports
the non-HAC F statistic testing the hypothesis that the coefficients on the t’s are all zero in the

17

In the notation of (3) and (5), the factor component due to the jth structural shock is
2
th
th
2
( L)1 H j jt . The R of the i variable with respect to the j shock is thus computed as R =

1

  (eˆ )    X  , where eˆ
t

j 2
it

t

2
it

j
it

ˆ 
ˆ ( L)1 Hˆ ˆ , where 
ˆ  is the ith row of ̂ .
= Xit – 
i
j jt
i
22

regression of Zt on t, which is a measure of the strength of identification that enters the null
distribution of the correlations in Table 7 (Montiel Olea, Stock, and Watson (2012)).
As discussed in Section 4.1, the external instrument identification approach does not
restrict the shocks to be uncorrelated. Table 7 reports the full-sample correlations among the
shocks. If all the instruments within a category were identifying the same shock and if the
shocks were orthogonal, then the entries in the population version of Table 7 would be 1 within
categories and 0 across categories. As discussed in Section 4.1, each shock is the predicted value
from the regression of its instrument onto the DFM innovations, so in general the correlation
between two estimated shocks is different than the correlation between the instruments
themselves.
Tables 6 and 7 suggest three main findings.
First, for many of the external instruments, the F-statistic in column 1 of Table 6, which
is akin to a first-stage F-statistic in two stage least squares, is small, being less than 5 in ten cases
and less than 10 in all but three cases. These small F-statistics reinforce and extend Kilian’s
(2008b) observation that oil price shock series appear to be weak instruments. This suggests that
there is considerable sampling uncertainty in the remaining statistics based on these instruments,
although we do not attempt to quantify that uncertainty here.
Second, with this weak-instrument caveat, there is considerable variation of results across
instruments within categories in Tables 6 and 7. For example, while the correlation between the
oil shocks identified using the Kilian (2008a) and Ramey-Vine (2010) instruments is 0.60, the
correlation between the oil shocks identified using the Hamilton (2003) and Ramey-Vine (2010)
instruments is only 0.15. Not surprisingly in light of these low correlations, the episode R2’s in
Table 6 vary considerably across instruments within a shock category, for example the Hamiltonidentified oil shock has a subsample R2 of -0.14 for 2007Q4-2011Q2, whereas for the Kilianidentified oil shock this R2 is 0.37. Wide ranges of correlations are also evident among the four
monetary policy shocks, although interestingly the variation in the subsample R2s is less, with
perhaps the exception of the Sims-Zha (2006) identified shock. Among fiscal policy shocks, the
correlation between the shocks identified using the Ramey (2011a) and Romer and Romer
(2010) instruments is -0.45 (the negative sign because one is spending, the other tax), and the
correlation between the Ramey (2011a) and Fisher-Peters (2010) spending shocks is only 0.38.
In contrast, the correlation between the Fisher-Peters (2010) and Romer-Romer (2010) identified
23

shocks is surprisingly large, 0.93, given that Fisher and Peters (2010) focus on exogenous
changes in government spending whereas Romer and Romer (2010) focus on exogenous tax
changes.
The observation that the different instruments within a category identify different shocks
with different effects echoes Rudebusch’s (1998) critique of monetary policy shocks in structural
VARs. One response is that these instruments are intended to estimate different effects, for
example the Romer-Romer fiscal instrument is intended to identify a tax shock whereas the
Ramey (2011a) and Fisher-Peters (2010) instruments are indented to identify spending shocks.
Similarly, Kilian (2008b, 2009) argues that the Kilian (2008a) instrument estimates an oil supply
shock, whereas the Hamilton instrument does not distinguish among the sources of price
movements. While the response that the different instruments are intended to estimate different
shocks has merit, it then confronts the problem that the individually identified shocks within a
category are not uncorrelated. For example, the correlation of -0.93 between the fiscal shocks
identified by the Romer-Romer (2010) tax instrument and the Fisher-Peters (2010) spending
instrument makes it problematic to treat these two shocks as distinct.
Third, again with the weak-instrument caveat, there is considerable correlation among
individually identified shocks across categories of shocks, which suggests that superficially
different instruments are capturing the same movements in the data (cross-category correlations
exceeding 0.6 in absolute value are bolded in Table 7). One notable set of correlations is
between the blocks of monetary and fiscal shocks, for which the mean average absolute
correlation between individually-identified shocks across the two categories is 0.51. The
monetary and fiscal shock literatures are aware of the difficulty of identifying one shock while
holding the other constant and this difficulty seems to arise in the large absolute correlations
between the shocks from these two literatures.
Another notable block of large correlations is between the uncertainty and liquidity/risk
shocks, for which the average absolute correlation between shocks across the two categories is
0.73. Indeed, for these categories the cross-category correlations are comparable to the withincategory correlations. The subsample R2’s in Table 6 also display similar patterns across these
four identified shocks. It is perhaps not surprising that the VIX shock and the TED spread shock
are correlated because neither isolates a specific source for the shock, for example a financial
market disruption that both heightened uncertainty and increased financial sector risk would
24

appear as shocks to both series. We find it more surprising that the correlation is 0.76 between
the shocks identified using the Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012) policy uncertainty index and the
Gilchrist- Zakrajšek (2011) excess bond premium spread. In any event, these two sets of
instruments do not seem to be identifying distinct shocks. As a result, we also consider two
composites of these five shocks constructed as the first two principal component of the five
identified shocks. The subsample R2’s for the first principal component, and for the first and
second principal components combined, are listed in the final rows of Table 6.
The 2007Q4 recession. Table 8 summarizes the contribution of the shocks in Table 6 to
the cumulative growth of GDP and employment over three periods starting in 2007Q4. Because
the shocks are correlated these contributions are not an additive decomposition of the total factor
component. Because all contributions and actuals are deviated from trend, in 2011Q2 GDP
remained 8.2 percent below its trend value, extrapolated from the 2007Q4 peak, of which 6.0
percentage points was the contribution of the factors. Plots of the contributions of the individual
shocks over the full sample, along with the shock contributions to other variables, are presented
in the Supplement.
Consider the recession period, 2007Q4-2009Q2. The largest negative shock
contributions to the drops in GDP and employment are seen in the financial shock measures
(liquidity/risk and uncertainty shocks). The composite uncertainty/liquidity shock based on the
first principal component of the five estimated shocks in this category attributes approximately
two-thirds of the recession’s decline in GDP and employment to financial factors (6.2 of 9.2
percentage points and 4.5 of 7.3 percentage points, respectively). Oil shocks and monetary
policy shocks both make moderate negative contributions, with the exception of the Sims-Zha
(2006) identified shock. The Romer-Romer (2004), Smets-Wouters (2007), and Gürkaynak,
Sack, and Swanson (2005) shocks indicate that monetary policy was neutral or contractionary
during the recession and recovery, which is consistent with the model being linear and not
incorporating a zero lower bound (so the Fed funds rate was contractionarily high).
Unfortunately, our identification scheme does not capture the unconventional monetary policy of
the crisis and recovery. During 2007Q4-2009Q2, the effects of productivity and fiscal policy
shocks on GDP growth are estimated to be small.

25

4.4 Discussion
Inference about the causes of the 2007Q4 recession based on Table 8 is complicated
because on the one hand the different instruments identify shocks that, in several cases, have a
low correlation within category, and in other cases have high correlations across categories.
Because our approach is to adopt identification schemes from the literature, this suggests internal
inconsistencies in the identified VAR literature concerning individual identified shocks. Perhaps
oversimplifying, what some authors call a monetary policy shock looks much like what other
authors call a fiscal policy shock, and what some authors call an uncertainty shock looks much
like what others call a liquidity or excess financial risk shock. These puzzling results might be
because our analysis is insufficiently nuanced to distinguish between the different estimands of
the different instruments, or because we have too few factors to span the space of the potentially
many structural shocks, or because of large sampling uncertainty arising from weak instruments.
In any event, the low correlations among some of the monetary policy shocks, the high
correlations between the monetary and fiscal policy shocks, and the high correlations among the
uncertainty and term spread shocks preclude a compelling decomposition.
Despite this substantial caveat, some substantive results emerge from Tables 6 and 8.
The contributions of productivity, monetary policy, and fiscal policy shocks to the 2007Q42009Q2 recession are small. Oil shocks contributed to the decline, especially before the
financial crisis. The main contributions to the decline in output and employment during the
recession are estimated to come from financial and uncertainty shocks. The plot of the
contribution of the first principal component of these five individually identified shocks in
Figure 3 shows that they explain a great deal of the 2007Q4 recession and recovery, and that they
also play an important but lesser role in prior fluctuations. Taken at face value, this suggests an
economy being hit by a sequence of unusually large shocks, all of which have been experienced
before, but not with such magnitude or in such close succession: initially oil shocks, followed by
the financial crisis, financial market disruptions, and a prolonged period of uncertainty.

26

5. The Slow Recovery
On its face, the unusually slow recovery following the 2009Q2 trough seems inconsistent
with the conclusion of the previous sections that the macroeconomic dynamics of this recession
are consistent with those of prior recessions, simply with larger shocks. Indeed, during the 8
quarters following the NBER-dated trough of 2009Q2, GDP grew by only 5.0%, compared with
an average of 9.2% for the recessions from 1960-2001, and employment increased only 0.6%
compared with the 1960-2001 average of 4.0%18. The contrast between the current slow
recovery and the robust recoveries of 1960-1982 is even more striking: those recessions averaged
8-quarter GDP growth of 11.0% and 8-quarter employment growth of 5.9% following the trough.
In this section, we therefore take a closer look at the extent to which the current slow recovery is
or is not consistent with historical experience.
Why has the 2009Q2 recovery in employment been so much slower than the 1960-1982
recoveries? In the context of the DFM, employment growth after a trough is the sum of four
terms: trend employment growth, the predicted cyclical common component (deviations from
trend) given the state of the economy at the trough, the prediction errors in the cyclical common
component, and the series-specific idiosyncratic errors. Accordingly, the weak 2009Q2
recovery, relative to (say) 1982Q4, could arise from differences in underlying trends (e.g.
demographics), differences in recovery paths after different types of recessions (e.g. monetary
policy vs. financial crisis), differences in macroeconomic luck once the recovery commenced, or
peculiarities of employment unrelated to the rest of the economy. Although the latter two terms
might be of historical interest, the former two terms shed more light on structural differences
between the two recoveries. In this section, we therefore focus on the first two of these terms –
the trend and the predicted cyclical common component – in the 2009Q2 recovery to their values
in previous recoveries.
As in Section 4, the calculations here require a VAR for the factors, which we estimate
using four lags and the “old” factors over the 1959-2007Q3 period. With this model held
constant, differences in the predicted cyclical component across recoveries reflects differences in
recovery paths implied by the shocks that produced the recessions. This permits a
18

These averages exclude the 1980Q3 recovery because the next recession started within the 8quarter window of these calculations.
27

decomposition of the slow recovery of 2009Q2, relative to previous recoveries, into changes in
the trend plus changes in the predicted cyclical component.
5.1 Different shocks imply different recovery paths
Different structural shocks induce different macroeconomic responses. For example,
Bloom (2009) predicts a fast recovery after an uncertainty shock (investment and consumption
pick up as soon as the uncertainty is resolved), whereas Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) describe
slow recoveries from financial crises. In terms of the factor model, the state of the economy at
the trough is summarized by the current and past values of the factors as of the trough. Because
the values of the shocks (and thus factors) vary across recessions both in composition and
magnitude, the recovery paths predicted by the DFM vary across recessions.
Figure 4 plots actual quarterly employment growth, its common component, and its
predicted common component following the eight post-1960 troughs. All series are deviated
from trend so a value of zero denotes trend employment growth. The predicted common
component is computed using the values of the factors through the trough date; that is, the
predicted common component is the forecast of the common component one would make
standing at the trough, given the historical values of the factors through the trough date and the
model parameters (because the DFM was estimated through 2007Q3, the predicted components
in Figure 4 are in-sample for the first seven recessions and pseudo out-of-sample forecasts for
2009Q2). The difference between the common component and actual employment growth is the
idiosyncratic disturbance (et in equation (1)). The difference between the common component
and the predicted common component arises from the factor innovations (t in (2)) that occurred
after the trough.
Three features of Figure 4 are noteworthy. First, there is considerable heterogeneity
across recessions in both the shape and magnitude of predicted recoveries of employment. By
construction, the sole source of this heterogeneity is differences in the state of the economy, as
measured by the factors, at the trough. Strong positive employment growth is predicted
following the 1982Q4 trough – employment growth returns to trend only three quarters after the
trough – while slow employment growth is predicted following 1980Q3, 1991Q1, and 2009Q2.

28

Second, in most recessions the predicted values track the actual common component.
The main exception is the 1980Q3 recovery, in which the next recession occurred shortly into the
expansion.
Third, given the values of the factors in 2009Q2, the DFM predicts six quarters of subtrend employment growth following the 2009Q2 trough. In fact, the DFM predicts a slower
employment recovery from the 2009Q2 trough than actually occurred, that is, the current
recovery in employment is actually stronger than predicted.19
5.2 Decomposition of the 2009Q2 recovery into trend and cyclical components
We now turn to the decomposition of the post-1959 recoveries into their trend and
predicted cyclical components, where the predicted cyclical components are computed as
described in the previous subsection using the factors at the trough. Table 9 summarizes the
results for 8-quarter cumulative post-trough growth of GDP, employment, and productivity.
Consistent with the trends plotted in Figure 1, Table 9 shows that the trend component of
predicted growth in GDP and employment falls over time. Consistent with the cyclical
components plotted in Figure 4, there is considerable variation in the predicted cyclical
components, which arises from variation in the composition and magnitude of the factors at the
trough. The predicted cyclical contributions to 8-quarter employment growth range from +1.1
percentage points following the 1982Q4 trough to -3.1 percentage points following the 2009Q2
trough.
The final rows of Table 9 provide the trend/cycle decomposition of the difference
between the predicted 8-quarter growth following 2009Q2 and the corresponding averages for
pre-1984 recoveries. Predicted GDP growth emerging from 2009Q2 is 3.0 percentage points less
than the pre-1984 average; four-fifths of this gap (2.4 percentage points) is due to differences in
trend. Predicted employment growth is 6.0 percentage points less than the pre-1984 average; of
this gap, 2.7 percentage points is attributed to differences in the cyclical components and most,
3.3 percentage points, is attributed to differences in trend employment growth. The predicted
cyclical component of productivity growth in the 2009Q2 recovery is unusually large, 6.3
percentage points, although this predicted value is perhaps comparable to its values in the
19

Allowing for a break in (L) in 1984Q1 produces somewhat faster predicted recoveries pre-84
and somewhat slower post-84, for details see the Supplement.
29

1975Q1 and 1982Q4 recoveries. The difference between the trend components of productivity
growth in the 2009Q2 recoveries and the pre-1984 recoveries is 0.5 percentage points, that is,
trend productivity growth in 2009Q2 is slightly higher than its average 1960-1982. Most of the
difference in productivity growth between the 2009Q4 recovery and the 1960-1982 recoveries is
attributed to differences in the cyclical component.20
5.3 The slowdown in trend labor force growth and slow recoveries
A striking result of the previous section is that the decline in the trend component
accounts for nearly all of the slowdown in GDP growth, and for over half the slowdown in
employment growth, in the current recovery relative to the pre-1984 averages.
Table 10 decomposes the change in trend GDP growth from 1965 to 2005 into GDP per
employee, the employment – population ratio, the labor force participation rate, and the growth
of the labor force. As seen in the first block in Table 10, the decline in the trend growth rate of
GDP of 1.2 percentage points from 1965 to 2005 is, in this accounting sense, almost entirely due
to declines in trend employment, which in turn is approximately equally due to declines in
growth of the employment-population ratio and to declines in population growth. In this
accounting sense, the third block of the table shows that declines in the growth of the
employment-population ratio are in turn due to declines in the growth of the labor force
participation rate which, in turn, is largely due to declines in the growth rate of the female labor
force participation rate. The estimated trends for the terms in the first block in Table 10 are
presented for the full 1959-2011 period in Figure 5.
Because the trend value of the unemployment rate is approximately the same in the 1960s
as in the early 2000s (after peaking in the early 1980s), understanding the decline in mean
employment growth amounts to understanding the decline in the growth of the labor force.21

20

The Supplement reports results for 5- and 7-factor models. The only notable departure from
the results reported in this paper for the 6-factor model is that the 5- and 7-factor models predict
stronger post-2009Q2 recoveries, so they attribute even more of the gap between the 2009Q2
recovery and the 1960-1982 recoveries to the slowdown in trend growth.
21
Two pieces of evidence suggest that the observed decline in employment growth is not an
artifact of long-term mismeasurement. First, trend growth in employment measured by the
household survey exhibits the same pattern as the establishment survey, with a decline of from
2.1% annually in 1970 to 1.0% annually in 2000; this 1.1 percentage point decline is close to the
1.4 percentage point decline in the establishment survey (see the Supplement). Second, the small
30

There is a significant literature that examines long-term labor force trends and links them to two
major demographic shifts.22
Two historic demographic shifts are evident in Figure 6. The first is the increase in the
female labor force participation rate from the 1960s through the 1990s and its subsequent
plateau, see Goldin (2006) for an extensive discussion. The second is the (smaller) decline in the
male labor force participation rate. Aaronson et. al. (2006) and Fallick and Pingle (2008)
attribute this decline to a combination of changes in the age distribution of workers and changing
cohort labor force participation rates associated with the aging of the baby boom; also see
Fallick, Fleischman, and Pingle (2010). The main conclusion from this demographic work is
that, barring a new increase in female labor force participation or a significant increase in the
growth rate of the population, these demographic factors point towards a further decline in trend
growth of employment and hours in the coming decades. Applying this demographic view to
recessions and recoveries suggests that the future recessions with historically typical cyclical
behavior will have steeper declines and slower recoveries in output and employment.
6. Conclusions and Discussion
Three main substantive conclusions emerge from this work. First, the recession of 20072009 was the result of shocks that were larger versions of shocks previously experienced, to
which the economy responded in an historically predictable way. Second, these shocks
emanated primarily, but not exclusively, from financial shocks and heightened uncertainty.
Third, while the slow nature of the subsequent recovery is partly due to the shocks of this
net trend in GDP per worker (establishment survey) matches the small net trend in output per
hour (nonfarm business), which would not be the case if nonfarm business hours (a narrower
measure) are correctly measured but employment is increasingly underestimated.
22
Focusing solely on demographic shifts ignores other potential factors affecting labor force
participation. One such factor is an endogenous response to the stagnation of median real wages;
however, while there is a debate about the magnitude of the labor supply elasticity, micro studies
generally suggest that it is small (see Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2011), Chetty (2011), and
Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2011) for discussions). Another such factor is a possible
trend increase in the mismatch between worker skills and available jobs. For example, Goldin
and Katz (2008) point to a plateau in the supply of educated Americans around 1980. Jaimovich
and Siu (2012) present evidence that the trend adjustments in employment occur mainly through
permanent losses of mid-skill jobs during and following recessions; this view of step-like
adjustments differs from our smooth trend. It goes beyond the scope of this paper to examine
these factors in any detail.
31

recession, most of the slow recovery in employment, and nearly all of the slow recovery in
output, is due to a secular slowdown in trend labor force growth. This slowdown in trend labor
force growth provides a simple explanation for the jobless recoveries of the 2001 and 2007
recessions. To the extent that this secular slowdown in trend labor force growth derives (as the
literature suggests) from persistent demographic changes, we can expect recoveries from future
recessions to be “jobless” as well. To these substantive conclusions, we would add a fourth,
methodological conclusion that ignoring these changing trends will impart low-frequency
movements to the errors, which seems likely to introduce subtle problems to structural VAR
analysis.
The three substantive conclusions are subject to a number of caveats. First, while the
evidence for the stability of the factor loadings is relatively strong, it is difficult to draw
inference on stability of the factor VAR parameters with only 15 quarters of data post-2007Q4,
particularly in the presence of evident heteroskedasticity in the factor innovations. The fact that
the current recovery in employment has been stronger than predicted by the DFM, standing at the
trough, could reflect the effectiveness of the extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy measures
taken during the recession, or it could be an indication of parameter instability; we are unable to
distinguish between these two possibilities with the current limited data.
Second, the structural DFM analysis using the method of external instruments estimates
shocks that are correlated with each other. The ability to estimate this correlation, rather than
needing to impose it as an identifying restriction, is a strength of this methodology. Finding
sometimes-large correlations across different types of shocks suggests that different
identification strategies are estimating similar features of the data, but interpreting them
differently. This raises broader challenges for the structural DFM and VAR literatures, and
addressing those questions goes beyond the scope of this analysis. Sorting out credible
instrumental variables methods for separately identifying liquidity shocks, market risk shocks,
exogenous wealth shocks, and uncertainty shocks constitutes a large research agenda.

32

References
Aaronson, Stephanie, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher
(2006), “The Recent Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and its Implications for
Potential Labor Supply,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity I:2006, 69 – 154 (with
discussion).
Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin (2012), “Which Financial Frictions? Parsing
the Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007-9,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012
(forthcoming).
Andrews, Donald W.K. (2003), “End-of-Sample Instability Tests,” Econometrica, 71(6): 16611694.
Bachman, R., S. Elstner, and E. Sims (2010), “Uncertainty and Economic Activity: Evidence
from Business Survey Data,” manuscript, University of Michigan.
Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2002), “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
Models,” Econometrica, 70, 191-221.
Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2006), “Confidence Intervals for Diffusion Index Forecasts and
Inference for Factor-Augmented Regressions,” Econometrica, 74,1133-1150.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2012), “Measuring Economic Policy
Uncertainty,” manuscript, Stanford University.
Bank of Canada (2011), Monetary Policy Report: October 2011.
Bassett, William F., Mary Beth Chosak, John C. Driscoll, and Egon Zakrajšek (2011), “Changes
in Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy,” manuscript, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Federal Reserve Board.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball (2006). “Are Technology Improvements
Contractionary?” American Economic Review 96(5): 1418-1448.
Bates, Brandon J., James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2012), “Dynamic Factor Models with
Structural Instability,” manuscript, Harvard University.
Baxter, Marianne B., and Robert G. King (1999), “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate
Band-Pass Filters for Economic Time Series,” Review of Economics and Statistics 81(4):
575-93.

33

Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca (2010), “Risk, Uncertainty, and Monetary
Policy,” NBER Working Paper 16397.
Berger, David (2011), “Countercyclical Restructuring and Jobless Recoveries,” manuscript, Yale
University.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz, (2005), “Measuring the Effects of Monetary
Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120, 387-422.
Bloom, Nicholas (2009). “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77, 623-685.
Boivin, Jean and Marc Gianonni (2010), “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,” NBER
Working Paper no.12772.
Bordo, Michael D. and Joseph G. Haubrich (2011), “Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and
Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record,” manuscript, Rutgers University.
Cambpell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Christopher Polk (2010), “Hard Times,” NBER WP
16222.
Chetty, Raj (2011), “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” forthcoming, Econometrica.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber (2011), “Does Indivisible Labor
Explain The Difference Between Micro And Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of
Extensive Margin Elasticities,” NBER Working Paper 16729; forthcoming, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2012.
Cochrane, John H., and Monica Piazzesi (2002), “The Fed and Interest Rates: A High-Frequency
Identification,” American Economic Review 92, 90-95.
Eickmeier, Sandra and Christina Ziegler, (2008), How successful are dynamic factor models at
forecasting output and inflation? A meta-analytic approach, Journal of Forecasting,
27(3), 237-265.
Fallick, Bruce and Jonathan Pingle (2008), “The Effect of Population Aging on Aggregate Labor
Supply in the United States,” The Outlook for Labor Supply in the United States, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, 31-80 (with discussion).
Fallick, Bruce, Charles Fleischman, and Jonathan Pingle (2010), “The Effect of Population
Aging on the Aggregate Labor Market,” ch. in Katharine G. Abraham, James R. Spletzer,

34

and Michael Harper, eds., Labor in the New Economy, University of Chicago Press for
the NBER, 377-417.
Faust, Jon, Eric Swanson, and Jonathan Wright (2004), “Identifying VARs Based on HighFrequency Futures Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6): 1107-1131.
Fisher, Jonas D.M. and Ryan Peters (2010), “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government
Spending Shocks,” The Economic Journal 120, 414-436.
Friedman, B. and K. Kuttner (1993), “Why Does the Paper-Bill Spread Predict Real Economic
Activity?”, in J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson (eds.), Business Cycles, Indicators and
Forecasting, University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Galí, Jordi (1999), “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review 89, 249-271.
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2012), “Money, Credit, Monetary
Policy and the Business Cycle in the Euro Area,” ECARES Working Paper 2012-008.
Giannone, Domenico, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Luca Sala, (2004), “Monetary Policy in Real
Time,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2004, 161-200.
Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajšek (2011), “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
NBER WP 17021; American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Gilchrist, Simon, V. Yankov, and Egon Zakrajšek (2009), “Credit Market Shocks and Economic
Fluctuations: Evidence from Corporate Bond and Stock Markets,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 56, 471-493.
Goldin, Claudia (2006), “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
Education, and Family,” American Economic Review 96(2), 1-21.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (2008), The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hall, Robert E. (2010), “Why Does the Economy Fall to Pieces after a Financial Crisis?” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 24, 3-20.
Hall, Robert E. (2011), “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review 101, 431-469.
Hall, Robert E. (2012), “Quantifying the Forces Leading to the Collapse of GDP after the
Financial Crisis,” manuscript, Stanford University.
Hamilton, James D. (1996), “This is What Happened to the Oil Price-Macroeconomy
Relationship,” Journal of Monetary Economics 38(2): 215-220.
35

Hamilton, James D. (2003), “What is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Econometrics 113: 363-398.
Hamilton, James D. (2009), “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2009, 215-283.
Hamilton, James D. (2010), “Nonlinearities and the Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices,”
NBER WP 16186.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz H.P. Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2011), “When Credit Bites Back:
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises,” NBER Working Paper 17621.
Kilian, Lutz (2008a), “Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do
They Matter for the U.S. Economy?” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, no. 2: 216–
40.
Kilian, Lutz (2008b), “The Economic Effect of Energy Price Shocks,” Journal of Economic
Literature 46(4), 871-909.
Kilian, Lutz (2009), “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market.” American Economic Review 99, no. 3: 1053–69.
Kim, Chang-Jin and Yungjo Eo (2012), “Markov-Switching Models with Evolving RegimeSpecific Parameters: Are Post-War Booms and Recessions All Alike?” manuscript,
University of Washington.
King, Robert G. and Mark W. Watson (2012), “Inflation and Unit Labor Costs,” manuscript,
Princeton University.
Lee, Jaewoo, Pau Rabanal, and Damiano Sandri (2010), “U.S. Consumption after the 2008
Crisis,” IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/01.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson (2011), “Shocks and Crashes,” NBER WP 16996.
Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn (2010), “Technology-Hours Redux: Tax Changes and the
Measurement of Technology Shocks,” manuscript, Cornell University.
Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn (2012), “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate
Income Tax Changes in the United States,” manuscript, Cornell University.
Mian, Attif and Amir Sufi (2011), “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate
Demand Channel,” manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2010), “Over the Cliff: from the Subprime to the Global Financial Crisis,”
NBER WP 16609.

36

Montiel Olea, José Luis, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2012), “Inference in Structural
VARs with External Instruments,” in progress, Harvard University.
Parker, Jonathan (2011), “On Measuring the Effects of Fiscal Policy in Recessions,” Journal of
Economic Literature 49(3): 703-718.
Ramey, Valerie A. (2011a), “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 1-50.
Ramey, Valerie A. (2011b), “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 49(3): 673–685.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Daniel J. Vine (2010), “Oil, Automobiles, and the U.S. Economy: How
Much Have Things Really Changed?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent R. Reinhart (2010), “After the Fall,” in Macroeconomic
Policy: Post-Crisis and Risks Ahead, Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City 2010 Jackson Hole Symposium.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly, (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (1989), “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test
in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4, 121-170.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (2004), “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review 94, 1055-1084.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (2010), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review 100,
763-801.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. (1998), “Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?,”
International Economic Review, 39, 907-931.
Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. Giertz (2012), “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to
Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” forthcoming, Journal of Economic Literature.
Şahin, Ayşgül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2011), “Measuring
Mismatch in the U.S. Labor Market,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1989), “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 251-287.

37

Sargent, Thomas J., and Christopher A. Sims (1977), “Business Cycle Modeling Without
Pretending to Have Too Much A-Priori Economic Theory,” in New Methods in Business
Cycle Research, ed. by C. Sims et al., Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.
Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (2006), “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary
Policy?” American Economic Review, 96:1, 54-81.
Smets, Frank and Raph Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97:3, 586-606.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2008), “NBER Summer Institute Minicourse 2008:
What’s New in Econometrics – Time Series, Lecture 7: Structural VARs,” at
http://www.nber.org/minicourse_2008.html.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2009), “Forecasting in Dynamic Factor Models Subject
to Structural Instability,” Ch. 7 in Neil Shephard and Jennifer Castle (eds), The
Methodology and Practice of Econometrics: Festschrift in Honor of D.F. Hendry.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2011) “Dynamic Factor Models,” Ch. 2 in M.J. Clements
and D.F. Hendry (eds.), Oxford Handbook on Economic Forecasting. Oxford: Oxford
University Press (forthcoming).

38

Table 1
Subsample R ’s of common component of selected quarterly macro variables,
based on six static factors from the DFM estimated over 1959Q1 – 2007Q3.
2

GDP
Consumption
Consumption – services
Nonres. fixed investment
Industrial production - total
IP – automotive
Nonfarm employment
Unemployment rate
Short-term unemployment rate
Long-term unemployment rate
Housing starts
Real house prices (OFHEO)
Inflation (PCE)
Gas & energy inflation (PCE)
Federal funds rate
Real monetary base
Real commercial & industrial
loans
TED spread
Gilchrist-Zakrajšek (2011)
spread (EBP)
S&P 500
VIX
SLOOS
HH Wealth/Disp. Income
HH Liabilities

19592007Q3
0.73
0.63
0.35
0.63
0.87
0.58
0.92
0.84
0.82
0.61
0.59
0.49
0.51
0.37
0.44
0.16
0.44

19842007Q3
0.62
0.45
0.22
0.57
0.79
0.29
0.91
0.75
0.70
0.58
0.39
0.44
0.54
0.48
0.34
0.09
0.54

60Q1
0.81
0.59
0.28
0.64
0.90
0.59
0.93
0.77
0.81
0.55
0.27
.
0.25
-0.42
-0.01
0.18
0.48

Computed over 15 quarters starting at NBER peak
69Q4 73Q4 80Q1 81Q3 90Q3 01Q1 07Q4
0.79
0.83
0.79
0.85
0.73
0.64
0.64
0.77
0.66
0.82
0.72
0.74
0.02
0.57
0.46 -0.06 0.62
0.47
0.47 -0.25
0.84
0.77
0.90
0.58
0.57
0.50
0.69
0.86
0.86
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.89
0.76
0.95
0.61
0.70
0.64
0.39
0.66
0.13
0.57
0.94
0.93
0.95
0.98
0.93
0.91
0.96
0.88
0.95
0.91
0.88
0.76
0.79
0.89
0.87
0.90
0.88
0.84
0.81
0.75
0.78
0.62
0.68
0.74
0.71
0.44
0.51
0.64
0.59
0.83
0.79
0.76
0.62
0.29
0.53
.
.
0.59 -0.01 0.60
0.42
0.57
0.70
0.66
0.44
0.40
0.57
0.56
0.82
-1.69 -0.63 0.25
0.23
0.55
0.48
0.71
0.47
0.57
0.48
0.41
0.72
0.14
-1.51
0.39
0.22
0.65
0.59 -0.18 -0.35
-0.03
0.47
0.55 -1.42 -1.07 0.70
0.62
0.46

0.54
0.48

0.02
0.48

.
.

.
.

0.78
0.89

0.74
0.11

0.70
0.49

-0.05
0.12

-0.04
0.65

0.76
.

0.72
0.47
0.60
0.16
0.57

0.69
0.50
0.18
0.14
0.48

0.75
.
.
-0.18
-0.19

0.68
0.38
.
0.67
0.73

0.89
0.74
0.65
0.48
0.90

0.62
-0.78
0.79
0.78
0.76

0.65
-0.69
0.67
0.06
0.70

0.37
0.40
0.55
0.28
0.79

0.81
0.75
-1.49
-0.46
0.18

0.89
0.89
0.47
0.51
0.77

Notes: The predicted values are the “old model/old factors” predicted values computed as
described in footnote 6. Table entries are one minus the ratio of the sum of squared prediction
errors to the sum of squares of the observed variable (see footnote 9), computed for the row
variable over the column subsample.

39

Table 2
Subsample R2 of common component of quarterly macro variables by category,
based on the six-factor DFM estimated over 1959Q1 – 2007Q3.
Category

N

NIPA
Industrial production
Employment & Unemp
Housing starts
Inventories, orders, &
sales
Prices
Earnings & productivity
Interest rates
Money & credit
Stock prices & wealth
Housing prices
Exchange rates
Other

21
13
46
8
8

19592007Q3
0.56
0.72
0.62
0.37
0.54

19842007Q3
0.43
0.60
0.50
0.21
0.35

60Q1
0.56
0.78
0.64
0.09
0.39

39
13
18
12
11
3
6
2

0.15
0.37
0.40
0.44
0.47
0.67
0.56
0.42

0.05
0.29
0.30
0.26
0.52
0.67
0.66
0.42

0.00
0.52
-0.07
0.22
0.00
.
-2.64
-0.40

Computed over 15 quarters starting at NBER peak
69Q4 73Q4 80Q1 81Q3 90Q3 01Q1 07Q4
0.46
0.62
0.66
0.59
0.64
0.49
0.65
0.77
0.86
0.86
0.80
0.66
0.61
0.80
0.68
0.76
0.76
0.81
0.61
0.63
0.78
0.26
0.54
0.46
0.54
0.44
-0.16
0.27
0.69
0.72
0.73
0.68
0.66
0.43
0.64
0.15
0.38
0.39
0.47
0.67
.
0.47
0.15

0.37
0.35
0.30
0.55
0.74
.
0.64
0.87

0.18
0.30
0.50
0.65
0.62
0.59
0.48
0.89

0.08
-0.03
0.44
0.63
0.50
-0.01
0.66
0.89

0.03
0.32
0.29
0.40
0.37
0.60
0.75
0.48

0.14
0.36
0.07
0.06
0.31
0.72
0.72
-0.60

Notes: entries are median subsample R2’s, where the median is computed for the row category of
variable over the indicated subsample. See the notes to Table 1.
Table 3
Rejection rates at the 5% significance level, by category, of the test of no break in the factor
loadings, 2007Q4 – 2011Q2 using the Andrews (2003) end-of-sample stability test

Category
NIPA
Industrial production
Employment & Unemployment
Housing starts
Inventories, orders, & sales
Prices
Earnings and Productivity
Interest rates
Money & credit
Stock prices & wealth
Housing prices
Exchange rates
Other

N
21
13
46
8
8
39
13
18
12
11
3
6
2

Rejection rates testing for a break
in 2007Q4 relative to:
1959-2007Q3
1984Q1-2007Q3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.15
0.15
0.25
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.26
0.23
0.15
0.08
0.00
0.11
0.42
0.17
0.18
0.00
0.33
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Notes: Entries are the fraction of series in the row category that reject, at the 5% significance
level, the hypothesis of stability of the factor loadings, using the Andrews (2003) end-of-sample
stability test. The statistic tests the null hypothesis of constant factor loadings against the
alternative of a break in the final 15 quarters (2007Q4-2011Q2), relative to the value of the
factor loading estimated over either 1959-2007Q3 (column 3) or 1984Q1-2007Q3 (column 4).
40

0.13
-0.11
-0.50
-0.37
0.77
0.57
0.60
0.31

Table 4
Standard deviations of four-quarter growth rates of major activity variables
Series
19842004
1.6
1.3
8.5
3.1
1.4
0.8

19591983
2.6
2.1
11.4
5.2
2.0
1.1

GDP
Consumption
Investment
Industrial production – total
Nonfarm employment
Unemployment rate (4-quarter
change)

20052011
2.8
2.3
15.3
6.4
2.3
1.5

19591983
2.6
2.1
10.5
4.9
1.9
1.1

Factor Component
198420052004
2011
1.4
2.8
1.2
2.4
6.8
11.4
3.2
5.9
1.3
2.5
0.7
1.4

Notes: Entries in the first three numeric columns are standard deviations of four-quarter
detrended growth rates of the row series; entries in the final three columns are standard
deviations of the four-quarter growth rate of the factor component (common component) of the
row series. For the unemployment rate, the statistics pertain to the four-quarter detrended
change, not the four-quarter growth rate. Calculations go through the final quarter in the data
set, 2011Q2.
Table 5
Innovations to factor components of selected series, 2007Q1 – 2011Q2 (standard deviation units)
Date

GDP
-0.9
0.3
-0.3
-0.3
-0.3
-1.4

Consumption
-1.3
-0.2
-0.8
-1.3
-0.7
-2.1

Investment
-0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
-0.4

Employment
-0.7
-0.1
-0.7
0.3
0.2
-1.1

Productivity
-1.2
0.2
0.0
-0.7
-0.4
-2.1

Housing
Starts
0.2
0.8
-0.7
-1.3
-1.3
1.0

Oil
Price
1.7
1.1
0.3
1.3
0.2
3.4

Fed
Funds
0.3
0.5
-0.6
0.4
-0.1
0.5

Ted
spread
0.0
-0.9
0.7
0.4
1.4
0.1

2007Q1
2007Q2
2007Q3
2007Q4
2008Q1
2008Q2
2008Q3
2008Q4
2009Q1
2009Q2
2009Q3
2009Q4
2010Q1
2010Q2
2010Q3
2010Q4
2011Q1
2011Q2

VIX
-0.6
-1.4
1.2
0.5
2.2
-0.4

Wealth
(FoF)
0.0
0.8
-1.0
-0.9
-2.0
-0.8

-1.7
1.0
0.3
2.9
1.6
-1.2
0.3
0.7
0.8
0.3
0.4
-0.9

-1.7
2.1
-2.7
1.8
0.4
-0.9
-0.1
0.3
-0.3
-0.6
-0.6
-0.8

-1.0
-0.1
2.3
3.3
1.9
-2.0
0.6
0.7
1.1
0.6
1.1
-1.1

-0.7
-0.4
0.9
3.8
2.3
-2.1
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.5
-1.3

-1.4
4.6
-0.3
0.7
-0.6
-0.2
0.0
1.3
0.9
0.0
-0.6
-0.6

-3.5
-8.3
-4.7
2.9
4.8
0.1
-0.5
-2.4
-1.7
0.6
1.5
0.5

-0.6
-10.3
2.5
2.8
5.0
-0.4
0.3
-1.8
0.0
1.7
2.8
0.4

0.2
-2.5
3.5
3.8
1.5
-2.1
1.2
0.3
0.9
0.8
1.2
-1.5

3.9
7.7
4.0
-3.0
-5.2
-1.7
0.9
2.1
1.0
-1.0
-0.9
-0.7

2.9
8.3
1.4
-3.4
-3.5
-2.1
0.0
1.6
0.3
-1.8
-0.8
0.1

-2.6
-4.1
-3.3
1.2
1.5
2.7
-0.6
-1.2
-0.7
0.8
-0.5
0.3

Notes: Entries are the standardized innovations in the factor component of the column series at
the row date, where the innovations are computed relative to the six factors; standardization is
done by dividing by the standard deviation of the 1959-2007Q3 factor component innovations
for that series. Standardized innovations exceeding 3 in absolute value appear in bold.
41

Table 6
Subsample R ’s of the factor component of GDP growth associated with individual identified
shocks, computed using the full-sample six-factor DFM
2

2

Structural Shock
1. Oil
Hamilton
Killian
Ramey-Vine
2. Monetary policy
Romer and Romer
Smets-Wouters
Sims-Zha
GSS
3. Productivity
Fernald TFP
Gali (long-run OPH)
Smets-Wouters
4. Uncertainty
Fin Unc (VIX)
Pol Unc (BBD)
5. Liquidity/risk
GZ EBP Spread
TED Spread
BCDZ Bank Loan
6. Fiscal policy
Ramey Spending
Fisher-Peters Spending
Romer-Romer Taxes
PCs of uncertainty and
credit spread shocks
1 PC
2 PCs

R for Structural Shock
Computed over 15 quarters starting at NBER peak
69Q4 73Q4 80Q1 81Q3 90Q3 01Q1 07Q4

F

19592007Q3

19842007Q3

2.9
1.1
1.8

0.18
0.08
0.14

0.01
-0.03
-0.04

0.26
0.15
0.27

0.49
0.10
0.24

0.10
0.20
0.38

0.11
0.24
0.49

0.23
-0.03
0.20

-0.55
-0.26
0.40

-0.14
0.37
0.23

4.5
9.0
6.5
0.6

0.23
0.18
0.19
0.12

-0.16
-0.01
-0.30
-0.07

0.35
0.24
0.29
0.07

0.31
0.25
0.44
0.39

0.57
0.32
0.54
0.26

0.57
0.23
0.51
0.26

0.16
0.37
-0.01
0.00

0.08
0.16
0.03
-0.05

0.26
0.46
0.03
0.34

14.5
na
7.0

0.29
0.07
0.20

0.14
0.02
-0.04

0.39
0.12
0.35

0.08
0.06
0.39

0.31
0.10
0.18

0.28
0.05
0.17

0.33
0.00
-0.05

-0.42
-0.11
-0.36

-0.14
-0.04
-0.17

43.2
12.5

0.08
0.11

0.03
0.02

0.12
0.15

0.16
0.40

0.18
0.15

0.31
0.14

0.22
0.48

0.23
0.15

0.34
0.62

4.5
12.3
4.4

0.12
0.18
0.11

-0.09
-0.08
0.04

0.17
0.28
0.20

0.21
0.45
0.25

0.25
0.31
0.13

0.38
0.21
0.31

0.07
0.21
0.27

0.30
0.30
0.45

0.57
0.38
0.41

0.5
1.3
0.5

0.21
0.23
0.16

-0.06
0.04
-0.20

0.36
0.27
0.21

0.35
0.02
0.25

0.50
0.32
0.36

0.55
0.36
0.31

0.06
0.41
0.08

0.01
-0.06
-0.38

0.19
0.09
-0.02

na
na

0.14
0.19

-0.03
0.07

0.21
0.17

0.36
0.49

0.25
0.31

0.26
0.40

0.30
0.38

0.23
0.32

0.48
0.54

Notes: The value of F in the first column is the (non-HAC) F-statistic from the regression of the
row instrument on the six factor innovations. The R2’s in the remaining columns are for the
contribution of the row shock to GDP growth, computed over the column subsample, as
described in footnote 18. The structural shocks are computed using the instrument listed in the
first column, as described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

42

Table 7
Correlations among estimated structural shocks

OH
OK
ORV
MRR
MSW
MSZ
MGSS
PF
PG
PSW
UB
UBBD
LGZ
LTED
LBCDZ
FR
FFP
FRR

OH
1.00
0.42
0.15
0.37
0.09
0.33
0.44
-0.64
-0.40
-0.91
-0.37
0.10
-0.20
-0.09
0.04
-0.17
0.04
0.20

OK

ORV

MRR

MSW

MSZ

MGSS

PF

PG

PSW

UB

UBBD

SGZ

STED

BBCDZ

FR

FFP

FRR

1.00
0.60
0.65
0.11
0.35
-0.12
0.30
0.34
-0.03
-0.37
0.11
-0.42
0.01
0.22
-0.64
-0.21
0.15

1.00
0.77
0.39
0.68
-0.08
0.24
0.01
0.00
-0.58
-0.37
-0.51
-0.05
0.79
-0.77
-0.35
0.30

1.00
0.09
0.93
0.24
0.20
-0.30
-0.24
-0.39
-0.17
-0.41
0.03
0.56
-0.84
-0.72
0.77

1.00
0.16
0.43
-0.09
0.35
-0.07
0.30
0.45
0.44
0.73
0.13
-0.32
0.20
-0.10

1.00
0.39
0.06
-0.53
-0.36
-0.29
-0.22
-0.24
0.10
0.55
-0.72
-0.78
0.88

1.00
-0.57
-0.37
-0.59
0.37
0.57
0.34
0.48
0.04
-0.34
-0.03
0.37

1.00
0.52
0.82
0.19
-0.06
0.07
0.21
-0.09
-0.17
-0.49
0.18

1.00
0.68
0.34
0.45
0.24
0.37
-0.28
-0.01
0.40
-0.59

1.00
0.27
-0.01
0.08
0.09
-0.06
0.01
-0.02
-0.28

1.00
0.78
0.92
0.80
-0.69
0.26
0.03
0.01

1.00
0.66
0.76
-0.54
-0.08
0.25
-0.10

1.00
0.84
-0.73
0.40
0.03
0.02

1.00
-0.40
-0.13
-0.12
0.19

1.00
-0.13
-0.12
0.19

1.00
0.38
-0.45

1.00
-0.93

1.00

Notes: Entries are correlations between individually identified shocks. Correlations are computed over the full 1959-2011Q2 sample.
Shaded background denotes correlations within categories of shocks, bold denotes cross-category absolute correlations exceeding
0.60. Row and column labels correspond to the identified shocks:
Oil: OH − Hamilton (1996, 2003); OK – Kilian (2008a); ORV – Ramey-Vine (2010)
Monetary Policy: MRR – Romer and Romer (2004); MSW – Smets-Wouters (2007); MSZ – Sims-Zha (2006); MGSS –
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005)
Productivity PF – Fernald (2009); PG – Gali (1999); PSW – Smets-Wouters (2007)
Uncertainty: UVIX – VIX/Bloom (2009); UBBD – policy/Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012)
Liquidity/risk: LGZ – Gilchrist-Zakrajšek (2011) excess bond premium; LTED: TED spread;
LBCDZ − Bassett, Choak, Driscoll, Zakrajšek (2011) bank loan
Fiscal Policy: FR – Ramey (2011); FFP – Fisher-Peters (2010); FRR – Romer-Romer (2010)

43

Table 8
Contributions of identified shocks to cumulative post-2007Q4 growth of GDP and employment
Cumulative Percentage Change
in Detrended GDP

Actual
Factor Component
1. Oil
Hamilton
Killian
Ramey-Vine
2. Monetary policy
Romer and Romer
Smets-Wouters
Sims-Zha
GSS
3. Productivity
Fernald
Gali
Smets-Wouters
4. Uncertainty
Fin Unc (VIX)
Pol Unc (BBD)
5. Liquidity/risk
GZ EBP Spread
TED Spread
BCDZ Bank Loan
6. Fiscal policy
Ramey Spending
Fisher-Peters Spending
Romer-Romer Taxes
PCs of uncertainty and
credit spread shocks
1 PC
2 PCs

Cumulative Percentage Change in
Detrended Payroll Employment

2009Q2 Forecast
Growth in Factor
Component
2009Q2-2011Q2
GDP
Emp

2007Q42008Q3
-2.8
-4.0

2007Q42009Q2
−8.7
−9.2

2007Q42011Q2
−8.2
−6.0

2007Q42008Q3
-1.4
-2.1

2007Q42009Q2
−6.2
−7.3

2007Q42011Q2
−7.4
−8.9

-1.0
-1.0
-1.4

-0.8
-2.1
-1.6

-0.8
-0.6
0.7

-0.4
-0.5
-1.1

-1.1
-1.7
-2.1

-1.0
-1.2
0.2

1.8
1.3
1.5

1.0
0.3
1.2

-1.1
-0.4
-0.3
-0.8

-1.6
-3.7
-0.1
-3.2

0.1
-5.0
-0.1
-4.3

-0.7
-0.5
-0.5
0.0

-2.1
-2.5
-1.0
-1.0

0.4
-6.2
0.3
-3.8

1.4
-0.6
0.4
-1.3

1.2
-3.3
0.8
-2.7

-0.7
0.4
-0.5

0.0
0.3
-0.1

1.4
1.1
0.6

-0.1
0.0
0.2

0.1
-0.6
-0.1

0.9
-0.9
0.4

0.2
1.0
0.9

0.2
0.5
0.7

-1.0
-2.3

-4.1
-5.8

0.2
-4.8

-0.9
-1.6

-3.7
-4.6

-2.2
-6.8

3.5
1.4

0.6
-2.0

-1.5
-1.2
-2.0

-6.3
-5.6
-3.2

-1.2
-4.9
0.1

-0.8
-0.8
-1.5

-4.6
-3.7
-3.5

-3.5
-6.8
-1.1

3.6
0.8
2.7

-0.4
-3.2
1.3

-1.6
-0.3
0.2

-1.6
-0.3
0.3

-1.0
0.3
-0.2

-0.9
-0.2
0.2

-1.6
-0.7
0.0

-0.5
0.3
0.3

0.3
0.4
-0.1

0.1
0.5
0.3

-1.5
-2.3

-6.2
-7.6

-3.4
-5.4

-1.0
-1.5

-4.5
-5.8

-5.8
-8.4

2.4
2.7

-1.8
-2.5

Notes: Entries are the contribution of the row shock to cumulative growth in GDP (first three
columns) and employment (second three columns) over the indicated period, where the shock
contribution is computed as described in footnote 18. The final two columns are the implied
forecasts of growth constructed in 2009Q2 associated with the particular shock.

44

Table 9
Predicted and actual cumulative percent growth of output, employment, and productivity in the 8
quarters following a NBER trough
Trough date
1961Q1

1970Q4

1975Q1

1980Q3

1982Q4

1991Q1

2001Q4

2009Q2

Source

GDP
1.1
7.5
8.7
2.4
6.9
9.3
3.3
6.6
9.9
1.1
6.3
7.5
5.0
6.2
11.2
0.8
5.9
6.7
2.9
5.1
8.0
2.4
4.4
6.8

Nonfarm
Employment
-1.0
4.9
4.0
0.0
4.7
4.6
-1.8
4.5
2.7
-1.5
4.2
2.7
1.1
4.1
5.2
-1.6
3.3
1.6
0.5
2.1
2.6
-3.1
1.2
-1.9

Output per Hour
(nonfarm business)
2.0
4.8
6.8
2.6
4.0
6.6
5.4
3.7
9.1
2.9
3.5
6.4
4.3
3.5
7.8
2.5
3.8
6.3
2.6
4.3
6.9
6.3
4.5
10.8

Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Actuala
Cyclical
Trend
Total
Actuala

3.0
6.8
9.8
11.0
2.6
6.4
9.0
9.2

-0.4
4.5
4.1
5.9
-0.5
3.9
3.5
4.0

3.6
4.0
7.6
7.3
3.2
4.0
7.3
7.2

Cyclical
Trend
Total

-0.6
-2.4
-3.0

-2.7
-3.3
-6.0

2.7
0.5
3.2

Averages
1960-1982

1960-2001
Differences
2009Q2 –
average,
1960-1982

Notes: Entries are the cumulative predicted percent growth (total, not per annum) of the
common component of the series in the column heading, where predictions are made using the
factors at the trough and the DFM estimated through 2007Q3. The predicted paths are
decomposed into the detrende cyclical component (the contribution of the factors at the trough)
and the trend growth rate.
a
Averages of actuals exclude the 1980Q3 recovery because the next recession commenced within
the 8-quarter window of this table.
45

Table 10
Contributions of trend productivity, labor force, and population to the trend GDP growth rate.
Series

Component

Trend Growth Rates
1965
1985
2005
3.7
3.1
2.5
1.6
1.3
1.5
0.3
0.4
-0.2
1.7
1.4
1.1

GDP
GDP/Employment
Employment/Population
Population
GDP/Employment

Difference,
2005-1965
-1.2
-0.1
-0.5
-0.6

GDP/Output(NFB)
Output(NFB)/Hours(NFB)
Hours(NFB)/Employment(NFB)
Employment(NFB)/Employment(NonFarm)

1.6
-0.2
2.3
-0.4
0.0

1.3
-0.3
1.8
-0.3
0.1

1.5
-0.2
2.2
-0.2
-0.3

-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.2
-0.3

Employment/LaborForce
LaborForce/Population

0.3
0.0
0.3

0.4
0.1
0.4

-0.2
0.0
-0.1

-0.5
0.0
-0.5

Female
Male

0.3
0.5
-0.2

0.4
0.4
-0.1

-0.1
0.0
-0.2

-0.5
-0.5
0.1

Female(Prime-age)
Male(Prime-age)
Female(Non-prime-age)
Male(Non-prime-age)

2.0
0.7
0.4
0.5
0.4

1.7
0.8
0.6
0.2
0.1

0.9
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2

-1.1
-0.4
-0.2
-0.3
-0.2

Employment/Population

LaborForce/Population

LaborForce

Notes: Entries in the first three numeric columns are the trend components of the row series,
computed as described in Section 2.3, in percent growth per year. The final column is the
difference between the 2005 and 1965 trend values. Line items within a block add to the first
row in a block, up to rounding. Standard errors for the estimated trends range from 0.1 for the
labor force variables to 0.5 for GDP, for details see the Supplement.

46

Figure 1. Quarterly growth rates of GDP, nonfarm employment, employee-hours, and labor
productivity growth, and their local means (“trends”).

47

48

49

Figure 2. Selected macro variables (solid) and their common components (dashed); plots are of
four-quarter changes, quarterly changes, or levels depending on the variable. For real variables
and prices, which are in logarithms, quarterly or four-quarter changes are scaled to be percentage
changes at an annual rate. The common components are computed using pre-2007Q3
coefficients and 2007Q4-2011 values of the “old” factors, derived from the 1959-2007Q3 model
as described footnote 6.
50

Figure 3. Contribution to 4-quarter growth of (a) GDP and (b) nonfarm employment of the first
principal component of the five identified financial shocks (uncertainty and liquidity/risk shocks)

51

Figure 4. Deviation of quarterly employment growth (at an annual rate) from trend during the
twelve quarters following the post-1960 troughs: actual (solid), the actual (estimated) common
component, and the predicted common component based on the factors at the trough (dots).

52

Figure 5. Trend components of the annual growth rates of GDP, the GDP-employment ratio, the
employment-population ratio, and population, 1959 – 2011

Figure 6. Civilian labor force participation rates: men, women, and total

53

