NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VOLATILITY, THE MACROECONOMY AND ASSET PRICES
Ravi Bansal
Dana Kiku
Ivan Shaliastovich
Amir Yaron
Working Paper 18104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18104

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

We thank seminar participants at NBER Spring 2012 Asset-Pricing Meeting, AFA 2012, SED 2011,
Arizona State University, Duke University, London School of Economics, NYU-Five Star conference,
The Wharton School, Vanderbilt University, University of British Columbia, University of New South
Wales, University of Sydney, and University of Technology Sydney for their comments. Shaliastovich
and Yaron thank the Rodney White Center for financial support The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, Ivan Shaliastovich, and Amir Yaron. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Volatility, the Macroeconomy and Asset Prices
Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, Ivan Shaliastovich, and Amir Yaron
NBER Working Paper No. 18104
May 2012
JEL No. E0,G0,G01,G12
ABSTRACT
We show that volatility movements have first-order implications for consumption dynamics and asset
prices. Volatility news affects the stochastic discount factor and carries a separate risk premium. In
the data, volatility risks are persistent and are strongly correlated with discount-rate news. This evidence
has important implications for the return on aggregate wealth and the cross-sectional differences in
risk premia. Estimation of our volatility risks based model yields an economically plausible positive
correlation between the return to human capital and equity, while this correlation is implausibly negative
when volatility risk is ignored. Our model setup implies a dynamics capital asset pricing model (DCAPM)
which underscores the importance of volatility risk in addition to cash-flow and discount-rate risks.
We show that our DCAPM accounts for the level and dispersion of risk premia across book-to-market
and size sorted portfolios, and that equity portfolios carry positive volatility-risk premia.

Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu

Ivan Shaliastovich
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2423 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ishal@wharton.upenn.edu

Dana Kiku
Finance Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
kiku@wharton.upenn.edu

Amir Yaron
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2256 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
yaron@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Financial economists are interested in understanding risk and return and the underlying economic sources of movements in asset markets. In this paper we show that
macroeconomic volatility is an important and separate source of risk which critically
affects the aggregate economy (i.e., consumption) and asset prices. Our analysis
yields a dynamic asset-pricing framework with three sources of risks: cash-flow, discount rate, and volatility risks. We show that volatility risk affects consumption
and ignoring volatility news results in a sizable mis-specification of the stochastic discount factor (SDF). Our empirical analysis yields two central results: (i) the impact of
volatility on consumption is important for understanding joint dynamics of the return
to human capital and the return to equity; (ii) volatility risks carry a sizeable risk
premium and help explain the level and dispersion of expected returns in the crosssection of assets. In sum, our evidence suggests that in addition to cash-flow and
discount-rate fluctuations, volatility risk is an important channel for understanding
the macroeconomy and financial markets.
Bansal and Yaron (2004) provide a structural framework to analyze volatility
risk. In their model risk premia is increasing in volatility of aggregate wealth, and
importantly, shocks to volatility carry a separate risk premium. In this article we show
that consumption news is directly affected by news about aggregate volatility. This
equilibrium result reveals the importance of volatility risks for a proper measurement
of consumption news and the stochastic discount factor (SDF), and for inference about
sources of risks in asset markets. Clearly the effect of volatility on consumption, SDF,
and consequently asset prices is overlooked in the literature that assumes a constant
volatility process (e.g., Campbell (1996)). We quantify the magnitude of the misspecification caused by ignoring volatility risks and document that it is significant for
both the SDF and risk premia.
We present empirical evidence that both macroeconomic- and return-based volatility measures feature persistent predictable variation, which suggests that volatility is
potentially an important source of economic risks. Our empirical findings of long-run
predictable variation in volatility are consistent with earlier work by Bollerslev and
Mikkelsen (1996) in the context of market-return volatility, and by Stock and Watson (2002) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) in the context of macroeconomic
volatility. We incorporate the evidence of time-variation in volatility in our dynamic
asset pricing model, and use it to evaluate the implications of volatility risk for consumption, returns to human capital and equity, and the cross-sectional dispersion in
equity returns.
In a model with constant volatility, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) show
that returns to human capital and the market are puzzlingly negatively correlated.
Standard economic models would imply a positive correlation between the two re1

turns, as both of these claims are long aggregate economic outcomes. In this paper
we provide a potential resolution to their puzzling finding by highlighting the importance of time-varying volatility of consumption. We document that in the data, high
macro-volatility states are high-risk states associated with significant consumption
declines and high risk premia and discount rates. In contrast, model specifications
used in earlier empirical work ignore volatility risk and therefore counterfactually
imply that expected consumption should rise in these states. We show that when
volatility risks are incorporated, an increase in the risk premium is indeed a bad state
for consumption; this allows the model to capture consumption and expected return
dynamics in a manner consistent with the data and generates a positive correlation
between human capital and equity returns.
To explore the importance of volatility risks for a broad cross-section of asset returns and their ability to account for the cross-sectional differences in risk premia,
we assume that the return to aggregate wealth is perfectly correlated with the return to market equity (e.g., Epstein and Zin (1991), Campbell (1996)). Under this
assumption, volatility of aggregate wealth is observed and can be used in empirical
analysis. Our model yields a dynamic CAPM (DCAPM) which has three sources of
risks: cash-flow, discount rate, and volatility risks. The market price of cash-flow
risk equals the risk aversion coefficient; the market prices of discount rate risks and
volatility risks are both equal to -1. As in Bansal and Yaron (2004), the market price
of volatility risk is negative, and assets with large payoffs in high volatility states
(such as long straddle positions) should have positive volatility betas, and therefore
negative risk premia. Empirical evidence in Bansal, Khatchatrian, and Yaron (2005b)
shows that equity has negative exposure to aggregate volatility since high volatility
lower equity prices; hence, equity should have a positive volatility risk premium. As
discussed below, we find considerable empirical support for these implications. Note
that when volatility risks are absent, as in Campbell (1996), all risk premia ought to
be constant and discount-rate news simply reflects risk-free rate news. If the risk-free
rate is also assumed constant, there is no discount-rate variation and the entire risk
premium in the economy is due to cash-flow risk.
To estimate the unobservable return to human capital, we assume that the expected return on human component of wealth is linear in economic states. This allows
us to extract the underlying news in consumption, wealth return and the stochastic
discount factor using a standard VAR-based methodology.1 We find that in the model
without volatility risks, as in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), the correlation
between human capital and market returns is strongly negative. For the benchmark
preferences (risk aversion of 5 and intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 2), the
correlations in realized and expected returns range between -0.50 and -0.70. In contrast, when volatility risks are incorporated, the two assets are positively correlated:
1

The importance of human capital component of wealth for explaining equity prices has been
illustrated in earlier work by Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Campbell (1996).

2

the correlation in return innovations is 0.20, and the correlations in discount rates
and five-year expected returns are 0.25 and 0.40, respectively. The model-implied risk
premia of the wealth portfolio, human capital and equity are 2.6%, 1.4% and 7.2%,
respectively. Volatility risks account for about one-third of the total risk premium
of human capital, and about one-half of the risk premium of the wealth portfolio.
The inclusion of volatility risks has important implications for time-series dynamics
of the underlying economic shocks. For example, in our volatility risk-based model,
discount rates are high and positive in recent recessions of 2001 and 2008, which is
consistent with a sharp increase in economic volatility and risk premia during those
times. The constant-volatility specification, on the other hand, generates negative
discount rate news in the two recessions.
To test the pricing implications of our volatility-based DCAPM, we exploit vectorautoregression dynamics of state variables and estimate the model under the null.
That is, we impose theoretical restrictions on the market prices of risks as well as
the riskless rate. In estimation, we utilize both time-series moments and pricing
restrictions for a cross section of book-to-market and size sorted portfolios.2 We
find that all equity portfolios have negative volatility betas, i.e., equity prices fall
on positive news about volatility. Given that investors attach a negative price to
volatility shocks, volatility risks carry positive premia. Our volatility-based DCAPM
accounts for more than 95% of the cross-sectional variation in risk premia and is
not rejected by the overidentifying restrictions. We find that volatility risk accounts
for up to 2% of the overall risk premium of the market portfolio, and quantitatively
matter more for growth rather than value portfolios.
We document a strong positive correlation between the risk premium and ex-ante
market volatility, which reflects a positive correlation between discount rates and
volatility. We find that in periods of recessions and those with significant economic
stress, such as the Great Recession, both discount-rate news and volatility news are
large and positive. Our evidence based on the expected return to aggregate wealth
and its volatility and that of expected market return and its volatility are consistent
in that volatility and discount rates in both cases are strongly positively correlated.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a theoretical
framework for the analysis of volatility risks. We set up the long-run risks model
to gain further understanding of how volatility affects quantitative inference about
consumption dynamics and the stochastic discount factor. In Section 3 we develop
an empirical framework to quantify the role of the volatility channel in the data and
discuss the model implications for the market, human capital and wealth portfolio.
Section 4 discusses the implications of the volatility-based DCAPM and the role
2

To measure economic news, we use a standard list of predictive variables (comprising the realized
market variance, price-dividend ratio, dividend growth, term and default spreads, and a long-term
interest rate), and unlike Campbell, Giglio, Polk, and Turley (2011), we do not use any portfoliospecific characteristics such as the small-stock value spread.

3

of volatility risks for explaining a broader cross-section of assets. We confirm the
robustness of our results in Section 6. Conclusion follows.

2

Theoretical Framework

In this section we consider a general economic framework with recursive utility and
time-varying economic uncertainty and derive the implications for the innovations
into the current and future consumption growth, returns, and the stochastic discount
factor. We show that accounting for the fluctuations in economic uncertainty is
important for a correct inference about economic news, and ignoring volatility risks
can alter the implications for the financial markets.

2.1

Consumption and Volatility

We adopt a discrete-time specification of the endowment economy where the agent’s
preferences are described by a Kreps and Porteus (1978) recursive utility function of
Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989). The life-time utility of the agent Ut satisfies
# 11
"
1− 1
1−
1
ψ
ψ
1− ψ
1−γ  1−γ
+ δ Et Ut+1
,
(2.1)
Ut = (1 − δ)Ct

where Ct is the aggregate consumption level, δ is a subjective discount factor, γ is a
risk aversion coefficient, ψ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), and
for notational ease we denote θ = (1 − γ)/(1 − ψ1 ). When γ = 1/ψ, the preferences
collapse to a standard expected power utility.
As shown in Epstein and Zin (1989), the stochastic discount discount factor Mt+1
can be written in terms of the log consumption growth rate, ∆ct+1 ≡ log Ct+1 −log Ct ,
and the log return to the consumption asset (wealth portfolio), rc,t+1 . In logs,
mt+1 = θ log δ −

θ
∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 .
ψ

(2.2)

A standard Euler condition
Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1

(2.3)

allows us to price any asset in the economy. Assuming that the stochastic discount
factor and the consumption asset return are jointly log-normal, the Euler equation
for the consumption asset leads to:
Et ∆ct+1 = ψ log δ + ψEt rc,t+1 −
4

ψ−1
Vt ,
γ−1

(2.4)

where we define Vt to be the conditional variance of the stochastic discount factor
plus the consumption asset return:
1
Vt = V art (mt+1 + rc,t+1 )
2
1
1
= V art mt+1 + Covt (mt+1 , rc,t+1 ) + V art rc,t+1 .
2
2

(2.5)

The volatility component Vt is equal to the sum of the conditional variances of the discount factor and the consumption return and the conditional covariance between the
two, which are directly related to the movements in aggregate volatility and the risk
premia in the economy. In this sense, we interpret Vt as a measure of the aggregate
economic volatility. In our subsequent discussion we show that, under further model
restrictions, the economic volatility Vt is proportional to the conditional variance of
the future aggregate consumption, and the proportionality coefficient is always positive and depends only on the risk aversion coefficient. As can be seen from equation
(2.4) economic volatility shocks do not impact expected consumption when there is no
stochastic volatility in the economy (so Vt is a constant), or when the IES parameter is
one, ψ = 1. These cases have been entertained in Campbell (1983), Campbell (1996),
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). In the
paper we argue for economic importance of the variation in aggregate uncertainty
and IES > 1 to interpret movements in consumption and in asset markets.
We use the equilibrium restriction in the Equation (2.4) to derive the immediate
consumption news. The return to the consumption asset rc,t+1 which enters the
equilibrium condition in Equation (2.4) satisfies the usual budget constraint:
Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct )Rc,t+1 .

(2.6)

A standard log-linearization of the budget constraint yields:
rc,t+1 = κ0 + wct+1 −

1
wct + ∆ct+1 ,
κ1

(2.7)

where wct ≡ log (Wt /Ct ) is the log wealth-to-consumption ratio (inverse of the savings
ratio), and κ0 and κ1 are the linearization parameters. Solving the recursive equation
forward, we obtain that the immediate consumption innovation can be written as the
revision in expectation of future returns on consumption asset minus the revision in
expectation of future cash flows:
ct+1 − Et ct+1 = (Et+1 − Et )

∞
X

κj1 rc,t+1+j − (Et+1 − Et )

j=0

∞
X

κj1 ∆ct+j+1 .

(2.8)

j=1

Using the expected consumption relation in (2.4), we can further express the consumption shock in terms of the immediate news in consumption return, NR,t+1 , revisions
5

of expectation of future returns (discount rate news), NDR,t+1 , as well as the news
about future volatility NV,t+1 :
NC,t+1 = NR,t+1 + (1 − ψ)NDR,t+1 +

ψ−1
NV,t+1 ,
γ −1

(2.9)

where for convenience we denote
NC,t+1 ≡ ct+1 − Et ct+1


NDR,t+1 ≡ (Et+1 − Et ) 


NCF,t+1 ≡ (Et+1 − Et ) 

∞
X
j=1

∞
X
j=0

NR,t+1 ≡ rc,t+1 − Et rc,t+1 ,


∞
X
κj1 Vt+j  ,
NV,t+1 ≡ (Et+1 − Et ) 



κj1 rc,t+j+1  ,

j=1



(2.10)

κj1 ∆ct+j+1  = NDR,t+1 + NR,t+1

To highlight the intuition for the relationship between consumption, asset prices
and volatility, let us define the news in future expected consumption NECF,t+1 :
!
∞
X
j
NECF,t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )
κ1 ∆ct+j+1 .
(2.11)
j=1

Note that the consumption innovation equation in (2.4) implies that the news in future
expected consumption is driven by the discount rate news to the wealth portfolio and
the news in economic volatility:
NECF,t+1 = ψNDR,t+1 −

ψ−1
NV,t+1 .
γ −1

(2.12)

In a similar way, we can decompose the shock in wealth-to-consumption ratio into
the expected consumption and volatility news:
(Et+1 − Et )wct+1 = NECF,t+1 − NDR,t+1



1
1
= 1−
NECF,t+1 −
NV,t+1 .
ψ
γ−1

(2.13)

When the IES is equal to one, the substitution effect is equal to the income
effect, so the future expected consumption moves one-to-one with the discount rate
news. As the two news exactly offset each other, the wealth-to-consumption ratio is
constant so that the agent consumes a constant fraction of total wealth. On the other
hand, when the IES is not equal to one, the movements in expected consumption
no longer correspond to the movements in discount rates when aggregate volatility is
time-varying. Indeed, fluctuations in economic volatility lead to the time variation
6

in the risk premia which directly affects the discount rates.3 In Sections 3 and 4
we empirically document that ”bad” economic times are associated with low future
expected growth, high risk premia and high uncertainty, so that the volatility news
co-move significantly positively with the discount rate news and negatively with the
cash-flow news. This evidence is consistent with the economic restriction in (2.12)
when volatility risks are accounted for: when the IES is above one, volatility shocks
directly lower future expected consumption and can offset a simultaneous increase in
discount rates. However, ignoring the volatility news, the structural equation (2.12)
would imply that news to future consumption and discount rates news are perfectly
positively correlated, so that the bad times of high volatility and high discount rates
would correspond to the good times of positive news to future consumption. This
stands in a stark contrast to the empirical observations and economic intuition, and
highlights the importance of volatility risks to correctly interpret the movements in
consumption and asset prices.

2.2

Asset Prices and Volatility

The innovation into the stochastic discount factor implied by the representation in
Equation (2.2) is given by,
θ
mt+1 − Et mt+1 = − (∆ct+1 − Et ∆ct+1 ) + (θ − 1)(rc,t+1 − Et rc,t+1).
ψ

(2.14)

Substituting the consumption shock in Equation (2.9), we obtain that the stochastic discount factor is driven by future cash flow news, NCF,t+1 , future discount rate
news, NDR,t+1 , and volatility news, NV,t+1 :
mt+1 − Et mt+1 = −γNCF,t+1 + NDR,t+1 + NV,t+1 .

(2.15)

As shown in the above equation, the market price of the cash-flow risk is γ,
and the market prices of volatility and discount rate news are equal to negative 1.
Notably, the volatility risks are present at any values of the IES. Thus, even though
with IES equal to one ignoring volatility does not lead to the mis-specification of the
consumption shock, the inference on the stochastic discount factor is still incorrect
and can significantly affect the interpretation of the asset markets.
3

Time-varying risk aversion would also induce time-varying risk premia. However, the volatility
dynamics we use is directly estimated from the observable macro quantities. In contrast, the process
for variation in risk aversion is more difficult to directly measure in the data.

7

Given this decomposition for the stochastic discount factor, we can rewrite the
expression for the ex-ante economic volatility Vt in (2.5) in the following way:
1
Vt = V art (mt+1 + rc,t+1 )
2
1
= V art (−γNCF,t+1 + NDR,t+1 + NV,t+1 + NR,t+1 )
2
1
= V art ((1 − γ)NCF,t+1 + NV,t+1 ) ,
2

(2.16)

where in the last equation we used the identity that the sum of the immediate and
future discount rate news on the wealth portfolio is equal to the current and future
consumption news. Consider the case when the variance of volatility news NV,t+1 and
its covariance with cash-flow news are constant (i.e., volatility shocks are homoscedastic). In this case, Vt is driven by the variance of current and future consumption
news, where the proportionality coefficient is determined only by the coefficient of
risk-aversion:
1
Vt = const + (1 − γ)2 V art (NCF,t+1 ).
2

(2.17)

Hence, the news in Vt correspond to the news in the future variance of long-run
consumption shocks; in this sense, Vt is the measure of the ex-ante economic volatility.
Further, note that when there is a single consumption volatility factor, we can identify
Vt from the rescaled volatility of immediate consumption news, Vt = const + 21 (1 −
γ)2 χV art (∆ct+1 ), where χ is the scaling factor which is equal to ratio of the variance
of long-run consumption growth to the variance of current consumption growth,
χ = V ar(NCF )/V ar(NC ).

(2.18)

We impose this structural restriction to identify economic volatility shocks in our
empirical work.
Using Euler equation, we obtain that the risk premium on any asset is equal to
the negative covariance of asset return ri,t+1 with the stochastic discount factor:
1
Et ri,t+1 − rf t + V art ri,t+1 = Covt (−mt+1 , ri,t+1 ).
2

(2.19)

Hence, knowing the exposures (betas) of a return to the fundamental sources of
risk, we can calculate the risk premium on the asset, and decompose it into the risk
compensations for the future cash-flow, discount rate, and volatility news:
1
Et ri,t+1 − rf t + V art ri,t+1
2
= γCovt (ri,t+1 , NCF,t+1 ) − Covt (ri,t+1 , NDR,t+1 ) − Covt (ri,t+1 , NV,t+1 ).
8

(2.20)

Consider a case when the volatility is constant and all the economic shocks are
homoscedastic. First, it immediately implies that the revision in expected future
volatility news is zero, NV,t+1 = 0. Further, when all the economic shocks are homoscedastic, all the variances and covariances are constant, which implies that the
risk premium on the consumption asset is constant as well. Thus, the discount rate
shocks just capture the innovations into the future expected risk-free rates. Hence,
under homoscedasticity, the economic sources of risks include the revisions in future
expected cash flow, and the revisions in future expected risk-free rates:

for NRF,t+1

oV ol
oV ol
mN
− Et mN
= −γNCF,t+1 + NRF,t+1 ,
t+1
t+1
P

∞
j
= (Et+1 − Et )
κ
r
.
f,t+j
j=1 1

(2.21)

When volatility is constant, the risk premia are constant and determined by the
unconditional covariances of asset returns with future risk-free rate news and future
cash-flow news. Further, the beta of returns with respect to discount rate shocks,
NDR,t+1 , should just be equal to the return beta to the future expected risk-free
shocks, NRF,t+1 . In several empirical studies in the literature (see e.g., Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004)), the risk-free rates are assumed to be constant. Following the
above analysis, it implies, then, that the news about future discount rates is exactly
zero, and so is the discount-rate beta, and all the risk premium in the economy
is captured just by risks in future cash-flows. Thus, ignoring volatility risks can
significantly alter the interpretation of the risk and return in financial markets.

2.3

Mis-Specification of Consumption and SDF

To gain further understanding of how volatility affects quantitative inference about
consumption, the stochastic discount factor, asset prices and risk premia, we utilize
a standard long-run risks model of Bansal and Yaron (2004). This model captures
many salient features of the macroeconomic and asset market data and importantly
ascribes a prominent role for the volatility risk.4
In a standard long-run risks model, consumption dynamics satisfies
∆ct+1 = µ + xt + σt ηt+1 ,
xt+1 = ρxt + ϕe σt ǫt+1 ,
2
σt+1
= σc2 + ν(σt2 − σc2 ) + σw wt+1 ,
4

(2.22)
(2.23)
(2.24)

See Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a) for a discussion of the
long-run risks channels for the asset markets and specifically the role of volatility risks, Bansal
et al. (2005b) for early extensive empirical evidence on the role of volatility risks, and Eraker and
Shaliastovich (2008), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010), and Drechsler and Yaron (2011), for the
importance of volatility risks for derivative markets.

9

where xt drives the persistent variation in expected consumption and σt2 is the conditional variance of the consumption shocks. Innovation ηt is a short-run consumption
shock, ǫt is the shock to the expected consumption growth, and wt is the volatility
shock; for parsimony, these three shocks are assumed to be i.i.d Normal.
As shown in Bansal and Yaron (2004), the innovation in the equilibrium stochastic
discount factor satisfies,
(Et+1 − Et )mt+1 = −λc σt ηt+1 − λx ϕe σt ǫt+1 − λσ σw wt+1 ,

(2.25)

where λc , λx and λσ denote the market prices of short-run, long-run and volatility
risk, respectively; their expressions are provided in the Appendix. In particular, with
preference for early resolution of uncertainty (ψ > 1/γ), the market price of volatility
risks is negative: λσ < 0, so that high volatility represents bad states for investors
in which their marginal utility goes up. Further, when IES parameter is above one,
the equilibrium equity valuations fall at times of high volatility, consistent with the
empirical evidence documented in Bansal et al. (2005b). Negative asset beta coupled
with negative market price of volatility risks leads to a positive risk premium for
volatility shocks in the model. Further, note that the risk premium in the economy
is time-varying and driven by the conditional volatility of consumption σt2 . When the
conditional volatility of economic shocks is constant, the case considered in Campbell
(1996), the risk premia on all the assets should be constant over time.
We use a standard calibration of the model to evaluate the extent of the mismeasurement of the innovations into consumption and stochastic discount factor if
one ignores the presence of volatility. The parameter configuration used in the model
simulation is similar to Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009b) and is presented in Table
A.1 in the Appendix. The model is calibrated to match a wide range of asset-market
and consumption moments in the data and thus provides a realistic laboratory for
our analysis. We document the key moments of the consumption and asset-market
data in Table 1, and provide the model-implied output in the Appendix Table A.2.
Notably, the model produces a significant positive correlation between the discount
rate news and the volatility news: it is 60% for the consumption asset, and 90%
for the market. Further, for both consumption and market return, most of the risk
compensation comes from the cash-flow and volatility news, while the contribution of
the discount rate news is quite small.
Table 2 reports the implied consumption innovations when volatility is ignored,
that is when the term NV is not accounted for in constructing the consumption innovations. In constructing the implied consumption innovations via equation (2.9) we
use the equilibrium solutions for NR,t+1 , NDR,t+1 , and NV,t+1 implied by the long-run
risks model. In particular, we assume that the consumption return news NR,t+1 and
NDR,t+1 can be identified correctly in the simulated data even if the econometrician
ignores volatility component in the analysis.
10

The top panel of Table 2 shows that when IES is not equal to one, the implied
consumption innovations are distorted. In particular, when IES is equal to two, the
volatility of consumption innovations is about twice that of the true consumption
innovations, and the correlation between the true consumption shock and the implied
consumption shock is only 50%. Similar distortions are present when the IES is less
than one. In the bottom panel of Table 2 we report the implications of ignoring
volatility for the stochastic discount factor. When volatility is ignored, for all values
of the IES the SDF’s volatility is downward biased by about one-third. The market
risk premium is almost half that of the true one, and the correlations of the SDF with
the return, discount rate, and cash-flow news are distorted. Finally, it is important to
note that even when the IES is equal to one, the SDF is still misspecified. In all, the
evidence clearly demonstrates the potential pitfalls that might arise in interpreting
asset pricing models and the asset markets sources of risks if the volatility channel is
ignored.
The analysis above assumed the researcher has access to the return on wealth,
rc,t+1 . In many instances, however, that is not the case (e.g., Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004), Campbell (1996)) and the return on the market rd,t+1 is utilized instead. The
fact the market return is a levered asset relative to the consumption/wealth return
exacerbate the inference problems shown earlier. In particular, Table A.3 in the
Appendix shows that when the IES is equal to two, the volatility of the implied consumption shocks is about 14.3%, relative to the true volatility of only 2.5%. Campbell
(1996) (Table 9) reports the implied consumption innovations based on equation (2.9)
when volatility is ignored and the return and discount rate shocks are read off a VAR
using observed financial data. The volatility of the consumption innovations when
the IES is assumed to be 2 is about 22%, not far from the quantity displayed in our
simulated model in Table A.3.5 As in our case, lower IES values lead to somewhat
smoother implied consumption innovations. While Campbell (1996) concludes that
this evidence is more consistent with a low IES, the analysis here suggests that in
fact this evidence is consistent with an environment in which the IES is greater than
one and the innovation structure contains a volatility component.

3

Volatility, Aggregate Wealth and Consumption

In this section we develop and implement a volatility-based permanent income hypothesis framework to quantify the role of the volatility channel for the asset markets.
As the aggregate consumption return (i.e., aggregate wealth return) is not directly
observed in the data we assume that it is a weighted combination of the return to
the stock market and human capital. This allows us to adopt a standard VAR-based
5

The data used in Campbell (1996) is from 1890-1990 which leads to slightly higher volatility
numbers than the calibrated model produces.

11

methodology to extract the innovations to consumption return, volatility, SDF, and
assess the importance of the volatility channel for returns to human capital and equity.

3.1

Econometric Specification

Denote Xt a vector of state variables which include annual real consumption growth
∆ct , real labor income growth ∆yt , real market return rd,t , market price-dividend
ratio pdt , and the realized variance measure RVt :

′
Xt = ∆ct ∆yt rd,t pdt RVt .

(3.1)

For parsimony, we focus on a minimal set of economic variables in our benchmark
empirical analysis, and in Section 6 we confirm that our main results are robust to
the choice of predictive variables, volatility measurements and estimation strategy.
The vector of state variables Xt follows a VAR(1) specification, which we refer to
as Macro VAR:
Xt+1 = µX + ΦXt + ut+1 ,

(3.2)

where Φ is a persistence matrix and µX is an intercept. Shocks ut+1 are assumed to
be conditionally Normal with a time-varying variance-covariance matrix Ωt .
To identify the fluctuations in the aggregate economic volatility, we include as
one of the state variables a realized variance measure based on the sum of squares of
monthly industrial production growth over the year:
RVt+1 =

12
X

∆ip2t+j/12 .

(3.3)

j=1

Constructing the realized variance from the monthly data helps us capture more
accurately the fluctuations in the aggregate macroeconomic volatility in the data,
and we use industrial production because high-frequency real consumption data is
not available for a long sample. For robustness, we checked that our results do not
materially change if we instead construct the measure based on the realized variance of
annual consumption growth. To ensure consistency, we re-scale industrial production
based realized variance to match an average level of consumption variance.
The expectations of RVt+1 implied by the dynamics of the state vector capture the
ex-ante macroeconomic volatility in the economy; this way of extracting conditional
aggregate volatility is similar to Bansal et al. (2005b), Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron
(2007b), among others. Following the derivations in Section 2, the economic volatility

12

Vt then becomes be proportional to the ex-ante expectation of the realized variance
RVt+1 based on the VAR(1):
1
Vt = V0 + χ(1 − γ)2 Et RVt+1
2
(3.4)
1
2 ′
= V0 + χ(1 − γ) iv ΦXt ,
2
where V0 is an unimportant constant which disappears in the expressions for shocks,
iv is a column vector which picks out the realized variance measure from Xt , and χ
is a parameter which captures the link between the observed aggregate consumption
volatility and Vt . In the model with volatility risks, we fix the value of χ to the ratio
of the variances of the cash-flow to immediate consumption news, consistent with
the theoretical restriction in Section 2. In the specification where volatility risks are
absent, the parameter χ is set to zero.
Following the above derivations, the revisions in future expectations of the economic volatility can be calculated in the following way:
1
NV,t+1 = χ(1 − γ)2 i′v (I + Q)ut+1 ,
2

(3.5)

where Q is the matrix of the long-run responses, Q = κ1 Φ (I − κ1 Φ)−1 .
d
The VAR specification implies that shocks into immediate market return, NR,t+1
,
d
6
and future market discount rate news, NDR,t+1 , are given by
d
NR,t+1
= i′r ut+1 ,

d
NDR,t+1
= i′r Qut+1 ,

(3.6)

where ir is a column vector which picks out market return component from the set
of state variables Xt .
While the market return is directly observed and the market return news can
be extracted directly from the VAR(1), in the data we can only observe the labor
income but not the total return to human capital. We make the following identifying
assumption, identical to Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), that expected labor
income return is linear in the state variables:
Et ry,t+1 = α + b′ Xt ,

(3.7)

where b captures the loadings of expected human capital return to the economic
state variables. Given this restriction, the news into future discounted human capital
y
returns, NDR,t+1
, is given by,
y
NDR,t+1
= b′ Φ−1 Qut+1 ,
6

(3.8)

In what follows, we use superscript ”d” to denote shocks to the market return, and superscript
”y” to identify shocks to the human capital return. Shocks without the superscript refer to the
consumption asset, consistent with the notations in Section 2.

13

y
and the immediate shock to labor income return, NR,t+1
, can be computed as follows:
!
∞
X
y
y
NR,t+1
= (Et+1 − Et )
κj1 ∆yt+j+1 − NDR,t+1
(3.9)
j=0

= i′y (I + Q)ut+1 − b′ Φ−1 Qut+1 ,

where the column vector iy picks out labor income growth from the state vector Xt .
To construct the aggregate consumption return (i.e.,aggregate wealth return), we
follow Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Campbell (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)
and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) and assume that it is a portfolio of the
returns to the stock market and returns to human capital:
rc,t = (1 − ω)rd,t + ωry,t .

(3.10)

The share of human wealth in total wealth ω is assumed to be constant. It immediately follows that the immediate and future discount rate news on the consumption
asset are equal to the weighted average of the corresponding news to the human
capital and market return, with a weight parameter ω :
y
d
NR,t+1 = (1 − ω)NR,t+1
+ ωNR,t+1
,

(3.11)

y
d
NDR,t+1 = (1 − ω)NDR,t+1
+ ωNDR,t+1
.

These consumption return innovations can be expressed in terms of the VAR(1) parameters and shocks and the vector of the expected labor return loadings b following
Equations (3.6)-(3.9).
Finally, we can combine the expressions for the volatility news, immediate and
discount rate news on the consumption asset to back out the implied immediate
consumption shock following the Equation (2.9):
ψ−1
NV,t+1
ct+1 − Et ct+1 = NR,t+1 + (1 − ψ)NDR,t+1 +
γ−1


= (1 − ω)i′r Q + ω(i′y (I + Q) − b′ Φ−1 Q) ut+1
|
{z
}
NR,t+1



+ (1 − ψ) (1 − ω)i′r Q + ωb′ Φ−1 Q ut+1 +
|
{z
}
NDR,t+1

≡ q(b)′ ut+1 .




ψ−1 1
χ(1 − γ)2 i′v Qut+1
γ − 1 |2
{z
}
NV,t+1

(3.12)

The vector q(b) defined above depends on the model parameters, and in particular,
it depends linearly on the expected labor return loadings b. On the other hand, as
14

consumption growth itself is one of the state variables in Xt , it follows that the
consumption innovation satisfies,
ct+1 − Et ct+1 = i′c ut+1 ,

(3.13)

where ic is a column vector which picks out consumption growth out of the state
vector Xt . We impose this important consistency requirement that the model-implied
consumption shock in Equation (3.12) matches the VAR consumption shock in (3.13),
so that
q(b) ≡ ic ,

(3.14)

and solve the above equation, which is linear in b, to back out the unique expected
human capital return loadings b. That is, in our approach the specification for the
expected labor return ensures that the consumption innovation implied by the model
is identical to the consumption innovation in the data.

3.2

Data and Estimation

In our empirical analysis, we use an annual sample from 1930 to 2010. Real consumption corresponds to real per capita expenditures on non-durable goods and services,
and real income is the real per capita disposable personal income; both series are
taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Market return data is for a broad portfolio from CRSP. The summary statistics for these variables are presented in Table
1. The average labor income and consumption growth rates are about 2%. The labor
income is more volatile than consumption growth, but the two series co-move quite
closely in the data with the correlation coefficient of 0.80. The average log market
return is 5.7%, and its volatility is almost 20%. The realized consumption variance is
quite volatile in the data, and spikes up considerably in the recessions. Notably, the
realized variance is negatively correlated with the price-dividend ratio: the correlation coefficient is about -0.25, so that asset prices fall at times of high macroeconomic
volatility, consistent with findings in Bansal et al. (2005b).
We estimate the Macro VAR specification in (3.2) using equation-by-equation
OLS. For robustness, we also consider an MLE approach where we incorporate the
information in the conditional variance of the residuals; the results are very similar,
and are discussed in the robustness section. To derive the implications for the market,
human capital, and wealth portfolio returns, we set the risk aversion coefficient γ to
5 and the IES parameter ψ to 2. The share of human wealth in the overall wealth
ω is set to 0.8, the average value used in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). In
the full model specification featuring volatility risks we fix the volatility parameter χ
according to the restriction in Equation (2.18). To discuss the model implications in
the absence of volatility risks, we set χ equal to zero.
15

The Macro VAR estimation results are reported in Table 3. The magnitudes of R2
in the regressions vary from 10% for the market return to 80% for the price-dividend
ratio. Notably, the consumption and labor income growth rates are quite predictable
with this rich setting, with the R2 of 60% and nearly 40%, respectively. Because of the
correlation between the variables, it is hard to interpret individual slope coefficients
in the regression. Note, however, that the ex-ante consumption volatility is quite
persistent with an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.63 on annual frequency, and it
loads significantly and negatively on the market price-dividend ratio. 7
We plot the ex-ante consumption volatility and the expected consumption growth
rate on Figure 2. The evidence on persistent fluctuations in the ex-ante macroeconomic volatility and the gradual decline in the volatility over time is similar to the
findings in Stock and Watson (2002) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000). Notably, the volatility process is strongly counter-cyclical: its correlation with the NBER
recession indicator is -40%, and it is -30% with the expected real consumption growth.
Consistent with this evidence, the news in future expected consumption implied by
the Macro VAR, NECF , is sharply negative at times of high volatility. Indeed, as
shown in Table 4, future expected consumption news are on average -1.70% at times
of high (top 25%) versus 2.23% in low (bottom 25%) volatility times. Further, in
Figure 2 we plot a Macro VAR impulse response of consumption growth to one standard deviation shock in ex-ante consumption volatility, V art ∆ct+1 ; see Appendix for
the details of the computations. One standard deviation volatility shock corresponds
to an increase in ex-ante consumption variance by (1.95%)2 . As shown in the Figure,
consumption growth significantly declines by almost 1% on the impact of volatility
news and remains negative up to five years in the future. The response of the labor
income growth is similar.
In the full model with volatility risks, the volatility news is strongly correlated
with the discount rate news in the data. As documented in Table 4, the correlation
between the volatility news and the discount rate news on the market reaches nearly
90%, and the correlations of the volatility news with the discount rate news to labor
return and the wealth portfolio are 30% and 80%, respectively. A high correlation
between the volatility news and the discount rate news to the wealth return is evident
on Figure 4. These findings are consistent with the intuition of the economic longrun risks model where a significant component of the discount rate news is driven
by shocks to consumption volatility (see Section 2.3). On the other hand, when the
volatility risks are absent, the discount rate news no longer reflect the fluctuations in
the volatility, but rather mirror the revisions in future expectations of consumption.
As a result, the correlation of the implied discount rate news with volatility news
becomes -0.85 for the labor return, and -0.3 for the wealth portfolio. The implied
discount rate news ignoring volatility risks is very different from the discount rate
news when volatility risks are taken into account. For example, when volatility risks
7

The process for realized volatility is obviously more volatile and less persistent.

16

are accounted for, the measured discount rate news is 5.14% in the latest recession
of 2008 and 0.91% in 2001. Without the volatility channel, however, it would appear
that the discount rate news is negative at those times: the measured discount rate
shock is -2.86% in 2008 and -0.73% in 2001. Thus, ignoring the volatility channel,
the discount rate on the wealth portfolio can be significantly mis-specified due to
the omission of the volatility risk component, which would alter the dynamics of the
aggregate returns as we discuss in subsequent section.

3.3

Labor, Market and Wealth Return Dynamics

Table 5 reports the evidence on correlations between immediate and future returns on
the market, human capital and wealth portfolio. Without the volatility risk channel,
shocks to the market and human capital returns are significantly negatively correlated,
which is consistent with the evidence in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). Indeed,
as shown in the top panel of the Table, the correlations between immediate stock
y
d
market and labor income return news, NR,t+1
and NR,t+1
, the discount rate news,
y
d
d
NDR,t+1 and NDR,t+1 , and the future long-term (5-year) expected returns, Et rt→t+5
y
and Et rt→t+5 , range between -0.50 and -0.70. All these correlations turn positive when
the volatility channel is present: the correlation of immediate return news increases
to 0.20; and for discount rates and the expected 5-year returns it goes up to 0.25
and 0.40, respectively. Figure 3 plots the implied time-series of long-term expected
returns on the market and human capital. A negative correlation between the two
series is evident in the model specification which ignores volatility risks. The evidence
for the co-movements of returns is similar for the wealth and human capital, and the
market and wealth portfolios, as shown in the middle and lower panels of Table 5.
Because the wealth return is a weighted average of the market and human capital
returns, these correlations are in fact positive without the volatility channel. These
correlations increase considerably and become closer to one once the volatility risks
are introduced. For example, the correlations between immediate and future expected
news on the market and wealth returns rise to 80% with the volatility risk channel,
while without volatility risks the correlation is 0.07 for the discount rates, 0.26 for
the 5-year expected returns and 0.46 for the immediate return shocks.
To understand the role of the volatility risks for the properties of the wealth
portfolio, consider again the consumption equation in (2.12), which for convenience
we reproduce below:
!
∞
X
ψ−1
NV,t+1
(Et+1 − Et )
κj1 ∆ct+j+1 = ψNDR,t+1 −
γ
−
1
j=1

 ψ−1
y
d
= ψ ωNDR,t+1
+ (1 − ω)NDR,t+1
−
NV,t+1
γ−1
(3.15)
17

When the volatility risks are not accounted for, Nv = 0 and all the variation in the
future cash flows is driven by news to discount rates on the market and the human
capital. However, as shown in Table 4, in the data consumption growth is much
smoother than asset returns: the volatility of cash-flow news is about 5% relative to
14% for the discount rate news on the market. Hence, to explain relatively smooth
variation in cash flows in the absence of volatility news, the discount rate news to
human capital must offset a large portion of the discount rate news on the market,
which manifests as a large negative correlation between the two returns documented
in Table 5. On the other hand, when volatility news is accounted for, they remove
the risk premia fluctuations from the discount rates and isolate the news in expected
cash flows. Indeed, a strong positive correlation between volatility news and discount
rate news in the data is evident in Table 4. This allows the model to explain the
link between consumption and asset markets without forcing a negative correlation
between labor and market returns.
We use the extracted news components to identify the innovation into the stochastic discount factor, according to Equation (2.15), and document the implications for
the risk premia in Table 6. At our calibrated preference parameters, in the model
with volatility risks the risk premium on the market is 7.2%; it is 2.6% for the wealth
portfolio, and 1.4% for the labor return. Most of the risk premium comes from the
cash-flow and volatility risks, and the volatility risks contribute about one-half to the
overall risk premia. The discount rate shocks contribute virtually nothing to the risk
premia. These findings are consistent with the economic long-run risks model (see
Table A.2). Without the volatility channel, the risk premia are 2.3% for the market,
0.9% for the wealth return and 0.5% for the labor return.
While the main results in the paper are obtained with preference parameters γ = 5
and ψ = 2, in Table 7 we document the model implications for a range of the IES parameter from 0.5 to 3.0. Without the volatility channel, the correlations between labor
and market returns are negative and large at all considered values for the preference
parameters, which is consistent with the evidence in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2008). In the model with volatility risks, one requires IES sufficiently above one
to generate a positive link between labor and market returns – with IES below one,
the volatility component no longer offsets risk premia variation in the consumption
equation, which makes the labor-market return correlations even lower than in the
case without volatility risks. The evidence is similar for other values of risk aversion
parameter. Higher values for risk aversion lead to higher risk premium, that is why
we chose moderate values of γ in our analysis.

18

4

Volatility-Based Dynamic CAPM

To further highlight the importance of volatility risks for understanding the dynamics
of asset prices, we use a market-based VAR approach to news decomposition. As frequently done in the literature, here, we assume that the wealth portfolio corresponds
to the aggregate stock market and, therefore, is observable. This assumption allows
us to measure cash-flow, discount-rate and volatility news directly from the available
stock market data. As shown in Section 3, in a more general setting that explicitly
makes a distinction between aggregate and financial wealth and accounts for timevariation in volatility, realized and expected returns on wealth and stock market are
highly correlated. This evidence suggests that we should be able to learn about timeseries dynamics of fundamental risks and their prices from the observed equity data.
Furthermore, to sharpen identification of underlying risks, we will extract them by
exploiting both time-series and cross-sectional moment restrictions.
The theoretical framework here is same as the one in Section 2 with the return
on the consumption asset equal to the return on the market portfolio. Hence, the
equilibrium risk premium on any asset is determined by its exposure to the innovation in the market return and news about future discount rates and future volatility.
The multi-beta implication of our model is similar to the multi-beta pricing of the intertemporal CAPM of Merton (1973) where the risk premium depends on the market
beta and the asset exposure to state variables that capture changes in future investment opportunities. What distinguishes our volatility-based dynamic capital asset
pricing model (DCAPM) from the Merton’s framework is that, in our model, both
relevant risk factors and their prices are identified and pinned down by the underlying
model primitives and preferences. This is important from an empirical perspective as
it provides us with testable implications that can be taken to the data. Note also that
in our volatility-based DCAPM, derived from recursive preferences, the relevant economic risks comprise not only short-run fluctuations (as in the equilibrium C-CAPM
of Breeden (1979)) but also risks that matter in the long run.

4.1

Market-Based Setup

As derived above, the stochastic discount rate of the economy is given by:
mt+1 − Et mt+1 = −γNCF,t+1 + NDR,t+1 + NV,t+1 .

(4.1)

In order to measure news components from equity data, we assume that the state of
the economy is described by vector:
Xt ≡ (RVr,t , zt , ∆dt , tst , dst , it )′ ,
where RVr,t is the realized variance of the aggregate market portfolio; zt is the log
of the market price-dividend ratio; ∆dt is the continuously compounded dividend
19

growth of the aggregate market; tst is the term spread defined as a difference in
yields on the 10-year Treasury bond and three-month T-bill; dst is the yield differential between Moody’s BAA- and AAA-rated corporate bonds; and it is the log of
the real long-term interest rate. The data are real, sampled on an annual frequency
and span the period from 1930 till 2010. The realized variance is constructed by summing up squared monthly rates of market return within a year. The real long-term
rate is measured by the yield on the 10-year Treasury bond adjusted by inflation
expectations. Excess returns on the market and a cross section are constructed by
subtracting the annualized rate on the three-month Treasury bill from annual, nominal equity returns. Our state vector comprises variables that are often used in the
return-forecasting literature. We discuss the robustness of our evidence to the state
specification below.
We model the dynamics of Xt via a first-order vector-autoregression:
Xt+1 = µX + ΦXt + ut+1 ,

(4.2)

where Φ is a (6 × 6)-matrix of VAR coefficients, µX is a (6 × 1)-vector of intercepts,
and ut+1 is a (6 × 1)-vector of zero-mean, conditionally normal VAR innovations.
Note that the dynamics of the log return on the aggregate market portfolio (r) are
implied by the dynamics of its price-dividend ratio and dividend growth:
rt+1 = κ0 + ∆dt+1 + κ1 zt+1 − zt ,

(4.3)

where κ0 and κ1 are constants of log-linearization. To construct cash-flow, discountrate and volatility news we iterate on the VAR, using the same algebra as in Section
3.1 with a simplification that all news components are now directly read from the
VAR since the return on the market is assumed to represent the return on the overall
wealth. For example, discount rate news is computed as:

′
NDR,t+1 = i∆d + κ1 iz Qut+1 ,
(4.4)

where iz and i∆d are (6 × 1) indicator vectors with an entry of one in the second and
third positions, respectively, and Q = κ1 Φ (I − κ1 Φ)−1 . Other news components are
computed in a similar way.

We use the extracted news to construct the innovation in the stochastic discount
factor and price a cross section of equity returns by exploiting the Euler equation,
i.e.,



Et Ri,t+1 −Rf t = −Covt mt+1 −Et mt+1 , ri,t+1 −Et ri,t+1
(4.5)



= γCovt NCF,t+1 , ǫi,t+1 −Covt NDR,t+1 , ǫi,t+1 −Covt NV,t+1 , ǫi,t+1


where Et Ri,t+1 − Rf t is the arithmetic risk premium of asset i, and ǫi,t+1 ≡ ri,t+1 −
Et ri,t+1 is the innovation into asset-i return. It is important to emphasize that we
20

carry out estimation under the null of the model. In particular, we restrict the
premium of a zero-beta asset and impose the model’s restrictions on the market prices
of discount-rate and volatility risks. The price of cash-flow risks (i.e., risk aversion)
is estimated along with time-series parameters of the model.
To extract return innovations for the cross section, we use an econometric approach
similar to Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005a) and Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku
(2009a) that allows for a sharper identification of long-run cash-flow risks in asset
returns. In particular, for each equity portfolio, we estimate its long-run cash-flow
exposure (φi) by regressing portfolio’s dividend growth rate on the three-year moving
average of the market dividend growth:
∆di,t = µi + φi ∆dt−2→t + ǫdi,t ,

(4.6)

where ∆di,t is portfolio-i dividend growth, ∆dt−2→t is the average growth in market
dividends from time t − 2 to t, and ǫdi,t denotes idiosyncratic portfolio news. Using
the log-linearization of return:
ri,t+1 = κi,0 + ∆di,t+1 + κi,1 zi,t+1 − zi,t ,

(4.7)

the innovation into asset-i return is then given by:
ǫi,t+1 = φi (∆dt+1 − Et ∆dt+1 ) + ǫdi,t+1 + κi ǫzi,t+1 ,

(4.8)

where zi,t is the price-dividend ratio of portfolio i, κi,0 and κi,1 are portfolio-specific
constants of log-linearization, (∆dt+1 − Et ∆dt+1 ) is the VAR-based innovation in
the market dividend growth rate, and ǫzi,t+1 is the innovation in the portfolio pricedividend ratio obtained by regressing zi,t+1 on the VAR state variables. We use the
extracted innovation in the portfolio return to construct the risk-premium restriction
given in Equation (4.5).8
To extract news and construct the innovation in the stochastic discount factor,
we estimate time-series parameters and the coefficient of risk aversion using GMM by
exploiting two sets of moment restrictions. The first set of moments comprises the
VAR orthogonality moments; the second set contains the Euler equation restrictions
for the market portfolio and a cross-section of five book-to-market and five size sorted
portfolios. To ensure that the moment conditions are scaled appropriately, we weight
each moment by the inverse of its variance and allow the weights to be continuously
up-dated throughout estimation. Further details of the GMM estimation are provided
in Appendix C.
8

Our empirical results remain similar if instead we rely on the cointegration-based specification
of Bansal et al. (2009a).

21

4.2

Ex-Ante Volatility and Discount-Rate Dynamics

The GMM estimates of the market-based VAR dynamics are presented in Table 8.
As shown in the first row of the table, the realized variance of the market return
is highly predictable with an R2 of more than 60%. Time-variation in the one-year
ahead expected variance is coming mostly from variation in realized variance, term
and default spreads, and the risk-free rate, all of which are quite persistent in the
data. The conditional variance, therefore, features persistent time-series dynamics
with a first-order autocorrelation coefficient of about 0.69. These persistent dynamics are consistent with empirical evidence of low-frequency fluctuations in market
volatility documented in the literature (see, for example, Bollerslev and Mikkelsen
(1996) among others).
We find that the extracted discount-rate and volatility risks are strongly countercyclical and positively correlated. Both news tend to increase during recessions and
decline during economic expansions. At the one-year horizon, the correlation between
discount-rate and volatility news is 0.47. This evidence aligns well with economic
intuition. As the contribution of risk-free rate news is generally small, discount-rate
risks are mostly driven by news about future risk premia, and the latter is tied to
expectations about future economic uncertainty. Consequently, discount rates and
conditional volatility of the market portfolio share common time-series dynamics,
especially at low frequencies. We illustrate their co-movement in Figure 5 by plotting
the 5-year expected market return and the 5-year conditional variance implied by the
estimated VAR. As the figure shows, both discount rates and the conditional variance
feature counter-cyclical fluctuations, and almost mirror the dynamics of one another.
The correlation between the two time series is 0.75. Motivated by the documented
high correlation between discount rates and volatility, in Section 4.4 we consider a
restricted version of our volatility-based DCAPM that constraints variations in the
discount rate to variations in the conditional variance.

4.3

Pricing Implications of the Volatility-based DCAPM

The cross-sectional implications of the volatility-based DCAPM are given in Table 9.
In this specification, no restrictions are imposed on the dynamics of discount rates.
The table presents sample average excess returns of the market portfolio and the
cross section, risk premia implied by the market-based model, and asset exposure to
cash-flow, discount-rate and volatility risks. The bottom panel of the table shows the
estimate of the market price of cash-flow risks. The evidence reported in the table
yields several important insights. First, we find that cash-flow risks play a dominant
role in explaining both the level and the cross-sectional variation in risk premia. At
the aggregate market level, cash-flow risks account for 4.8% or, in relative terms, for
about 60% of the total risk premium. Cash-flow betas are monotonically increasing
22

in book-to-market characteristics and monotonically declining with size. Value and
small stocks in the data are more sensitive to persistent cash-flow risks than are
growth and large firms, which is consistent with the evidence in Bansal et al. (2005a),
Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) and Bansal et al. (2009a).
Second, we find that all assets have negative exposure to discount-rate and volatility risks. That is, in the data, prices of all equity portfolios tend to fall when discount
rates or volatility are expected to be high. Because the prices of discount-rate and
volatility risks, according to the model, are equal to negative one, both risks carry
positive premia. The documented positive compensation for volatility risks is consistent with the evidence of a positive variance premium reported in Drechsler and
Yaron (2011), and Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009). These papers show that
the estimate of the variance risk premium defined as a difference between expected
variances under the risk-neutral and physical measure is not only positive on average,
it is almost always positive in time series. Our findings are also confirmed by the
option-based evidence in Coval and Shumway (2001) who show that, in the data,
average returns on zero-market-beta straddles are significantly negative. Recently,
Campbell et al. (2011) also consider an ICAPM framework with time-varying volatility. They, however, report a negative compensation for volatility risks which conflicts
with the discussed evidence on the variance risk premium and expected straddle returns. From an economic standpoint, high volatility states are states of low prices and
low aggregate wealth. Hence, volatility risks should carry a positive risk premium.
The evidence in Table 9 also shows that discount-rate and volatility risks, each,
account for about 20% of the overall market risk premium, and seem to affect the
cross section of book-to-market sorted portfolios in a similar way. Both discount-rate
and volatility risks matter more for the valuation of growth firms than that of value
firms. This is consistent with economic intuition that growth firms, whose cash flows
are shifted to the future, are more exposed to risk-premia and discount-rate variation.
Overall, our volatility-based DCAPM accounts for about 96% of the cross-sectional
variation in risk premia, and implies a value premium of 6.1% and a size premium
of about 6.8%. The cross-sectional fit of the model is illustrated in Figure 6(a). The
estimate of the market price of cash-flow risks is statistically significant: b
γ = 2.64
(SE=0.41), and the model is not rejected by the overidentifying restrictions: the χ2
test statistic is equal to 7.74 with a p-value of 0.65.
Our empirical evidence is fairly robust to economically reasonable changes in the
VAR specification, sample period or frequency of the data. For example, omitting
term and default spreads from the VAR yields a p-value of 0.25. The estimation of
the model using post-1964 quarterly-sampled data results in a χ2 statistic of 8.1 with
a corresponding p-value of 0.33. Across these alternative specifications, the estimates
of the market price of cash-flow risks continue to be significant, and the extracted
discount-rate and volatility risks remain strongly positively correlated.
23

4.4

Asset Pricing Implications of the Restricted DCAPM

In addition to the unrestricted model discussed above, we consider a specification that
ties the dynamics of the expected return of the market portfolio to the dynamics of its
conditional variance. This restricted specification has the advantage of allowing for a
better identification of the role of volatility risks and is motivated by a documented
tight link between discount-rate and volatility news. The estimation details of this
set-up are presented in Appendix D.
Table 10 presents the asset pricing implications of the restricted volatility-based
DCAPM that incorporates the constraint on the dynamics of the risk premium. It
reports the model-implied premia of the aggregate market and the cross section,
and portfolio betas with respect to each risk source. Consistent with the evidence
from the unrestricted model, cash-flow risks remain the key determinant of the level
of the risk premium and its dispersion in the cross section. Still, volatility risks
contribute significantly. At the aggregate level, about 2% of the premium is due to
volatility risks. Thus, volatility risks account for about 25% of the overall market
premium. At the cross-sectional level, the contribution of volatility risks is fairly
uniform across size-sorted portfolios, but displays some tangible heterogeneity in the
book-to-market sort. Value firms in the data seem to be quite immune to volatility
risks, and therefore carry an almost zero volatility risk premium. Growth firms, on the
other hand, are relatively sensitive to news about future economic uncertainty. The
restricted specification is not rejected by the test of overidentifying restrictions and,
as shown in Figure 6(b), accounts for a large portion of the cross-sectional variation
in risk premia. Once again notice that all equity portfolios have negative exposure to
volatility risks, and therefore, provide investors with positive volatility premia.
The variance decomposition of the stochastic discount factor reveals that 52% of
the overall variation in the SDF is due to cash-flow risks and about 12% is due to
volatility risks. While the direct contribution of volatility risks may seem modest,
they account for another 32% of the variation in the SDF through their covariation
with cash-flow news. Similar to the consumption-based evidence presented in Section
3, cash-flow news rises during expansions and falls in recessions, while news about
future uncertainty exhibits strongly counter-cyclical dynamics. Volatility risks have
a sizable effect on the dynamics of asset prices. A one-standard deviation increase
in volatility news leads to a negative 11% fall in the return of the aggregate market
portfolio.
To summarize, our empirical evidence in Section 4 highlights the importance of
volatility risks for understanding the cross-sectional risk-return tradeoff. We show
that revisions in expectations about future volatility contribute significantly to the
overall variation in the stochastic discount factor. In the data, equity prices fall when
volatility news and marginal utility are high. Therefore, volatility risks carry a sizable
and positive risk premium.
24

5

Robustness

We conduct a number of robustness checks to ensure that our main results are not
sensitive to volatility measurements, choice of the predictive variables and estimation strategy. In our benchmark Macro VAR specification, we measure the realized
variance using squared monthly industrial production growth rates, scaled to match
the overall consumption volatility. First, we check that our results remain broadly
similar if we instead compute the realized variance based on the square of the annual
consumption growth; in this case, the implied correlations between immediate news
to the stock market and labor return is 0.20; it is 0.03 for the discount rate news and
0.26 for the 5-year expected returns. Second, we confirm that adding other predictive
variables into the VAR(1) does not materially change our results, either. For example, if we include the data on interest rate, slope of the term structure and default
spread into our benchmark Macro VAR specification, the implied correlations between human capital and market return are all in 0.2-0.4 range. Finally, we consider
an alternative MLE estimation strategy where we allow the variance of the VAR(1)
residuals of consumption and income growth to be time-varying and driven by the
ex-ante volatility variable. The results are very similar to our benchmark Macro VAR:
the correlations between human capital and market returns are positive and range
between 5% for the immediate news to 45% for the 5-year expected returns.
In Section 4 we assume that the volatility of volatility shocks is constant. To
confirm robustness of our DCAPM evidence, we estimate a more general set-up that
allows for time-variation in the variance of volatility shocks. In particular, we assume that state vector Xt follows the first-order dynamics as in Equation (4.2), with
ut+1 ∼ N(0, σr,t Ω), and σr,t = V art (NR,t+1 ). Here, we assume that all time-variation
in conditional second moments of the VAR innovations (including the innovation to
the variance component) is driven by a single state variable.9 We maintain the assumption that the conditional risk premia are proportional to the conditional variance
of the return of the market portfolio.10 One can show that in this set-up, the dynamics
of the aggregate volatility component Vt are given by:
2
Vt ≈ V0 + ξσr,t
,

(5.1)

where ξ is a non-liner function of the underlying preference and time-series parameters.
We find that the asset pricing implications of this generalized DCAPM set-up are
comparable to the ones in our benchmark specification. Consistent with the evidence
discussed above, cash-flow risks play a dominant role in explaining the cross-sectional
risk-return tradeoff. The contribution of volatility risks remains significant and, in
9
10

The estimation is carried out by imposing positivity restriction on σ̂r,t .
Empirical evidence is robust if the assumption on the dynamics of risk premia is relaxed.

25

fact, is slightly larger relative to the case when volatility shocks are homoscedastic.
On average, volatility risks account for about 25% of the overall risk premia in the
cross-section, and about 40% of the total premium of the market portfolio. The
contribution of volatility risks varies significantly across stocks sorted on book-tomarket characteristic. Similar to the implications of our benchmark specification,
growth stocks are more sensitive to volatility (and discount rate) variation than value
stocks are.

Conclusions
In this paper we show that volatility news is an important source of risk that affects
the measurement and interpretation of underlying risks in the economy and financial markets. Our theoretical analysis yields a dynamics asset pricing model with
three sources of risks: cash-flow, discount-rate and volatility risks, each carrying a
separate risk premium. We show that ignoring volatility risks may lead to sizable
mis-specifications of the dynamics of the stochastic discount factor and equilibrium
consumption, and distorted inferences about risk and return. Calibrating an off-theshelf, long-run risks model, we find that potential distortions caused by neglecting
time-variation in economic volatility are indeed significant and manifest in large upward biases in the volatility of consumption news and large downward biases in the
volatility of the implied stochastic discount factor and, consequently, risk premia.
Consistent with the existing empirical evidence, we document that both macroeconomic and return-based measures of volatility are highly persistent. Importantly,
we also find that, in the data, a rise in volatility is typically accompanied by a
significant decline in realized and expected consumption, a fall in equity prices and an
increase in risk premia. That is, high volatility states are states of high risk reinforced
by low economic growth and high discount rates. This evidence is consistent with
the equilibrium relationship among volatility, consumption and asset prices implied
by our model. A specification that ignores time-variation in volatility, in contrast to
the data, would imply an upward revision in expected lifetime consumption following
an increase in discount rates and would clearly fail to account for a strong positive
correlation between volatility and discount-rate risks.
The empirical evidence we present highlights the importance of volatility risks for
the joint dynamics of human capital and equity returns, and the cross-sectional riskrisk tradeoff. Our dynamic volatility-based asset pricing model is able to reverse the
puzzling negative correlation between equity and human-capital returns documented
previously in the literature in the context of a homoscedastic economy. By incorporating empirically robust positive relationship between ex-ante volatility and discount
rates (a missing link in the homoscedastic case), our model implies a positive correlation between returns to human capital and equity while, simultaneously, matching
26

time-series dynamics of aggregate consumption. We also show that quantitatively,
volatility risks help explain both the level and variation in risk premia across portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market characteristics. We find that during times
of high volatility in financial markets (hence, high marginal utility), equity portfolios
tend to realize low returns. Therefore, equity markets carry a positive premium for
volatility risk exposure.

27

A

Long-Run Risks Model Setup

In a standard long-run risks model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), consumption dynamics
satisfies
∆ct+1 = µ + xt + σt ηt+1 ,

(A.1)

∆dt+1 = µd + φxt + πσt ηt+1 + ϕd σt ud,t+1 ,

(A.2)

xt+1 = ρxt + ϕe σt ǫt+1 ,
2
σt+1

=

σc2

+

ν(σt2

−

σc2 )

(A.3)
+ σw wt+1 ,

(A.4)

where ρ governs the persistence of expected consumption growth xt , and ν determines the
persistence of the conditional aggregate volatility σt2 . ηt is a short-run consumption shock,
ǫt is the shock to the expected consumption growth, and wt+1 is the shock to the conditional
volatility of consumption growth; for parsimony, these three shocks are assumed to be i.i.d
Normal.
The equilibrium solution to the price-consumption ratio, pct , is linear in the expected
growth and consumption volatility:
pct = A0 + Ax xt + Aσ σt2 ,
where the equilibrium price-to-consumption ratio parameters satisfy


2 
κ 1 ϕx
1
1− ψ
1  1 + 1−κ1 ρ 
,
Aσ = (1 − γ)(1 − ) 
Ax =
,
1 − κ1 ρ
ψ
2(1 − κ1 ν)

(A.5)

(A.6)

and κ1 is the log-linearization parameter.

The innovation into the stochastic discount factor is determined by the short-run, expected consumption and volatility shocks:
mt+1 − Et mt+1 = −λc σt ηt+1 − λx ϕe σt ǫt+1 − λσ σw wt+1 ,

(A.7)

where the discount rate parameters and market prices of risks satisfy
1
mx = − , mσ = (1 − θ)(1 − κ1 ν)Aσ , m0 = θ log δ − γµ − (θ − 1) log κ1 − mσ σc2 ,
ψ
λc = γ, λx = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax , λσ = (1 − θ)κ1 Aσ .
(A.8)
Given the equilibrium model solution, we can provide explicit expressions for the immediate consumption returns news, NR,t+1 , the discount-rate news, NDR,t+1 , and the volatility

28

news, NV,t+1 , in terms of the underlying shocks and model parameters. The consumption
return shock, NR,t+1 is driven by all three shocks in the economy,
NR,t+1 = Ax κ1 ϕx σt ǫt+1 + Aσ κ1 σw wt+1 + σt ηt+1 ,

(A.9)

while the discount rate news, NDR,t+1 is driven only by the expected growth and volatility
innovations:
NDR,t+1 =

1 κ1
ϕe σt ǫt+1 − κ1 Aσ σw wt+1 .
ψ 1 − κ1 ρ

(A.10)

The economic volatility component, Vt , is directly related to the conditional variance of
consumption growth:
1
1
Vt = V art (rc,t+1 + mt+1 ) = const + χ(1 − γ)2 σt2 ,
2
2

(A.11)

where the proportionality coefficient χ satisfies,
χ=



κ1 ϕe
1 − κ1 ρ

2

+ 1.

(A.12)

Consistent with our discussion in Section 2, as volatility shocks are homoscedastic and
there is a single consumption volatility factor, the volatility parameter χ is unambiguously
positive and is equal to the ratio of variances of the long-run cash flows news, NCF,t+1 , to
the immediate consumption news, NC,t+1 :
χ=

V ar(NCF,t+1 )
.
V ar(NC,t+1 )

(A.13)

The innovation into the future expected volatility NV,t+1 satisfies
1
κ1
NV,t+1 = χ(1 − γ)2
σw wt+1 .
2
1 − κ1 ν

(A.14)

Notice that all the three shocks, NR,t+1 , NDR,t+1 and NV,t+1 , are correlated with each
other as they depend on the underlying shocks in the economy. In particular, if IES is above
one, the discount rate shocks and the volatility shocks are positively correlated, because the
volatility is driving the risk premium which is an important component of discount rate
innovations.
The expression for consumption innovations, NC,t+1 , and the stochastic discount factor
can now be written in terms of the innovations to the consumption return, discount rate
and volatility shocks, as shown in Equations (2.9) and (2.15). Under the null of the model,
the consumption shock is equal to σt ηt+1 , and the innovation into the stochastic discount
factor matches the expression in Equation (A.7).

29

The price-dividend ratio satisfies
pdt = H0 + Hx xt + Hσ σt2 ,

(A.15)

ms + 0.5((π − γ)2 + (λx − κ1d Hx )2 ϕ2e + ϕ2d )
,
1 − κ1d ν

(A.16)

where
Hx =

φ−

1
ψ

1 − κ1d ρ

,

Hσ =

for a log-linearization parameter κ1d
2
log κ1d = m0 + µd + Hσ σ02 (1 − κ1d ν) + 0.5(λσ − κ1d Hσ )2 σw
.

30

(A.17)

Table A.1: Configuration of Long-Run Risks Model Parameters

Preferences

Consumption

δ

γ

ψ

0.9984

10

2

µ

ρ

ϕe

0.0015 0.975
Volatility

σg

0.037

ν

σw

0.0072 0.999 2.8e-06
Dividend

µd

φ

ϕd

π

0.0015

2.5

3.5

2.0

Baseline calibration of the long-run risks model.

Table A.2: Consumption and Asset Market Calibration

Consumption:
Dividend:
Risk-free Rate:
Corr. of discount rate with vol shock
Total Risk Premium
Cash-flow Risk Premium
Discount Rate Risk Premium
Vol. Risk Premium

Mean

Std. Dev.

AR(1)

1.82
1.82
1.52
Wealth
0.59
2.28
1.22
0.03
1.06

2.90
10.54
1.14
Market
0.96
6.01
3.44
0.03
2.54

0.43
0.34
0.98

Long-run risks model implications for consumption growth and asset market. Based on a long model
sample of monthly data. Consumption is time-aggregated to annual frequency.

31

Table A.3: Consumption Innovation Ignoring Volatility and Consumption Return
IES = 2
Ignore Vol Mkt Vol

True

IES= 1
Ignore Vol Mkt Vol

True

IES = 0.75
Ignore Vol Mkt Vol

True

Panel A: Model with Time-varying Volatility

32

Vol of cons. shock

14.32

12.73

2.49

11.53

10.87

2.49

8.67

8.82

2.49

Corr. with True cons. shock

0.35
0.39
1.00
0.43
0.46
1.00
Panel B: Model with Constant Volatility

0.58

0.57

1.00

Volatility of cons. shock

8.48

8.48

2.49

8.47

8.47

2.49

8.41

8.41

2.49

Corr. with True cons shock

0.59

0.59

1.00

0.59

0.59

1.00

0.59

0.59

1.00

Consumption shock, the stochastic discount factor shock and the market risk premium under the calibrated long-run risks model
(column ”True”), and implied when dividend return is substituted for consumption return (column ”Mkt Vol”), and when the
volatility risks are ignored (column ”Ignore Vol”). Population values based on the long-run risks model with stochastic volatility.
Volatility is annualized, in percent.

B

Impulse Response Computations

The VAR(1) dynamics for the state variables follows,
Xt+1 = µ + ΦXt + ut+1 ,

(B.1)

where the unconditional variance-covariance matrix of shocks is Ω = ΣΣ′ .
The ex-ante consumption variance is V ar∆ct = υ0 + υ1′ Xt , for υ1 = i′rv Φ. Hence, exante volatility shocks are υ1′ ut+1 . To generate a one-standard deviation ex-ante volatility
shock, we choose a combination of primitive shocks ũt+1 proportional to their impact on
the volatility:
(υ ′ Σ)′
.
ũt+1 = p ′ 1
υ1 ΣΣ′ υ1

(B.2)

Based on the VAR, we can compute impulse responses for consumption growth, labor
income growth, price-dividend ratio and expected market return in the data. Using the
structure of the model and the solution to the labor return sensitivity b, we can also compute
the impulse response of model-implied consumption return and price-consumption ratio to
the volatility shocks.

Appendix C: GMM Estimation
The dynamics of the state vector are described by a first-order VAR:
Xt = Φ0 + ΦXt−1 + ut
where Xt is a (6 × 1)-vector of the state variables, Φ0 is a (6 × 1)-vector of intercepts, Φ
is a (6 × 6)-matrix, and ut is a (6 × 1)-vector of gaussian shocks. The VAR orthogonality
moments compose the first set of moment restrictions in our GMM estimation:




ut
E hVt AR = E
= 0.
ut ⊗ Xt−1
The second set of moments comprises the Euler conditions for 11 portfolios (the aggregate
market and the cross section of five size and five book-to-market sorted portfolios):
h
i11


e
E hCS
=
E
R
−
RiskPrem
= 0,
i
t
i,t
i=1

e is the excess return of assets i, and RiskPrem ≡ −Cov m
where Ri,t
i
t+1 −Et mt+1 , ri,t+1 −

Et ri,t+1 is the model-implied risk premium of asset i.

33

Let b
h denote the sample counterpart of the combined set of moment restrictions, i.e.,

T 
1 X hVt AR
b
.
h=
T t=1 hCS
t

The parameters of the VAR dynamics and the coefficient of risk aversion are estimated by
minimizing a quadratic form of the sample moments:
b′ b
{Φ\
0 , Φ, γ} = argmin h W h ,
Φ0 ,Φ,γ

where W is a weight matrix. The moments are weighted by the inverse of their corresponding
variances; the off-diagonal elements of matrix W are set at zero. We allow the weights to
be updated throughout estimation (as in a continuously up-dated GMM). The reported
standard errors are based on the New-West variance-covariance estimator.
When we incorporate restrictions on the variation in risk premia, the set of moment
conditions is augmented by the two orthogonality moments implied by equation (B.3). In
2
), where rte is the log excess return of the market
particular, let εt ≡ rte − (α0 + ασr,t−1
portfolio. Then,


 RP 
εt
E ht
=E
= 0.
2
εt σr,t−1

The estimation of the parameter vector, which in addition includes α0 and α, is set-up in
the same way as described above.

Appendix D: Incorporating Restrictions on RiskPremia Variation
To facilitate the interpretation of risks and identify the contribution of volatility risks, we
make the following assumption:
2
Et [rt+1 − rf,t ] = α0 + ασr,t
.

(B.3)

That is, we assume that risk premia in the economy are driven by the conditional variance
2 ≡ V ar (N
of the market return, σr,t
t
R,t+1 ). We can now re-write the innovation into the
stochastic discount factor in terms of cash-flow news, risk-free rate news and long-run news
2 . In particular, using the definition of V and the dynamics of the SDF (see equations
in σr,t
t
(2.5) and (2.15)):
 1

1
V art mt+1 + rt+1 = V art − γNCF,t+1 + NDR,t+1 + NV,t+1 + NR,t+1
(B.4)
2
2

1
V art − γ(NR,t+1 + NRP,t+1 + NRF,t+1 ) + NRP,t+1 + NRF,t+1 + NV,t+1 + NR,t+1
=
2
2
≈ 0.5(1 − γ)2 σr,t
.

Vt =

34

Note that the second line in equation (B.4) makes use of the decomposition of discountrate news into risk-premia (NRP ) and risk-free rate (NRF ) news, and the last line exploits
assumption (B.3) and homoscedasticity of volatility shocks. Since variation in the risk-free
rate in the data is quite small, we ignore its contribution to the conditional variance and
use equation (B.4) as an approximation. We can now express the innovation in the SDF as:
mt+1 − Et [mt+1 ] = −γNCF,t+1 + NDR,t+1 + NV,t+1

(B.5)

≈ −γNCF,t+1 + NRF,t+1 + α + 0.5(1 − γ) Nσ2 ,t+1 ,

P

P
j 2
j
∞
∞
where Nσ2 ,t+1 ≡ (Et+1 − Et )
κ
σ
κ
r
.
,
and
N
≡
(E
−
E
)
RF,t+1
t+1
t
f,t+j
j=1 1 r,t+j
j=1 1
Note that if the volatility channel is shut down (i.e., risk premia are constant), the last term
of the innovation in the stochastic discount factor disappears.
2

We exploit the same market-based VAR set-up as earlier. Note that the first equation
2 , which we
in the VAR allows us to estimate the dynamics of the conditional variance, σr,t
then use to obtain the estimate of the market risk premium. We continue to rely on GMM
in estimation of the VAR parameters, the parameters of the risk-premium dynamics (α0
and α), and risk aversion. The set of moment restrictions is augmented by the two moments
of the risk-premium regression implied by equation (B.3).

35

References
Bansal, R., R. Dittmar, and C. Lundblad, (2005a), Consumption, dividends, and the
cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and D. Kiku, (2009a), Cointegration and consumption
risks in asset returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1343–1375.
Bansal, R., V. Khatchatrian, and A. Yaron, (2005b), Interpretable asset markets,
European Economic Review 49, 531–560.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron, (2007a), A note on the economics and statistics
of predictability: A long run risks perspective, Working paper.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron, (2007b), Risks for the long run: Estimation and
inference, Working paper.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron, (2009b), An empirical evaluation of the long-run
risks model for asset prices, Working paper.
Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich, (2010), Confidence risks and asset prices, American
Economic Review, papers and proceedings 100, 537–41.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron, (2004), Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of
asset pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Bollerslev, T. and H. O. Mikkelsen, (1996), Modeling and pricing long memory in
stock market volatility, Journal of Econometrics 73.
Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou, (2009), Expected stock returns and variance
risk premia, Review of Financial Studies 22.
Breeden, D. T., (1979), An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265–
296.
Campbell, J., (1983), Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data., American Economic Review 83, 487–512.
Campbell, J., (1996), Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy
104, 298–345.
Campbell, J., S. Giglio, C. Polk, and R. Turley, (2011), An intertemporal capm with
stochastic volatility, Working paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, J. and T. Vuolteenaho, (2004), Bad beta, good beta, American Economic
Review 94, 1249–1275.
36

Coval, J. D. and T. Shumway, (2001), Expected option returns, Journal of Finance
56(3).
Drechsler, I. and A. Yaron, (2011), What’s vol got to do with it, Review of Financial
Studies 24, 1–45.
Epstein, L. G. and S. Zin, (1989), Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica
57, 937–969.
Epstein, L. G. and S. Zin, (1991), Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: An empirical analysis, Journal of Political
Economy 99, 263–286.
Eraker, B. and I. Shaliastovich, (2008), An equilibrium guide to designing affine
pricing models, Mathematical Finance 18, 519–543.
Hansen, L. P., J. C. Heaton, and N. Li, (2008), Consumption strikes back? Measuring
long-run risk, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Jagannathan, R. and Z. Wang, (1996), The conditional capm and the cross-section
of expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3–53.
Kreps, D. M. and E. L. Porteus, (1978), Temporal resolution of uncertainty and
dynamic choice theory, Econometrica 46, 185–200.
Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, (2001), Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56(3).
Lustig, H. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2008), The returns on human capital: Good
news on wall street is bad news on main street, Review of Financial Studies 21,
2097–2137.
McConnell, M. and G. Perez-Quiros, (2000), Output fluctuations in the united states:
What has changed since the early 1980s?, American Economic Review 90, 1464–
76.
Merton, R. C., (1973), An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica
41, 867–887.
Stock, J. and M. Watson, (2002), Has the business cycle change and why?, in Gertler,
M. and K. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 2002 , Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Weil, P., (1989), The equity premium puzzle and the risk free rate puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.

37

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Data Summary Statistics

Consumption growth
Labor income growth
Market return
Price-dividend ratio
Realized variance

Mean

Std. Dev.

AR(1)

1.86
2.01
5.70
3.38
4.76

2.18
3.91
19.64
0.45
11.13

0.48
0.39
-0.01
0.88
0.44

Summary statistics for real consumption growth, real labor income growth, real market return,
stock market price-dividend ratio and the realized variance. Realized variance is based on the sum
of squared monthly industrial production growth rates over the year, and is re-scaled to match the
unconditional variance of consumption growth. Annual observations from 1930 to 2010. Consumption growth, labor income growth and market return statistics are in percent; realized variance is
multiplied by 10000.

38

Table 2: Mis-Specification of Consumption and SDF Dynamics

IES = 2
Ignore Vol True

IES= 1
Ignore Vol True

IES = 0.75
Ignore Vol True

Implied Consumption Shock
Vol of cons. shock
Corr. with true cons. shock

5.46
0.46

2.49
1.00

2.49
1.00

2.49
1.00

2.79
0.89

2.49
1.00

59.65
4.96
1.00

39.14
2.28
0.64

58.46
3.84
1.00

Implied SDF Shock
Vol of SDF shock
Market Risk Premium
Corr. with true SDF shock

41.37
3.48
0.71

61.89
6.02
1.00

39.96
2.75
0.67

Consumption shock, the stochastic discount factor shock and the market risk premium under the
calibrated long-run risks model (column ”True”), and implied when the volatility risks are ignored
(column ”Ignore Vol”). Population values based on the long-run risks model with stochastic volatility. Volatility is annualized, in percent.

39

Table 3: Macro VAR Estimates

∆ct+1
∆yt+1
rd,t+1
pdt+1
RVt+1

∆ct

∆yt

rdt

pdt

RVt

R2

0.221

0.149

0.058

0.002

2.628

0.61

[0.090]

[0.037]

[0.012]

[0.003]

[1.091]

-0.271

0.507

0.079

0.005

2.991

[0.271]

[0.146]

[0.026]

[0.007]

[3.417]

-3.081

1.109

0.065

-0.073

-10.653

[0.881]

[0.369]

[0.085]

[0.037]

[10.265]

-3.586

0.974

-0.234

0.921

-8.872

[0.939]

[0.647]

[0.147]

[0.041]

[10.856]

-0.007

-0.006

0.001

-0.001

0.310

[0.005]

[0.004]

[0.0004]

[0.0003]

[0.091]

0.36
0.08
0.80
0.35

Parameter estimates of the Macro VAR which includes real consumption growth ∆c, real labor
income growth ∆y, real market return rd , market price-dividend ratio pd and the realized variance
RV. Realized variance is based on the sum of squared monthly industrial production growth rates
over the year, and is re-scaled to match the unconditional variance of consumption growth. Annual
observations from 1930 to 2010. Robust standard errors are in the brackets.

40

Table 4: Role of Volatility for Economic News

NECF

NV

d
NDR

With Vol Risk
y
NDR
NDR
NM

No Vol Risk
y
NDR
NDR NM

5.19
-0.27

29.72
1.00

14.22
0.86

2.58
0.28

3.91
0.77

47.27
0.84

4.65
-0.85

2.60
-0.27

26.41
0.24

Volatility News Periods:
Lowest 25%
2.23
-32.57
Highest 25%
-1.70
36.94

-12.37
16.02

-0.61
0.68

-2.96
3.75

-44.77
49.90

4.48
-5.09

1.11
-0.86

-8.13
8.35

Std. Dev.
Corr. with NV

Standard deviation of economic news, correlation with volatility news and the magnitude of the news
in lowest 25% and highest 25% volatility periods. Economic news include news in expected future
consumption NECF , future volatility NV , stochastic discount factor NM , and discount rates on the
y
d
market NDR
, labor NDR
and wealth return NDR . ”With Vol Risk” columns show the economic news
when the volatility risks are present in the construction of the aggregate wealth portfolio, while ”No
Vol Risk” columns document the implications when volatility risks are ignored. Risk aversion is set
at γ = 5, and IES ψ = 2.

41

Table 5: Labor, Market and Aggregate Wealth Return Correlations
No Vol Risk

With Vol Risk

Return:
Corr(NRd , NRy )
d , Ny )
Corr(NDR
DR
y
d
, Et rt→t+5
)
Corr(Etrt→t+5

-0.60
-0.72
-0.50

0.20
0.25
0.38

Market and Wealth Return:
Immediate Shocks
Corr(NRd , NR )
d ,N
Discount Shocks
Corr(NDR
DR )
d
5-year Expectations Corr(Etrt→t+5 , Et rt→t+5 )

0.46
0.07
0.26

0.80
0.86
0.78

Wealth and Labor
Immediate Shocks
Discount Shocks
5-year Expectations

0.43
0.65
0.71

0.74
0.71
0.87

Market and Labor
Immediate Shocks
Discount Shocks
5-year Expectations

Return:
Corr(NR , NRy )
y
)
Corr(NDR , NDR
y
)
Corr(Etrt→t+5 , Et rt→t+5

Correlations between immediate shocks, discount rate shocks and 5-year expected returns to the
market, labor, and aggregate wealth. NR , NDR and Et rt→t+5 stand for the immediate news, discount
rate news, and 5 year expected return to the wealth portfolio, respectively. Subscripts ”y” and ”d”
denote the corresponding news for the labor return and stock market return. ”With Vol Risk”
columns show the implications the volatility risks are present in the construction of the aggregate
wealth portfolio, while ”No Vol Risk” columns document the implications when volatility risks are
ignored. Risk aversion is set at γ = 5, and IES ψ = 2.

42

Table 6: Labor, Market and Aggregate Wealth Return Risk Premium
No Vol Risk

With Vol Risk

Market Return:
Risk Premium
Cash-Flow Risk Premium
Vol Risk Premium
Discount Rate Risk Premium

Cov(−NM , NRd )
Cov(−γNCF , NRd )
Cov(−NV , NRd )
Cov(−NDR , NRd )

2.34
2.57
0
-0.23

7.16
2.57
4.28
0.30

Wealth Return:
Risk Premium
Cash-Flow Risk Premium
Vol Risk Premium
Discount Rate Risk Premium

Cov(−NM , NR )
Cov(−γNCF , NR )
Cov(−NV , NR )
Cov(−NDR , NR )

0.86
0.94
0
-0.08

2.57
1.20
1.31
0.06

Labor Return:
Risk Premium
Cash-Flow Risk Premium
Vol Risk Premium
Discount Rate Risk Premium

Cov(−NM , NRy )
Cov(−γNCF , NRy )
Cov(−NV , NRy )
Cov(−NDR , NRy )

0.53
1.27
0
-0.04

1.42
0.86
0.57
0.00

Total risk premium on labor, market and wealth return, and its decomposition into cash-flow,
discount rate and volatility risk premium components. NM denotes the stochastic discount factor
shock, and NCF , NDR and NV represent the current and future cash-flow news, discount rate news
on the wealth portfolio and volatility news. NR , NRy and NRm denote the immediate return news to
wealth, labor and market, respectively. ”With Vol Risk” columns show the implications the volatility
risks are present in the construction of the aggregate wealth portfolio, while ”No Vol Risk” columns
document the implications when volatility risks are ignored. Risk aversion is set at γ = 5, and IES
ψ = 2.

43

Table 7: Role of Preferences for Aggregate Returns

ψ
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

Lbr-Mkt Corr
NR NDR
Er
-0.89
-0.94
-0.29
0.20
0.36
0.44

Risk Premia
Mkt Lbr Wealth

With Vol Risk
-0.54 -0.35 4.86
-0.43 -0.16 6.39
-0.17 0.13 6.90
0.25 0.38 7.16
0.52 0.50 7.31
0.62 0.56 7.42

-5.03
-1.38
0.41
1.42
2.05
2.49

-3.06
0.18
1.71
2.57
3.11
3.48

Lbr-Mkt Corr
NR NDR
Er
-0.81
-0.94
-0.76
-0.60
-0.51
-0.44

-0.20
-0.43
-0.60
-0.72
-0.79
-0.84

Risk Premia
Mkt Lbr Wealth

No Vol Risk
0.05 1.65 -1.38
-0.16 2.11 -0.30
-0.35 2.27 0.21
-0.50 2.34 0.49
-0.62 2.39 0.67
-0.71 2.42 0.79

-0.77
0.18
0.62
0.86
1.01
1.12

Correlations between labor and and market returns (immediate news NR , discount rate news NDR
and 5-year expected returns Er), and the risk premia on the market, labor and aggregate wealth
returns. ”With Vol Risk” columns show the implications the volatility risks are present in the construction of the aggregate wealth portfolio, while ”No Vol Risk” columns document the implications
when volatility risks are ignored. Risk aversion is set at γ = 5, and the IES varies betwee 0.5 and 3.

44

Table 8: Market-based VAR Estimates

RVr,t+1
zt+1
∆dt+1
tst+1
dst+1
it+1

RVr,t

zt

∆dt

tst

dst

it

R2

0.274

-0.017

0.023

-0.696

2.579

0.353

0.63

[0.167]

[0.012]

[0.035]

[0.336]

[1.031]

[0.202]

-0.961

0.904

-0.584

0.856

4.981

0.593

[0.863]

[0.074]

[0.261]

[1.276]

[5.213]

[0.556]

0.715

0.050

0.161

2.347

-7.887

-0.407

[0.408]

[0.031]

[0.131]

[0.952]

[3.121]

[0.370]

-0.071

0.004

-0.016

0.410

1.036

-0.029

[0.023]

[0.003]

[0.011]

[0.103]

[0.147]

[0.019]

0.020

-0.001

0.009

-0.127

0.682

0.021

[0.017]

[0.002]

[0.006]

[0.034]

[0.146]

[0.024]

-0.352

0.001

-0.050

-0.197

2.075

0.613

[0.105]

[0.007]

[0.026]

[0.182]

[0.792]

[0.109]

0.80
0.27
0.50
0.56
0.48

Table 8 presents GMM estimates of the market-based VAR. RVr,t denotes the realized variance of
the aggregate market portfolio; zt is the log of the price-dividend ratio; ∆dt is the log dividend
growth; tst and dst are term- and default spreads, respectively; it is the log of the interest rate.
Robust standard errors are presented in brackets. The data used in estimation are real and cover
the period from 1930 to 2010.

45

Table 9: Asset Pricing Implications of the Volatility-Based DCAPM
Risk Premia (%)
Data

Betas × 100

Model

CF

DR

Vol

7.9

7.7

1.80

-1.67

-1.23

BM1
BM2
BM3
BM4
BM5

7.2
7.6
9.4
10.8
13.1

7.2
8.3
10.0
11.3
13.2

1.72
2.11
2.66
3.29
4.64

-1.53
-1.59
-1.58
-1.58
-0.91

-1.09
-1.13
-1.37
-1.04
-0.09

Size1
Size2
Size3
Size4
Size5

14.8
13.0
11.6
10.4
7.4

14.2
12.4
11.2
9.7
7.4

4.57
3.47
2.97
2.43
1.91

-1.55
-1.98
-1.94
-1.88
-1.44

-0.62
-1.29
-1.38
-1.44
-0.98

Price(CF)

Price(DR)

Price(Vol)

Market

2.64

-1

-1

[0.38]

[na]

[na]

Table 9 shows risk premia implied by the volatility-based Dynamic CAPM and risk exposures (betas)
of the aggregate market and a cross section of five book-to-market and five size sorted portfolios.
The bottom panel presents the estimates of the market prices of risks and the corresponding robust
standard errors (in brackets). According to the model, prices of discount-rate and volatility risks
are fixed at -1. “Data” column reports average returns in excess of the three-month Treasury bill
rate in the 1930-2010 sample.

46

Table 10: Asset Pricing Implications of the Restricted Volatility-Based
DCAPM
Risk Premia (%)

Betas × 100

Data

Model

CF

RF

Vol

Market
BM1
BM2
BM3
BM4
BM5

7.9
7.2
7.6
9.4
10.8
13.1

7.6
7.0
8.3
10.2
11.4
13.0

1.98
1.92
2.30
2.80
3.39
4.54

-0.02
0.19
0.10
-0.09
-0.17
-0.04

-1.93
-1.76
-1.81
-2.09
-1.58
-0.05

Size1
Size2
Size3
Size4
Size5

14.8
13.0
11.6
10.4
7.4

14.1
12.5
11.3
9.8
7.4

4.63
3.67
3.19
2.63
2.04

0.07
0.07
0.05
-0.05
-0.04

-0.96
-2.06
-2.20
-2.25
-1.52

Price(CF)

Price(RF)

Price(Vol)

2.85

-1

-1

[0.45]

[na]

[na]

Table 10 shows risk premia implied by the restricted volatility-based Dynamic CAPM and risk
exposures (betas) of the aggregate market and a cross section of five book-to-market and five size
sorted portfolios. In this specification, discount-rate variation is decomposed into variation in risk
premia (which are proportional to the conditional market variance) and variation in the risk-free
rate. The bottom panel presents the estimates of the market prices of risks and the corresponding
robust standard errors (in brackets). According to the model, prices of risk-free and volatility news
are fixed at -1. “Data” column reports average returns in excess of the three-month Treasury bill
rate in the 1930-2010 sample.

47

Figure 1: Volatility and Expected Consumption Growth from Macro VAR
5
Cons. Vol
Exp. Cons.

4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Ex-ante consumption volatility (solid line) and expected consumption growth (dashed line) implied
from Macro VAR. The two series are standardized. Shaded areas represent the NBER recession
dates.

Figure 2: Consumption Response to Volatility Shock from Macro VAR
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7
−0.8

0

1

2

3

4

Impulse response of consumption growth to one standard deviation shock in ex-ante volatility of
consumption, implied by the Macro VAR. One standard deviation volatility shock corresponds to an
increase in ex-ante consumption variance by (1.95%)2 . Consumption growth is annual, in per cent.

48

Figure 3: 5-year Expected Market and Labor Returns
No Volatility Risk
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

With Volatility Risk
4

d

Er

y

Er

2
0
−2
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Five-year expected returns on the market (solid line) and human capital (dashed line). ”With
Volatility Risk” panel shows the implied expected returns when the volatility risks are present in
the construction of the aggregate wealth portfolio, while ”No Volatility Risk” panel documents the
return implications when volatility risks are ignored. The return series are standardized. Shaded
areas represent the NBER recession dates.

49

Figure 4: Discount Rate and Volatility News

3

NDR
NV

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Discount rate news on the wealth portfolio NDR and the volatility news NV . The news series are
standardized. Shaded areas represent the NBER recession dates.

50

Figure 5: Discount Rate and Conditional Variance of the Market Portfolio
5

#
$
Et Rt+1→t+5
!
"
Vart Rt+1→t+5

4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 5 plots time-series of the 5-year expected market return and 5-year conditional variance of
the market portfolio implied by the unrestricted market-based VAR estimates. The two lines are
normalized to have a zero mean and a unit variance; shaded areas represent the NBER recession
dates.

51

Figure 6: Data and Model-Implied Risk Premia

Sample Average Excess Returns

0.15

0.13

0.11

0.09

0.07
0.07

0.09

0.11

0.13

0.15

Model−Implied Premia

(a) Volatility-Based DCAPM

Sample Average Excess Returns

0.15

0.13

0.11

0.09

0.07
0.07

0.09

0.11

0.13

0.15

Model−Implied Premia

(b) Restricted Volatility-Based DCAPM
Figure 6 presents a scatterplot of sample average excess returns versus model-implied risk premia of
the aggregate market and a cross section of five book-to-market and five size sorted portfolios. Panel
(a) shows cross-sectional fit of the unrestricted volatility-based DCAPM. Panel (b) corresponds to
the restricted version of the volatility-based DCAPM. In the restricted specification, variation in the
market risk premium is proportional to variation in the conditional variance of the market portfolio.
Sample averages correspond to average returns in excess of the three-month Treasury bill rate in the
1930-2010 sample.

52

