                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HUMAN CAPITAL, ECONOMIC GROWTH, AND INEQUALITY IN CHINA

                                          James J. Heckman
                                             Junjian Yi

                                        Working Paper 18100
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18100


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




This work was funded in part by NIH R37-HD065072 and a grant from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by James J. Heckman and Junjian Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Human Capital, Economic Growth, and Inequality in China
James J. Heckman and Junjian Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 18100
May 2012
JEL No. I25,J24,O15

                                             ABSTRACT

China’s rapid growth was fueled by substantial physical capital investments applied to a large stock
of medium skilled labor acquired before economic reforms began. As development proceeded, the
demand for high skilled labor has grown, and, in the past decade, China has made substantial investments
in producing it. The egalitarian access to medium skilled education characteristic of the pre-reform
era has given rise to substantial inequality in access to higher levels of education. China’s growth will
be fostered by expanding access to all levels of education, reducing impediments to labor mobility,
and expanding the private sector.


James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Junjian Yi
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
junjian@uchicago.edu
China’s rapid growth in the past 30 years was fueled by substantial physical capital investments

applied to a large stock of medium-skill labor acquired before economic reforms began.1,2 As

development proceeded, the demand for high-skill labor grew, and in the past decade China has

made substantial investments in producing it. The egalitarian access to medium-skill education

characteristic of the pre-reform era has given rise to substantial inequality in access to higher levels

of education. China’s growth will be fostered by expanding access to all levels of education,

reducing impediments to labor mobility, and expanding the private sector.

          The complementarity between the abundant medium-skill labor and the large inﬂow of

physical capital induced by the Open Door policy fostered China’s economic growth since 1979.

The high saving rate, fast accumulation of physical capital, and integration of China into the world

economy during the 1980s and 1990s increased the demand for high-skill workers. The return to

education increased dramatically. The government implemented a radical expansion of higher

education in 1999 in response to the substantial increase in the demand for high-skill labor. As a

result, the skill level of the labor force has been substantially increased in the ﬁrst decade of the

21st century. However, the restrictive household registration (hukou) system and segmented labor

market distort the incentives to invest in human capital and have created a large pool of “left

behind” children in rural areas. Moreover, reliance on family resources to ﬁnance the children’s

education beyond the primary level, the lack of capital markets, and substantial increases in tuition

and accommodation fees have restricted opportunities for children from poor families to attain

   1
      Medium-skill labor refers to those with primary or secondary education. The illiterate or semi-illiterate are
referred to as low-skill labor. The tertiary education graduates are deﬁned as high-skill labor.
   2
       For an insightful discussion of China’s economic reforms and its policies, see Lin (2011).




                                                                                                                 2
higher education. These factors reduce social mobility and perpetuate intergenerational poverty.




1. Complementarity between abundant medium-skill labor and the
   large inﬂow of physical capital initiated China’s economic growth
   since 1979
The extraordinarily high primary and middle school enrollment rates before the 1979 economic

reform have not been fully appreciated in the literature studying China’s economic growth. For

example, in 1975 the primary school enrollment rate was 96%, and the middle school enrollment

rate was 60% (NBS, 2010). Adjusting for stages of economic development, the primary and

secondary enrollment rates were much higher in China than in other Asian countries, such as South

Korea and Taiwan, during the early stage of their economic take-off (Becker et al., 2012). Further,

the Chinese pupil-teacher ratio of primary school in 1976 was 29, ranking 51st in the world and

second in South and East Asia, next to Japan (World Bank, 2011).

       However, in 1976, per capita GDP in China was about 2% of that in the U.S., ranking near

the bottom of the world. In contrast with the abundance of labor, physical capital was extremely

scarce in the 1970s. For example, the net foreign exchange reserve was a negligible 0.58 billion

U.S. dollars in China in 1976 (NBS, 2010). The Open Door policy induced a huge inﬂow of

physical capital since 1979. The total amount of FDI was US$1,096.6 billion from 1979 to 2008

(NBS, 2010). The per capita FDI was higher in China than in South Korea and Taiwan at the same

stage of economic development.




                                                                                                   3
2. Fast accumulation of physical capital increased the demand for
   higher education
However, the stock of high-skill labor was low. Tertiary education was suspended during the

Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976. Tertiary school enrollment rates hovered around 1.5% to

2.5% from 1979 to 1995 (NBS, 2011a). With economic growth and fast accumulation of physical

capital, the return to education increased (Wang, 2012). China, like other East Asian countries,

maintained a national gross saving rate as high as 35-55% throughout the entire economic reform

period, dramatically increasing the marginal productivity of labor, especially high-skill labor. The

newer technology was strongly complementary with high-skill labor (Liang, 2012).

       The increase in the demand for higher education led the government in 1999 to implement

a radical policy expansion of higher education. The total number of fresh college graduates

increased more than six-fold from 960,000 in 2001 to 6,350,000 in 2010, at an annual increment of

1 million per year (NBS, 2011a). The tertiary school enrollment rates jumped from less than 3% to

almost 19% during the same period. Moreover, the increase in the stock of domestic college

graduates is only a part of the entire picture. Constant et al. (2011) show that the number of

Chinese students studying abroad also increased dramatically. In 2000, less than 40,000 Chinese

students went overseas. This number increased more than four-fold to almost 180,000 in 2008.

China’s impressive strides in human capital investment and its notable achievements in education

have not been fully appreciated in the scholarly literature.




                                                                                                  4
3. Widening inequality in education in China
Along with the rapid economic growth and expansion in higher education, inequality in education

in China increased drastically. Public schooling is funded mainly at the local level. Rich provinces

tend to produce more human capital per capita than poor provinces. Resource constraints

differentially affect the access to schooling of individuals in different segments of Chinese society.

Particularly hard hit are children in rural areas and those in the West. The place of birth is now one

of the most important determinants of adult skill levels (Fleisher et al., 2011), creating serious

regional disparities. Place of birth is an important source of cross-sectional and intergenerational

inequality in Chinese society (Heckman, 2003, 2005).

       This inequality is reinforced by the hukou system. Data from the 1% sample of the 2005

Census show that there are about 140 million rural-to-urban migrants working in urban areas. Most

of these migrants are not able to acquire urban residency due to the hukou system. Most children of

these migrants are deprived of the right to attend free public schools in urban areas. Those able to

attend public schools in the city have to pay a substantial tuition fee above what is required of

locals. As a consequence, many migrant workers leave their school-age children behind to attend

schools in their home villages. These “left-behind” children are usually cared for by grandparents

or other relatives. According to the research commissioned by the All-China Federation of Women,

the estimated number of left-behind children is 58 million (Ye et al., 2005). The rapid increase in

the number of left-behind children causes serious concerns for Chinese society. The quality of

schooling received by these children is not the only source of concern. The substantially negative



                                                                                                    5
effect on the children’s psychological development and human capital caused by the parental

absence is another serious issue. The hukou system has produced a segmented labor market

(Fleisher and Wang, 2004; Meng and Zhang, 2001). In this system, the hukou status is a major

determinant of an individual’s salary, which distorts incentives to invest in human capital

(Heckman, 2005).

       The ratio of government investment in schooling over GDP has historically been very low,

and was 3% in 2007, despite the fact that tertiary school enrollment rates increased from less than

2% in 1990 to almost 19% in 2010. Tertiary education in China is mainly ﬁnanced by a child’s

family. In addition, tuition fees have also increased substantially with the rapid expansion of

higher education. In the early 1990s, higher education was almost entirely subsidized by the

government. However, tuition fees plus accommodation fees for an ordinary college student

exceeded RMB10,000 per year in 2010. Since the annual income for rural residents is only

RMB5,919, and the annual disposable income for urban residents is RMB19,109 in the same year

(NBS, 2011b), the cost of attending colleges has become a heavy burden for ordinary families,

particularly for rural families. The lack of any capital market to ﬁnance the college education of

children has exacerbated inequality in education. Li and Xing (2010) find that, relative to other

groups, minority females and children from the central-western region and rural areas are much

less likely to enter college. Wang et al. (2007) report evidence of the growing inﬂuence of private

ﬁnancial constraints on decisions to attend college as tuition costs have risen. Educational reforms

without concomitant capital market reforms or government support for the ﬁnancially

disadvantaged further contribute to the increase in inequality.



                                                                                                  6
       In addition, educational choice is a sequential process. The increase in the cost of attending

tertiary schools discourages children from poor and rural families from attending secondary school

because the option value of attending secondary school has decreased. In recent years, secondary

school enrollment in rural areas has deteriorated (NBS, 2011a).




4. Promoting human capital, economic growth, and reducing
   inequality
Although notable achievements in education have been made in the past decades, China still faces

serious challenges in decreasing inequality in education, fostering a high-skill workforce and

promoting economic growth.

       Given the current stock of the high-skill workers, the returns to additional government

expenditures on education are very high. From this perspective, the current practice of having

tertiary education financed mainly by families is both inefficient and inequitable. Investment in

human capital has strong positive external effects on society. The absence of capital markets limits

access to schooling. Relying on family resources to ﬁnance a child’s education creates persistent

intergenerational poverty.

       Policies that balance and expand human capital investment across geographic regions and

across rural vs. urban areas, and policies that build more primary and secondary schools in urban

areas to accommodate migrant children promote efficiency and reduce inequality. Expanding the

college loan system will allow students to borrow against their future earnings. This would allow

children from poor families to have the opportunity to pursue higher education (Heckman, 2005).



                                                                                                   7
       Increasing government expenditure is not the only way to enhance the quality of education.

A lesson learned from studies in the United States, Europe, and other countries around the world is

that competition among schools provides incentives for improving the performance of educational

institutions (Heckman, 2000). Allowing more private and foreign educational organizations to

operate promotes competition between public and private schools and enhances the resources

available to support the expansion of education. Even if the government is cautious in permitting

private and foreign educational institutions to enter the market, allowing more competition among

existing public schools will promote the quality of education.

       Freeing up the labor market is another way to foster human capital development with little

direct cost to the government. The segmented labor market produced by the hukou system reduces

incentives to invest in human capital in China. Current practices restrict labor mobility across

regions. A free labor market allows individuals to reap the fruits of their skills and allows the

forces of market incentives to operate.




5. Summary
China’s rapid economic growth was initiated by the complementarity between a solid base of

medium-skill labor and a huge inﬂow of FDI. It has been sustained by rapid physical capital

accumulation and human capital formation. However, China is now facing serious challenges in

the areas of education, the quality of its labor force, and in sustaining its economic growth. These

challenges can be met by equalizing access to education, reducing restrictions on mobility, and

creating effective markets to finance human capital.



                                                                                                  8
References
Becker, G., K. Ye, and J. Yi (2012). Rapidly growing human capital investment in China.
       Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Chicago.

Constant, A., J. Meng, B. Tien, and K. Zimmermann (2011). China’s latent human capital
      investment: Achieving milestones and competing for the top. IZA Discussion Paper,
      No.5650.

Fleisher, B., H. Li, and M. Q. Zhao (2011). Human capital, economic growth, and regional
       inequality in China. Journal of Development Economics 92 (2), 215–31.

Fleisher, B. M. and X. Wang (2004,). Skill differentials, return to schooling, and market
       segmentation in a transition economy: The case of mainland China. Journal of
       Development Economics 73 (1), 315–328.

Heckman, J. J. (2000). Policies to foster human capital. Research in Economics 54 (1), 3–56.

Heckman, J. J. (2003). China’s investment in human capital. Economic Development and Cultural
     Change 51 (4), 795–804.

Heckman, J. J. (2005). China’s human capital investment. China Economic Review 16 (1), 50–70.

Li, S. and C. Xing (2010). China’s higher education expansion and its labor market consequences.
        IZA Discussion Papers 4974.

Liang, J. (2012). Evolution of the labor market in a rapidly developing economy. Unpublished
       manuscript, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

Lin, J. Y. (2011). Demystifying the Chinese economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Meng, X. and J. Zhang (2001). The two-tier labor market in urban China: Occupational
      segregation and wage differentials between urban residents and rural migrants in Shanghai.
      Journal of Comparative Economics 29 (3), 485–504.

National Bureau of Statistics (2010). China Compendium of Statistics 1949–2008. Beijing: China
       Statistics Press.

National Bureau of Statistics (2011a). China Education Yearbook. Beijing: China Statistics Press.

National Bureau of Statistics (2011b). China Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: China Statistics Press.

Wang, L. (2012). How does education affect the earnings distribution in urban China 1995– 2002?
      Forthcoming, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.




                                                                                                 9
Wang, X., B. M. Fleisher, H. Li, and S. Li (2007). Access to higher education and inequality: The
Chinese experiment. IZA Discussion Papers, 2823.

World Bank (2011). World Bank Data Catalog. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator.

Ye, J., J. Murray, and Y. Wang (2005). Left-behind Children in Rural China: Impact Study of
Rural Labor Migration on Left-behind Children in Mid-West China. Beijing: Social Sciences
Academic Press.




                                                                                              10
