                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   TRADE CREDIT AND TAXES

                                            Mihir A. Desai
                                            C. Fritz Foley
                                          James R. Hines Jr.

                                         Working Paper 18107
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18107


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality
requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of the
U.S. Department of Commerce. We thank seminar participants at Columbia Law School, Harvard
Law School, Oxford University, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University of
Michigan, the UNC Tax Symposium, and ITPF for helpful comments. Foley and Desai thank the Division
of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Credit and Taxes
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 18107
May 2012
JEL No. F23,G31,G32,H25

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the extent to which firms use trade credit to reallocate capital in response to tax
incentives. Tax-induced differences in pretax returns encourage the use of trade credit to reallocate
capital from firms facing low tax rates to those facing high tax rates. Evidence from the worldwide
operations of U.S. multinational firms indicates that affiliates in low-tax jurisdictions use trade credit
to lend, whereas those in high-tax jurisdictions use trade credit to borrow: ten percent lower local tax
rates are associated with net trade credit positions that are 1.4 percent higher as a fraction of sales.
The use of trade credit to get capital out of low-tax, low-return environments is also illustrated by
reactions of U.S. firms to the temporary repatriation tax holiday in 2005, when affiliates with positive
net trade credit positions were significantly more likely than others to repatriate dividends to parent
companies in the United States.


Mihir A. Desai                                           James R. Hines Jr.
Graduate School of Business Administration               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                       University of Michigan
Soldiers Field                                           343 Lorch Hall
Boston, MA 02163                                         611 Tappan Street
and NBER                                                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mdesai@hbs.edu                                           and NBER
                                                         jrhines@umich.edu
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu
1.     Introduction

       This paper examines the extent to which taxation influences trade credit practices by
affecting returns to investment. High rates of taxation generally increase the cost of capital,
reducing investment levels and driving up pretax returns. As a result, tax rate differences create
incentives to transfer capital from low-tax, low-capital-cost, low-return users to high-tax, high-
capital-cost, high-return users by delaying or accelerating the payment of trade accounts.

       The effects of taxation on the use of trade credit are most readily observed
internationally, where tax rate differences are sizeable and apparent. The empirical work in this
paper uses comprehensive data collected by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) on the
operations of U.S. multinational firms to examine the extent to which international tax rate
differences account for their trade credit practices. Foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational firms
make extensive use of trade credit: at yearend 2004 these affiliates held current accounts
receivable of $1.49 trillion and had current accounts payable of $1.39 trillion; each of these
exceeded 30 percent of total annual affiliate sales.

       The analysis of detailed affiliate-level data suggests that tax effects are large and
statistically significant in explaining trade credit choices. Figure 1 offers descriptive evidence,
drawn from published BEA data, of the extent to which tax incentives may influence the use of
trade credit by multinational affiliates. The figure presents information on the foreign affiliates
of U.S. multinational firms sorted by tax rates in their host foreign countries. The bars depict
average accounts receivable, accounts payable, and net working capital (the difference between
accounts receivable and accounts payable) for affiliates in countries with designated tax rates, all
scaled by affiliate sales. Each bar is the mean of the country aggregate values, by varying levels
of corporate tax rates. The figure shows that accounts receivable and accounts payable, as well
as differences between the two, are greater in low-tax jurisdictions than in high-tax jurisdictions.
The evidence that low tax rates are associated with high net working capital positions is
consistent with incentives to use trade credit to allocate capital to places where it generates high
pretax returns.

       The regression analysis presented in section 3 investigates the effects of local tax rates in
specifications that control for observable firm-level factors. Regressions using parent company
fixed effects confirm that affiliates in low-tax countries have larger net working capital positions

                                                                                                       1
than do other affiliates. The association of tax rate differences and net working capital positions
is strongest for wholly-owned affiliates and for those with high levels of trade with related
parties. These patterns suggest that tax-influenced use of trade credit is most easily facilitated
when borrowers and lenders are controlled by the same firm. Furthermore, the net working
capital positions of affiliates with strong idiosyncratic capital needs, as reflected by unusually
large capital expenditures or little cash on hand, appear to be largely unaffected by local tax
rates.

         Responses to recent changes in U.S. international tax policy offer additional evidence of
the use of trade credit to reallocate capital to more productive uses. The 2004 U.S. Homeland
Investment Act provided for a one-time tax holiday in 2005 for repatriated foreign earnings.
Prior to the holiday, U.S. multinational firms with accumulated foreign profits but without
attractive foreign investment opportunities could use trade credit arrangements to reallocate a
certain amount of capital to the United States or another high-tax country. The 2004 Act greatly
lowered the cost of reallocating capital to the United States, albeit only for a single year, by
permitting many firms to pay U.S. tax on only 15 percent of the dividends they received from
foreign affiliates. Among foreign affiliates that prior to 2005 were using trade credit to
reallocate capital elsewhere, the sudden appearance of an attractive new alternative should be
associated with significant dividend repatriations to the United States in 2005.

         Figure 2 depicts aggregate dividend payout ratios for two samples of foreign affiliates of
U.S. firms in 2004 and 2005. The left two bars display dividend payout ratios for directly owned
affiliates that had positive net working capital positions in 2004. If these affiliates used working
capital arrangements to reallocate capital to a high-tax location such as the United States prior to
the tax holiday, they should respond to the tax holiday in a more pronounced manner than other
affiliates, whose behavior is described by the two bars on the right. The shaded bars present
aggregate payout ratios for 2004, and the unshaded bars present payout ratios for 2005. The
evidence indicates that those affiliates that were directly owned and had positive net working
capital positions prior to the tax change increased their dividend payout ratios much more than
did other affiliates. This apparent reaction to the tax change is consistent with pre-2005 use of
trade credit to reallocate capital to locations where it earns higher returns, and the emergence in
2005 of a more permanent and cost-effective method of doing so.


                                                                                                      2
       Existing work emphasizes explanations for the use of trade credit that are unrelated to
taxes. Several papers, including Burkart and Ellingsen (2004), Giannetti, Burkart and Ellingsen
(2011), Cunat (2006), and Fabbri and Menichini (2010) highlight the ability of suppliers to lend
in a way that limits managerial opportunism more effectively than can financial lenders. Other
studies, such as Lee and Stowe (1993), Long, Malitz, and Ravid (1993), Ng, Smith, and Smith
(1999), and Antràs and Foley (2011) explain how trade credit arrangements solve information
problems concerning product quality and buyer creditworthiness. Relatedly, Petersen and Rajan
(1994) present evidence that monitoring provided by suppliers might aid firms in accessing
financial lenders who can free-ride on the monitoring provided by suppliers. Trade credit
decisions also appear to reflect the bargaining power of buyers and suppliers, as indicated by
Klapper, Laeven and Rajan (2012). Fisman and Love (2003), and Love, Preve, and Sarria-
Allende (2007), identify some of the consequences of access to trade credit. Meltzer (1960) and
Ramey (1992) explain trade credit as a means of reallocating capital across firms, though the
motives for this reallocation are unrelated to taxes.

       In analyzing empirical patterns of trade credit, studies typically emphasize small firms
where monitoring issues and liquidity constraints are likely to be important. Petersen and Rajan
(1997) provide some of the most important empirical results in this literature. One of the most
puzzling findings in their study can be understood within a tax-based explanation. They note
that lower income firms are more likely than others to lend via trade credit, in contrast to the
implications of most theories of trade credit. The tax-based explanation predicts precisely this
pattern, as lower income firms face lower marginal tax rates and might therefore find it profitable
to use trade credit to reallocate capital to firms with higher incomes and therefore high tax rates
and higher pretax marginal products of capital.

       Section 2 of the paper analyzes the underlying tax incentives to use trade credit to
reallocate capital and describes empirical predictions related to these incentives. Section 3
describes the data and presents the empirical analysis of the predictions. Section 4 concludes.

2.     Understanding the impact of taxes on trade credit

       This section considers the effect of tax rate differences on incentives to use trade credit to
reallocate capital. High tax rates discourage investment, raising pretax marginal products of
capital above levels that prevail in environments with low tax rates. Differences in pretax

                                                                                                      3
marginal products of capital then create opportunities for mutually beneficial trade by delaying
or accelerating payment of trade credit accounts to put capital where it is most productive.

2.1.     Trade Credit, Taxes, and Capital Reallocation

         It is useful to start by considering a setting in which two unrelated parties, both
corporations, have transactions in which they buy and sell items from each other. They can pay
for these items at the time of purchase, or else pay at another time, in the meantime creating
accounts payable and accounts receivable. Corporations are required to use the accrual method
in calculating their tax liabilities, so income is taxable when it is earned, not necessarily when it
is received. Consequently, a corporation must pay income taxes on sales to another party, even
if it has not yet received payment, as long as the sale has taken place and the buying party can
reasonably be expected to make that payment eventually; similarly, the buying party receives an
immediate tax deduction, even though the payment takes place on a different date. Thus, for
example, a corporation that sells inventory property for $100 to another corporation that does not
pay immediately is required to include the $100 in its taxable income this year, and similarly, the
corporation that purchases the inventory property is entitled to a tax deduction of $100, even
though it has not yet paid. One implication of accrual accounting is that the mere timing of the
payments does not affect the timing of tax liabilities; what matters is the date on which income is
earned. A similar rule applies to prepayments: if a buyer pays now for a future purchase, the
seller does not have taxable income, and the buyer does not receive a tax deduction, until the sale
is ultimately completed.1

         Consider a setting in which firm i purchases a good worth one dollar from firm j at the
start of a year and faces the question of whether or not to pay immediately. If firm i delays
payment then it accrues an account payable that it will settle at the start of the following year
with interest r, so next year it pays (1+r). As a result of not paying this year, firm i has the use
of an additional dollar of capital for the year, thus increasing Ki, and firm j foregoes the use of
the same dollar of capital, thus decreasing Kj. Suppose that firm i’s production function is given
1
  Graetz and Schenk (2009, pp. 693-732) review the interpretation and application of U.S. tax law to corporate
accounts receivable and accounts payable. Brick and Fung (1984) consider the implications of a cash accounting tax
regime, in which transactions are taxed when payments are made, rather than at the time of sale. In the legal regime
considered by Brick and Fung, heavily taxed firms have incentives to extend credit to lightly taxed firms, which is
the opposite of the incentives created by the laws that apply to U.S. corporations. This illustrates the importance of
the distinction between cash and accrual accounting for the use of trade credit.


                                                                                                                    4
by Qi(Ki), in which Qi is firm i’s output and Ki its level of financial capital. Then after earning

Qi K i of income from the additional dollar of financial capital, and remitting (1+r) to firm j at

the start of the next year, the delayed payment nets firm i after taxes:

(1)                                             Qi K i     r 1      i
                                                                            ,

in which    i   is the tax rate facing firm i. Expression (1) reflects that both that the additional
income is taxable and that firm i is entitled to deduct from taxable income the interest component
of its settlement of the account payable to firm j. Similarly, firm j loses the benefit of using a
dollar of financial capital for a year, but receives interest, so after taxes it nets:

(2)                                            r Qj K j        1        j
                                                                            ,

in which Q j K j is the marginal product of capital held by firm j and                j   the tax rate facing firm

j.

         Expressions (1) and (2) can be viewed as participation constraints in which both parties
have incentives to use trade credit if Qi Ki             r Q j K j . By delaying payment, firm i

effectively borrows from firm j and benefits from this trade due to a difference in pretax
marginal products of capital. If the pattern of pretax marginal products of capital were reversed,
so that Qi Ki        Q j K j and r lies between them, then firm j is a more productive user of capital

than firm i, and both can benefit by having firm i prepay for its purchase.

         Tax rate differences influence marginal products of capital and thereby affect incentives
to use trade credit. To describe these effects, it is helpful to begin by considering the case in
which firms do not use trade credit, are equity financed, and thereby face the full corporate tax.2


2
  The assumption of equity finance is a common starting place in the analysis of the effect of corporate taxation,
since if corporate investment is instead debt-financed, then there is effectively no corporate tax: a firm that is 100
percent debt-financed, with an average return on investment equal to the interest rate, has interest deductions that
exactly offset its taxable income, leaving zero corporate tax to be paid (Auerbach, 2002). The evidence that high tax
rates discourage investment, together with the hundreds of billions of dollars collected by the U.S. corporate tax
each year, suggests that in practice corporations are not entirely debt financed. Hassett and Hubbard (2002),
Chirinko, Fazzari and Meyer (1999), Desai and Goolsbee (2004), Djankov et al. (2010), Da Rin, Giacomo, and
Sembenelli (2011), and Bond and Xing (2010) offer evidence of the impact of corporate tax rates on investment.


                                                                                                                     5
Then if the shadow cost of the use of a dollar of equity for a year is common for all firms at an
after-tax value of , it follows that firms invest to the point that after-tax marginal products of
capital equal this common cost of funds, Qm Km 1                    m        , m , so:

                                                                    1   i
(3)                                            Qj K j   Qi K i
                                                                    1    j
                                                                             .

Hence, if    i     j   then Qi K i     Q j K j , the marginal product of capital held by firm i is greater

than that held by firm j. There are mutual benefits available by delaying payment from firm i to
firm j. As a result of the delayed payment, capital flows from the lightly taxed to the more
heavily taxed firm, because the pretax marginal product of capital of the heavily taxed firm is
higher due to the lower investment levels induced by the higher tax rate.

         The advantage of using trade credit is manifest by summing expressions (1) and (2) to
obtain the joint benefit generated by the contemplated delayed payment:

(4)                         Qi Ki 1        i
                                                 Qj K j 1       j
                                                                    r    i       j



The joint benefit consists of the difference between the after-tax marginal products of capital, as
given by the first two terms of expression (4), and the tax-advantaged location of interest
payments and receipts, as given by the third term. If after-tax marginal products of capital are
equal, then the first two terms offset each other and there is a gain to the transaction associated
with the third term.3 Capital reallocation raises the after-tax marginal product of capital of firm j
and reduces the after-tax marginal product of capital of firm i. Reallocation continues until the
tax saving associated with having firm i incur costs r and firm j earn income r equals the wedge
in after-tax marginal products of capital. At this point, the pretax marginal products of capital are
equal and expression (4) is zero. All other considerations equal, larger tax rate differences


Graham (2000) measures the extent to which firms borrow too little from a tax standpoint; he estimates that the
average firm in his sample could double its debt-related tax benefits by taking on additional debt.
3
  The third term of expression (4) corresponds to the net value of interest tax deductions in the high-tax jurisdiction
and taxes on interest income in the low-tax jurisdiction, reflecting that trade credit reallocates capital in a manner
that is treated for tax purposes like borrowing. Since higher tax rates are consistently associated with greater
propensity to use debt finance (Graham, 1996; Desai, Foley and Hines, 2004; Huizinga, Laeven and Nicodeme,
2008), it follows that firms facing high corporate tax rates should be expected to borrow using trade credit, whereas
those facing low corporate tax rates should be expected to use trade credit to loan to other firms.


                                                                                                                          6
induce greater reallocations of capital. Trade credit, just like debt, undoes the distortion to
investment levels created by the corporate tax by encouraging firms to invest to levels at which
pretax, rather than after-tax, marginal products of capital are equalized.

2.2     Sources of Tax Rate Differences

        Firms i and j might face different tax rates for any of a number of reasons. U.S. firms
organized as subchapter C corporations are subject to the corporate income tax, whereas those
organized as subchapter S corporations, LLCs, and other business forms are taxed at the owners’
tax rates, which commonly differ from each other and from the corporate tax rate. Firms with
tax loss carryforwards or significant contemporaneous deductions are effectively untaxed until
the deductions and prior tax losses are exhausted. While this firm-level variation in effective tax
rates can be significant, differences in tax rates across countries are more readily and reliably
measured, so the analysis below uses international tax rate differences to identify the effect of tax
rates on trade credit practices.

        Tax rate differences across countries create incentives for multinational firms to use trade
credit arrangements. Multinational affiliates in low tax jurisdictions where pretax investment
returns are low have incentives to extend credit to affiliates in high tax jurisdictions where pretax
returns are high. The system by which the United States taxes foreign source income also
creates incentives for U.S. multinationals to use trade credit to reallocate capital between foreign
and U.S. operations. The United States taxes the worldwide incomes of U.S. firms, but permits
deferral of U.S. taxes on certain foreign income that is retained abroad. U.S. taxpayers are also
entitled to claim tax credits for foreign income tax payments. As a result of this system, many
U.S. firms have incentives to defer repatriation of foreign profits earned in low-tax countries
because returning the profits to the United States triggers a tax equal to the difference between
the U.S. corporate tax rate and the rate at which the profits are taxed by foreign governments.4

        Because U.S. firms have incentives to avoid repatriating foreign income, these firms are
apt to accumulate foreign capital beyond the point at which it earns pretax returns comparable to


4
 Hartman (1985), Sinn (1993) and Hines (1994) analyze repatriation incentives created by home country taxation of
foreign income; and Desai, Foley and Hines (2001), Foley, Hartzell, Titman and Twite (2007), and Dharmapala,
Foley and Forbes (2011) offer evidence of the extent to which the U.S. tax system discourages repatriation of
foreign income.


                                                                                                                7
those available in the United States. U.S. firms have incentives to retain and accumulate foreign
capital as long as the after-foreign-tax rate of return abroad exceeds the after-tax rate of return
that they can earn in the U. S. This accumulation exhausts available profitable foreign
investment opportunities, driving down the rate of return on new investments. Eventually the
rate of return on marginal foreign investments can decline to the point that it is worth repatriating
funds, and incurring the associated tax cost, in order to deploy capital in the United States. The
availability of foreign tax credits means that U.S. tax obligations on repatriated foreign income
increase with the extent to which the U.S. tax rate exceeds the creditable foreign tax rate, so the
induced decline in pretax foreign rates of return should be most pronounced among affiliates
facing particularly low foreign tax rates.

       A system that taxes foreign profits on repatriation encourages firms to retain profits
abroad to the point at which marginal foreign capital generates lower returns than marginal
domestic capital, so any tax-neutral method of reallocating capital from foreign affiliates to the
domestic parent company looks attractive. Firms can do so by having parent companies delay
payment for inventory property received from foreign affiliates; a roughly equivalent method is
to have foreign affiliates prepay for inventory property that parent companies will subsequently
provide the affiliates. In both cases the function of the trade credit arrangement is to reallocate
capital from foreign affiliates to their parent companies. In the first of these cases one can think
of the foreign affiliate as repatriating in the form of property rather than cash.

       Some aspects of U.S. law create specific opportunities for U.S. multinationals to
reallocate capital in response to differences between U.S. and foreign rates. Foreign affiliates
can reallocate capital by purchasing accounts receivable from their parent companies; if the
accounts are owed by non-U.S. persons, for example due to export sales by the parent company,
then purchase of an account receivable is not treated as a constructive repatriation, and the
subsidiary effectively swaps its capital for a loan made by the parent company. Laws limiting
deferral of U.S. taxes on foreign income require that the payments subsequently received by the
foreign affiliate from the accounts receivable will be subject to immediate U.S. taxation, but this
arrangement nonetheless reallocates capital from the foreign affiliate to the U.S. parent company
without subjecting the capital amount to U.S. taxation. If instead the foreign affiliate were to
make an ordinary loan to the U.S. parent company, U.S. tax rules would treat the loan as a
repatriation of profit, subjecting the loan amount to immediate U.S. taxation.

                                                                                                       8
2.3      Substitutes and Constraints

         There are alternatives to trade credit arrangements; for example, customers might
exchange cash for goods at the time of sale, financing their expenditures, if need be, with loans
from local banks. Bank loans serve many of the same functions as trade credit, though terms and
conditions of bank loans are likely to differ from trade terms offered by suppliers because banks
and suppliers have different relationships with buyers, access to different information, and can
draw on differing expertise. For example, as stressed in the existing literature, suppliers of goods
and services might have monitoring advantages over more remote financial lenders, thereby
making it less costly for suppliers to provide loans in the form of trade credit than it is for banks
to provide more traditional loans. Additionally, the fact that suppliers offering trade credit
effectively lend property rather than cash may restrict the ability of managers of buying firms to
divert assets to uses that benefit them personally at the expense of their firms, and therefore
make it more likely that loans are repaid. Agency and other costs associated with third-party
transactions can make these alternative financing sources unattractive, as evidenced by the
apparent willingness of corporations to use equity finance and thereby incur corporate tax
liabilities.

         If trade credit offers a type of borrowing not available elsewhere, and does not offset
other forms of borrowing, then tax rate differences encourage firms to use trade credit to
reallocate capital. The analysis in this paper proceeds under the assumption that agency costs
limit the ability of firms to borrow from third parties, which accounts both for the existence of
corporate tax burdens and the inability of firms to use debt finance to arbitrage at least some of
the resulting differences in pretax marginal products of capital. Tax regulations may also
effectively limit the use of alternatives; for example, thin capitalization rules limit the amount of
borrowing for which interest payments are tax-deductible.

         In addition, there are limits on the extent to which trade credit can be used to reallocate
capital within firms. The U.S. tax system does not allow taxpayers unlimited ability to use
intrafirm trade credit arrangements, generally imposing a requirement that trade credit balances
not exceed those that are ordinary and necessary to carry on trade or business, thereby requiring
that repayment schedules correspond to normal business terms, or else the arrangement can be
recharacterized for tax purposes as a constructive repatriation. While this limits the value of


                                                                                                        9
using trade credit arrangements, it is nevertheless possible for parent companies and their
subsidiaries to maintain significant trade credit accounts for all of their transactions.

2.4    Empirical Implications

       Firms have incentives to use trade credit arrangements to reallocate capital from low-
return to high-return operations. Since low tax rates encourage high investment levels that
reduce marginal returns, and high tax rates discourage investments and thereby elevate marginal
returns, it follows that net working capital positions should be generally higher for affiliates
located in low tax jurisdictions. It is noteworthy that these conditions carry implications for net
working capital rather than accounts receivable and accounts payable separately – though either
or both of accounts receivable and accounts payable must of course be affected by taxation in
order for there to be any effect on net working capital. Firms engaged in extensive trade with
others may be unable to increase net working capital without taking actions that increase both
accounts receivable and accounts payable, so it is possible for tax rate differences to influence
one of the components of net working capital in a direction that moves against any total effect on
net working capital.

       The effect of tax rate differences on investment returns may vary with firm
circumstances, and its impact on trade credit amounts presumably depends in part on the capital
needs of other parties with which a firm transacts. Consequently, the strongest prediction of a
tax-based theory of trade credit is for transactions among related parties of the same firm with
common firm-wide capital availability and whose affiliates in different jurisdictions do not face
unusual short-term capital needs. The empirical tests presented in sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4
analyze the effects of tax rate differences on the use of trade credit and consider how these
effects vary across different kinds of firms.

       A temporary legislative change offers a separate test of the effect of taxes on the use of
trade credit to reallocate capital. The 2004 Homeland Investment Act allowed U.S.
multinationals to exclude from U.S. tax 85 percent of foreign dividends repatriated in 2005. The
benefit of the repatriation tax holiday was strongly concentrated among U.S. firms with foreign
affiliates that had lightly taxed foreign earnings and limited prospects for profitable future
foreign investments. It is noteworthy that firms with foreign affiliates satisfying these conditions
have incentives to use trade credit arrangements to reallocate capital to more productive uses

                                                                                                    10
elsewhere, particularly those in high-tax locations such as the United States. Hence a tax-based
theory of trade credit use predicts that those foreign affiliates making net loans with trade credit
arrangements prior to 2005 are the most likely to take advantage of the repatriation tax holiday.
Section 3.5 presents the results of tests of this idea.

2.5     Transfer Pricing Considerations

        In addition to using trade credit to reallocate capital, firms have incentives to use trade
credit terms to reallocate taxable income between related parties subject to different tax rates.
This can be accomplished through the choice of prices used in intercompany transactions,
including the implied interest rates on trade credit balances. If an affiliate in a high tax location
sells goods to a related party in a low tax location, then the highly taxed affiliate could reallocate
taxable income to the lightly taxed affiliate by granting additional time to pay at a low implied
interest rate. Alternatively, the highly taxed affiliate could give the lightly taxed affiliate a large
discount for prepayment. Tax rules require intracompany transactions to be conducted at arm’s
length prices, those that unrelated parties would use, but in practice the imprecision of this
standard leaves taxpayers some discretion to choose trade credit terms among those within a
reasonable range. As a result, taxpayers who benefit from reallocating taxable income to
operations in jurisdictions with lower tax rates can be expected to select trade credit terms that
reallocate income in that direction.

        The ability to adjust trade credit terms to reallocate taxable income creates incentives to
use trade credit, though it does not necessarily encourage the accumulation of net working
capital positions in low tax location. In the example described above, a firm could use trade
credit terms to reallocate taxable income to its lightly taxed affiliate by creating either a positive
(with prepayment) or negative (with delayed payment) net working capital position in the
affiliate. This contrasts with the capital reallocation incentives that encourage net working
capital accumulation among lightly taxed affiliates. The desire to reallocate taxable income in
response to tax rate differences instead generally stimulates the use of trade credit, whether used
to create positive or negative net working capital positions.

3.      Evidence from U.S. multinational firms.

3.1.    Data and Descriptive Statistics


                                                                                                      11
         The data used to analyze the financing and operations of U.S. firms are drawn from the
BEA annual survey of U.S. direct investment abroad. The BEA survey provides a panel of data
on the activities of U.S. multinational firms operating abroad. The survey defines U.S. direct
investment abroad as the direct or indirect ownership or control by a single U.S. legal entity of at
least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise or the
equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A U.S. multinational entity
is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made the direct investment, called the
U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign affiliate. As a result
of confidentiality assurances and penalties for noncompliance, BEA believes that coverage is
close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.

         The survey forms that U.S. multinational enterprises are required to complete cover both
domestic and foreign operations; survey information varies depending on the year, the size of the
affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage ownership of its affiliate. Although many data items,
such as sales, are collected for a broad sample on an annual basis, detailed data on trade credit
are only available for larger affiliates in 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004, years in which BEA
conducted benchmark surveys. In these years, surveys captured information on current trade
accounts and trade notes receivable as well as current trade accounts and trade notes payable.5 In
the analysis below, these measures are scaled by sales.6 The framework developed above
emphasizes predictions concerning net trade credit positions. These are measured in the data as
the difference between accounts receivable and accounts payable scaled by sales.

         In addition to tracking basic income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow items such as
total income, cash holdings, capital expenditures, and total liabilities, the BEA survey captures
information that allows for characterization of the extent to which affiliates transact with their
U.S. parents. The data include total values of U.S. exports to each affiliate and values shipped
by the affiliate’s U.S. parent. The detailed sales data also cover affiliate sales to the U.S. parent.
Data on foreign income taxes paid and net income can be used to calculate foreign corporate
5
  In 1982, 1989, and 1994, all affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income in excess of $3, $15,
and $50 million respectively were required to report accounts receivable and accounts payable. In 1999 and 2004,
all majority owned affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income in excess of $100 million and
$150 million respectively were required to report accounts receivable and accounts payable.
6
  To reduce the potential impact of outliers, accounts receivable/sales, accounts payable/sales, and net working
capital/sales are winsorized at the 2.5% level in each tail of the distribution.


                                                                                                                   12
income tax rates; each affiliate’s average tax rate is the ratio of foreign income tax payments to
the sum of net income and foreign income tax payments. Countries are then assigned tax rates
equal to median tax rates among local U.S. affiliates.

        The BEA data also track affiliate dividend payments. These data are collected annually,
and data covering 1999-2005 are used to study responses to the Homeland Investment Act. The
analysis uses two measures of dividend repatriations to U.S. parent companies: a dividend
dummy equal to one for years in which affiliates repatriate profits, and a more continuous
measure, namely the ratio of dividends to sales. The Homeland Investment Act changed
incentives to pay dividends from affiliates to their U.S. parents, but many foreign affiliates are
indirectly owned by other foreign affiliates. Fortunately, the BEA data include information on
parent company ownership of affiliates; this information is used to identify affiliates most
directly affected by the repatriation tax holiday. Table 1 presents means and standard deviations
of variables used in the regressions that follow.

3.2.    Trade Credit and Local Tax Rates

        Table 2 presents regressions that explore the impact of local tax rates on trade credit use
by U.S. multinational affiliates in foreign countries between 1982 and 2004. As noted in Section
2, there is reason to expect affiliates in low-tax countries to have significantly larger net working
capital positions than do otherwise-similar affiliates in high-tax countries. The dependent
variable in the regression presented in column 1 of Table 2 is the ratio of net working capital to
affiliate sales.   All of the regressions presented in Table 2 include parent company fixed effects
and year fixed effects. Specifications also control for the log of affiliate assets, the log of
country GDP per capita, and non trade account leverage – which is measured as current liabilities
and long term debt less current trade accounts payable, scaled by sales. The negative sign on the
coefficient on the local tax rate indicates that affiliates in low tax countries have larger net
working capital positions than do affiliates in high tax countries. Specifically, the -0.1430
coefficient suggests that ten percent lower tax rates are associated with net working capital
positions that are 1.4 percent greater as a fraction of sales.

        This effect of low tax rates on net working capital positions reflects the much greater
impact of low tax rates on accounts receivable than on accounts payable. The dependent variable
in the regression reported in column 2 of Table 2 is the ratio of accounts receivable to sales. The

                                                                                                     13
-0.3393 coefficient indicates that ten percent lower tax rates are associated with accounts
receivable balances that are 3.4 percent greater as a fraction of total sales. The association
between tax rates and accounts payable is of the same sign but of considerably smaller
magnitude and statistically insignificant, as indicated by the -0.0647 coefficient in column 3.

        The regressions presented in columns 4-6 analyze differences between affiliates located
in foreign jurisdictions identified as tax havens by Hines and Rice (1994) and affiliates located
elsewhere. U.S. multinational firms commonly use affiliates located in tax havens to facilitate
indirect ownership of other foreign affiliates and to serve as intermediaries in trade between
related parties. Consequently, the trade credit positions of these affiliates are particularly likely
to be influenced by tax rate differences. The 0.0660 coefficient in column 4 of Table 2 indicates
that tax haven affiliates have significantly larger net working capital positions than do affiliates
located elsewhere. The difference in magnitudes of working capital positions between affiliates
located in tax havens and affiliates located elsewhere is substantial, equal to roughly 6.6 percent
of sales. The regressions reported in columns 5 and 6 identify the trade credit components that
make up these net working capital positions. The 0.1260 coefficient reported in column 5
indicates that affiliates in tax havens have accounts receivable that are 12.6 percent larger as a
fraction of sales than do affiliates located outside of tax havens. The dependent variable in the
regression reported in column 6 is accounts payable as a fraction of local sales; the 0.0103
coefficient in this regression is much smaller in magnitude than the corresponding coefficient in
column 5, and not statistically different from zero, suggesting that accounts payable are much
less strongly associated with tax haven location than are accounts receivable.

3.3.    Whole Ownership, Trade with Parent Companies, and Trade Credit

        The use of trade credit to reallocate capital in response to tax incentives is likely to be
most easily facilitated when these entities are under common control and transact with one
another. Although the data do not indicate if net working capital positions are attributable to
related party transactions, it is possible to infer indirectly the impact of related party trade on the
trade credit positions of foreign affiliates of U.S. companies. The BEA data include the degree
of parent company ownership of U.S.-controlled foreign affiliates and also indicate the fraction
of an affiliate’s sales and intracompany purchases represented by trade with the parent company.
The ability to derive advantage by adjusting the terms of related-party trade is likely to be


                                                                                                      14
greatest for wholly-owned affiliates and those with extensive trade with parent companies.
Consequently, interacting these indicators with tax variables used in the regressions reported in
Table 2 offers the prospect of identifying the extent to which higher levels of control and
intrafirm trade precipitate the tax effects evident in the Table 2 regressions.

        Table 3 presents regressions in which the dependent variable is the ratio of an affiliate’s
net working capital position to its sales. All of the regressions include as controls parent
company fixed effects, year fixed effects, the log of affiliate assets, non trade account leverage,
and the log of local per capita GDP. The regression reported in column 1 of Table 3 presents
estimated coefficients from a regression that includes a dummy variable for wholly-owned
affiliates and an interaction of this dummy variable and the local tax rate; the regression is
otherwise identical to that reported in column 1 of Table 2. The 0.0650 coefficient on the whole
ownership dummy indicates that wholly-owned affiliates have significantly greater net working
capital positions than do partially-owned affiliates. The -0.1012 coefficient suggests that wholly-
owned affiliates in low tax countries have much larger working capital positions than do wholly-
owned affiliates elsewhere – though this tax effect is only statistically significant at the 10%
level. It is noteworthy that the -0.0538 coefficient on the uninteracted tax rate is quite small and
statistically insignificant, implying that tax rate differences have little discernible effects on
working capital positions of partially-owned affiliates. The regression reported in column 2 of
Table 3 uses a tax haven dummy variable in place of the local tax rate, the 0.0866 coefficient
indicating that wholly-owned affiliates in tax havens have net working capital positions that are
8.6 percent larger as a fraction of sales than those elsewhere. The net working capital positions
of partially owned affiliates in tax havens do not differ from the positions of partially owned
affiliates located in high-tax countries.

        The regressions reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 evaluate the role of trade with
parent companies. The -0.1146 coefficient reported in column 3 indicates that, even among
affiliates that do not trade with their parent companies, those located in low tax countries have
larger net working capital positions than those located in high tax countries: ten percent tax rate
differences are associated with working capital that is 1.1 percent greater as a fraction of sales.
The -0.3608 coefficient in column 3 implies that this tax effect is much larger for affiliates with
significant trade with their parent companies. For example, the association between local tax
rates and affiliate net working capital positions is twice as large among affiliates selling 32

                                                                                                      15
percent of their output to parent companies than it is among affiliates that do not trade with their
parent companies. The regression reported in column 4 similarly suggests that affiliates located
in tax havens have larger net working capital positions if they trade extensively with their parent
companies than if they do not, though the estimated coefficient on the interaction of the tax
haven dummy and the share of trade with the parent company is only statistically significant at
the 10% level.

        Taken as a whole, the evidence presented in Table 3 is generally consistent with intrafirm
transactions playing an important role in the association of local tax rates and net working capital
positions. Wholly-owned affiliates, and those with extensive trade with parent companies,
exhibit the strongest positive relationships between local tax rates and net working capital
positions.

3.4.    Investment Opportunities and Working Capital

        The regression coefficients presented in Table 2 are consistent with firms reallocating
capital from low-productivity uses in low tax countries to higher-productivity uses in high-tax
countries. This central tendency presumably reflects the aggregate behavior of firms in widely
differing circumstances. Affiliates with highly attractive investment opportunities are unlikely to
prefer to extend large amounts of trade credit, regardless of local tax rates, because their capital
can earn high returns in local investments. While it is not possible to identify directly the quality
of an affiliate’s investment opportunities, the affiliate’s investment behavior offers an indirect
indicator. Specifically, affiliates with significant expenditures on property, plant and equipment
are likely to face more attractive investment opportunities than are affiliates without such
expenditures. Similarly, affiliates with significant cash holdings are likely to have fewer burning
investment opportunities than do other affiliates.

        The regressions presented in Table 4 use these indicators of investment opportunity to
explore the net working capital implications of the interaction between tax incentives and
investment opportunities. The dependent variable in these regressions is the ratio of net working
capital to affiliate sales; all of the regressions include controls for logs of affiliate assets, non
trade account leverage, the log of local per capita GDP, and parent company and year fixed
effects. The regression reported in column 1 includes a dummy variable that takes the value one
if an affiliate’s capital expenditure to asset ratio lies above the sample median; the dummy

                                                                                                        16
variable is zero otherwise. As indicated by the -0.1277 coefficient in column 1, affiliates with
above-median capital expenditure to asset ratios have substantially smaller net working
positions, reflecting some combination of their demand for, and availability of, investible funds.
The -0.1940 coefficient in column 1 indicates that affiliates in low tax countries have much
higher net working capital positions than do affiliates in high tax countries, but the 0.1762
coefficient reveals that this tax correlation entirely disappears among affiliates with significant
capital expenditures. Hence it appears that tax rate differences are much more strongly
associated with net working capital account differences in the part of the sample without
extensive demand for capital expenditures.

       A similar pattern appears in the regression reported in column 2 of Table 4, in which the
capital expenditure dummy variable is interacted with a dummy for tax haven location. The
0.0779 coefficient on tax haven location indicates that affiliates in tax havens have significantly
larger net working capital accounts than do affiliates located elsewhere, and the -0.0709
coefficient on the interaction reveals that this effect again disappears for affiliates with
significant capital expenditures.

       The regressions reported in columns 3-4 of Table 4 use cash balances rather than capital
expenditures to indicate investment opportunities. The -0.0733 coefficient in the regression
reported in column 3 indicates that affiliates with substantial cash balances have smaller net
working capital accounts, largely reflecting the accounting reality that cash not deployed as net
working capital is cash on hand. The -0.1353 coefficient in column 3 indicates that the negative
association of local tax rates and net working capital positions is stronger for affiliates with
significant cash holdings, though this effect is not statistically significant. The regression
reported in column 4 considers the impact of tax haven location, and here the 0.0710 coefficient
on the cash balance interaction indicates that tax haven location is more strongly associated with
net working capital positions for affiliates holding greater amounts of cash. The evidence on
cash balances reported in columns 3-4 is consistent with the capital expenditure evidence
reported in columns 1-2 and with the interpretation that tax effects on net working capital
positions are significantly influenced by other capital demands that firms face.

3.5.   Net Working Capital and Dividend Repatriations under the Homeland Investment Act



                                                                                                      17
       Firms without attractive foreign investment opportunities, but with foreign profits that
would be subject to high rates of U.S. tax if repatriated, stood to benefit more than others from
the 2005 repatriation tax holiday. These firms also had the strongest incentives to use trade
credit arrangements to reallocate capital from foreign affiliates prior to the holiday. The
regressions presented in Table 5 evaluate the extent to which foreign affiliates with positive net
working capital positions prior to 2005 took advantage of the repatriation tax holiday to remit
dividends to U.S. parent companies. For this purpose it is necessary to focus on foreign affiliates
directly owned by their U.S. parent companies because dividend payments by indirectly owned
affiliates would be received by entities other than U.S. parent companies and therefore possibly
not included among 2005 repatriations benefiting from the tax holiday.

       The dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns 1-3 of Table 5 is a dummy
equal to one if an affiliate pays a dividend, and zero otherwise. The independent variable
“Directly Owned with Positive Net Working Capital” is a dummy equal to one for affiliates that
are directly owned and have accounts receivable exceeding accounts payable in 2004. The -
0.0269 coefficient in column 1 indicates that affiliates that are directly owned and have positive
net working capital positions in 2004 are less likely to pay dividends than are other affiliates.
The 0.0620 coefficient on the interaction of this variable with a dummy for year 2005 indicates
that directly owned affiliates with positive net working capital positions were more likely to pay
dividends during 2005 than in other years; these affiliates were indeed more likely to pay
dividends in 2005 than are typical affiliates in typical years, as reflected by the positive sum of
the -0.0269 and 0.0620 coefficients. The regression reported in column one controls for ratios of
net income to sales, whether the affiliate paid a dividend in the previous year, and year effects.
The specification reported in column 2 adds parent fixed effects, and the specification in column
3 includes affiliate fixed effects instead of parent fixed effects, in both cases without changing
significantly the estimated effect of the 2005 repatriation holiday.

       Columns 4-6 of Table 5 present estimated coefficients from similar regressions in which
the dependent variable is the ratio of dividends to affiliate sales. The interaction of direct parent
ownership, positive net working capital position in 2004, and the observation year 2005 is again
positive and significant, suggesting that those affiliates using trade credit to reallocate capital
prior to the 2005 repatriation holiday used the 2005 opportunity to repatriate unusually large
dollar volumes of dividends.

                                                                                                      18
4.         Conclusion

           Although there is extensive analysis of the effects of taxation on many aspects of
corporate financial policy including borrowing and dividend distributions, rather little previous
attention has been paid to the effects of corporate income taxes on trade credit practices. 7 This
paper develops the idea that trade credit allows firms to reallocate capital in response to tax
differences. Managers have incentives to set accounts receivable and accounts payable in a
manner that reallocates capital from lightly taxed operations where investment opportunities
have dissipated to highly taxed operations where profitable opportunities remain. This
mechanism implies that net working capital positions, or the difference between accounts
receivable and accounts payable, should be higher for firms facing lower tax rates.

           The empirical analysis uses detailed data on the foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational
firms. The virtue of these data is that it is possible to observe affiliates of the same firm
operating in different countries and therefore facing different corporate income tax rates. Several
patterns suggest that firms use working capital positions to reallocate capital in response to
taxation. The data indicate that affiliates in low tax jurisdictions have higher net working capital
positions than do other affiliates. The tax pattern is strongest among affiliates that have the
greatest opportunities to use trade credit to reallocate capital and for affiliates that do not appear
to have attractive investment opportunities, specifically those with low capital expenditures and
high cash holdings. Further evidence of the use of trade credit to reallocate capital comes from
an analysis of firm responses to the Homeland Investment Act, which reduced the tax costs of
repatriating foreign earnings in 2005. Foreign affiliates with positive net working capital
positions were the most likely to increase their repatriations that year, suggesting that these
affiliates used trade credit arrangements to reallocate capital prior to the tax holiday.

           Taken together, this evidence illustrates the effect of taxes on levels of working capital.
Firms use trade credit to mitigate the effect of tax differences on the allocation of capital, and
their actions imply that tax rate differences across countries significantly affect capital allocation
within firms, depressing investment levels in high tax jurisdictions and introducing differences
between the productivity of capital deployed in different locations.


7
    For a review of this literature, see Graham (2006).


                                                                                                         19
References

Antràs, Pol and C. Fritz Foley (2011): “Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade
       Finance Practices,” NBER Working Paper No. 17091.

Auerbach, Alan J. (2002): “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in Alan J. Auerbach and
      Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3 (Amsterdam: North-
      Holland, 2002), 1251-1292.

Bond, Stephen and Jing Xing (2010): “Corporate Taxation and Capital Accumulation,” Oxford
       University Centre for Business Taxation Working Paper No. 10/15.

Brick, Ivan E. and William K. H. Fung (1984): “Taxes and the Theory of Trade Debt,” Journal
        of Finance 39 (4), 1169-1176.

Burkart, Mike and Tore Ellingsen (2004): “In-Kind Finance: A Theory of Trade Credit,”
       American Economic Review 94 (3), 569-590.

Chirinko, Robert S., Seven M. Fazzari, and Andrew P. Meyer (1999): “How Responsive Is
       Business Capital Formation to Its User Cost? An Exploration with Micro Data,” Journal
       of Public Economics 74 (1), 53-80.

Cunat, Vicente M. (2007): “Trade Credit: Suppliers as Debt Collectors and Insurance Providers,”
       Review of Financial Studies 20 (2), 491-527.

Da Rin, Marco, Marina Di Giacomo, and Alessandro Sembenelli (2011): “Entrepreneurship,
       Firm Entry, and the Taxation of Corporate Income: Evidence from Europe,” Journal of
       Public Economics 95 (9-10), 1048-1066.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. (2001): “Repatriation Taxes and
       Dividend Distortions,” National Tax Journal 54 (4), 829-851.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. (2004): “A Multinational Perspective on
       Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets, Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2451-
       2487.

Desai, Mihir A. and Austan D. Goolsbee (2004): “Investment, Overhang, and Tax Policy,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2), 285-338.

Dharmapala, Dhammika, C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes (2011): “Watch What I Do, Not
      What I Say: The Unintended Consequences of the Homeland Investment Act,” Journal of
      Finance 66 (3), 753-788.



                                                                                               20
Djankov, Simeon, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer (2010):
      “The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship,” American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (3), 31-64.

Fabbri, Daniela and Anna Maria C. Menichini (2010): “Trade Credit, Collateral Liquidation and
        Borrowing Constraints,” Journal of Financial Economics 96 (3), 413-432.

Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love (2003): “Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development
      and Industry Growth,” Journal of Finance 58 (1), 353-374.

Foley, C. Fritz, Jay Hartzell, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite (2007): “Why do Firms Hold so
       Much Cash? A Tax-Based Explanation,” Journal of Financial Economics 86 (3), 579-
       607.

Giannetti, Mariassunta, Mike Burkart and Tore Ellingsen (2011): “What You Sell Is What You
      Lend? Explaining Trade Credit Contracts,” Review of Financial Studies 24 (4), 1261-
      1298.

Graetz, Michael J. and Deborah H. Schenk (2009), Federal Income Taxation: Principles and
       Policies, 6th ed. New York: Foundation Press.

Graham, John R. (1996): “Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial Economics 41
      (1), 41-73.

Graham, John R. (2000): “How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt?” Journal of Finance 55 (5),
      1901-1941.

Graham, John R. (2006): “A Review of Taxes and Corporate Finance,” Foundations and Trends
      in Finance 1 (7), 573-691.

Hartman, David (1985): “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of Public
      Economics 26 (1), 107-21.

Hassett, Kevin A. and R. Glenn Hubbard (2002): “Tax Policy and Business Investment,” in Alan
       J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3
       (Amsterdam: North-Holland), 1293-1343.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1994): “Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives,”
       Journal of Public Economics 55 (2), 323-347.

Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice (1994): “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
       American Business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (1), 149-182.

Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme (2008): “Capital Structure and International
       Debt Shifting,” Journal of Financial Economics 88 (1), 80-118.

                                                                                             21
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan (2012): “Trade Credit Contracts,” Review of
      Financial Studies 25(3), pp. 838-867.

Lee, Yul W. and John D. Stowe (1993): “Product Risk, Asymmetric Information, and Trade
       Credit,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28 (2), 285-300.

Long, Michael S., Ileen B Malitz, and S. Abraham Ravid (1993): “Trade Credit, Quality
      Guarantees, and Product Marketability,” Financial Management 22 (4), 117-127.

Love, Inessa, Lorenzo A Preve, and Virginia Sarria-Allende (2007): “Trade Credit and Bank
       Credit: Evidence from Recent Financial Crises,” Journal of Financial Economics 83 (2),
       453-469.

Meltzer, Allan H. (1960): “Mercantile Credit, Monetary Policy, and Size of Firms,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 42 (4), 429-437.

Ng, Chee K., Janet Kiholm Smith and Richard L. Smith (1999): “Evidence on the Determinants
      of Credit Terms Used in Interfirm Trade,” Journal of Finance 54 (3), 1109-1129.

Petersen, Michell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan (1994): “The Benefits of Lender Relationships:
       Evidence from Small Business Data,” Journal of Finance 49 (1), 3-37.

Petersen, Michell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan (1997): “Trade Credit: Theories and Evidence,”
       Review of Financial Studies 10 (3), 661-691.

Ramey, Valerie A. (1992): “The source of fluctuations in money: Evidence from trade credit,”
      Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 171-193.

Sinn, Hans-Werner (1993): “Taxation and the Birth of Foreign Subsidiaries,” in Trade, Welfare
       and Economic Policies: Essays in Honor of Murray C. Kemp, eds. Horst Herberg and
       Ngo Van Long (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press), 325-352.




                                                                                               22
Figure 1
Figure 2
       Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
                                     Table 2
                      Taxes and Net Working Capital Positions




Dependent Variable:
                                          Table 3
                      Effects of Whole Ownership and Trade with Parent




Dependent Variable:
                                      Table 4
                      Capital Expenditures and Cash Holdings




Dependent Variable:
                                           Table 5
                      Tax Holiday Repatriations and Net Working Capital




Dependent Variable:
