                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      QUALITY OF LIFE, FIRM PRODUCTIVITY, AND THE VALUE OF AMENITIES
                           ACROSS CANADIAN CITIES

                                            David Albouy
                                          Fernando Leibovici
                                            Casey Warman

                                         Working Paper 18103
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18103


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012




Please contact at the Department of Economics, 611 Tappan St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 or
albouy@umich.edu. We would like to thank Kevin Milligan, James Milway, Daniel Parent, and
participants of seminars at McGill University, Queens University, Simon Fraser University, the
University of British Columbia, and the University of Victoria and attendees at the 2009 Canadian
Economics Association and Western Economics Association Annual Meetings for their help, input,
and advice. All mistakes are our own. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance
provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). While the
research and analysis are based on data from Statistics Canada, this paper represents the views of the
authors and does not necessarily reflect the opinions of Statistics Canada, nor does it necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Albouy, Fernando Leibovici, and Casey Warman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quality of Life, Firm Productivity, and the Value of Amenities across Canadian Cities
David Albouy, Fernando Leibovici, and Casey Warman
NBER Working Paper No. 18103
May 2012
JEL No. J31,J61,Q51,R1

                                             ABSTRACT

We present hedonic general-equilibrium estimates of quality-of-life and productivity differences across
Canada’s metropolitan areas. These are based off of the estimated willingness-to-pay of heterogeneous
households and firms to locate in various cities, which differ in their wage levels, housing costs, and
land values. Using 2006 Canadian Census data, our metropolitan quality-of-life estimates are somewhat
consistent with popular rankings, but find Canadians care more about climate and culture. Quality-of-life
is highest in Victoria for Anglophones, Montreal for Francophones, and Vancouver for Allophones,
and lowest in more remote cities. Toronto is Canada’s most productive city; Vancouver is the overall
most valuable city.


David Albouy                                        Casey Warman
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Michigan                              Dunning Hall, Room 209
611 Tappan Street                                   94 University Avenue
351C Lorch Hall                                     Queen's University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                            Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6
and NBER                                            warmanc@econ.queensu.ca
albouy@umich.edu

Fernando Leibovici
Economics Department
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6FL
New York, NY 10012
fml234@nyu.edu
1    Introduction

Wage and cost-of-living levels vary significantly across Canadian cities and provinces, despite the fact that

capital and labor are largely mobile within Canada’s borders. Coulombe and Lee (1995) and Coulombe

(2000) find that income and price levels converged significantly between 1960 and 1980, but have converged

relatively little since then. These persistent differences in wages and prices are most naturally explained

by persistent differences in local advantages to households and firms, broadly termed as "amenities." To

clarify terminology, we say consumption amenities determine an area’s overall quality of life (QOL), while

production amenities determine an area’s overall productivity. The primary goal of this paper is to identify

the overall differences in quality-of-life and productivity levels across Canadian cities.

    Some places in Canada have undeniable advantages over others. Most Canadians live south, close to the

United States border, where the climate is warmer and trading costs are lower than further north. Canadians

are acutely aware of regional disparities in natural resource wealth, from oil in Alberta, forests in British

Columbia, to depleted fish stocks in the Atlantic provinces. Much of the population is concentrated in a

handful of large cities, which benefit from sizable agglomeration economies and vast cultural opportunities,

but also suffer disproportionately from urban disamenities such as crime, pollution, and congestion. Strong

local and provincial governments, as well as differential treatment of regions by the federal government,

also lead to geographic differences in public services and taxation.

    While some places appear more advantaged than others, much of the population is still located in less

advantaged areas. Although heterogeneity in household tastes and production technologies may help explain

this, the importance of heterogeneity should not be overstated: most individuals prefer temperatures above

-40, and most firms benefit from low transportation costs. Furthermore, many Canadians are quite mobile

over their lifetime and have only limited local attachments (e.g. Bernard et al. 2008).

    In this setting, households and firms in areas with less advantageous amenities should be largely com-

pensated by more advantageous local prices. Specifically, households in areas with lower QOL should be

compensated either through higher nominal wages or lower costs-of-living. Firms in less productive areas

should be compensated through either lower labor or non-labor costs. This is the essence of the methodology

of Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982), which has been used extensively by researchers to measure QOL and


                                                                                                           1
productivity differences in the United States (e.g. Blomquist et al. 1988, Beeson and Eberts 1989; Gyourko

and Tracy 1991; Gabriel and Rosenthal 2004; Shapiro 2006; Chen and Rosenthal 2008).

   Surprisingly, this popular methodology has never been applied to Canadian data. We explain this theory

in Section 2, using the framework by Albouy (2008a, 2009b), which realistically incorporates federal taxes

and produced non-tradable goods, such as housing, in a manner that Roback (1982) suggested, but never

implemented. In Section 3, we explain how we calibrate this model for Canada, and use the 2006 Census

microdata to estimate wage and housing-cost differences across Census Metropolitan Areas (CMAs), so as

to infer QOL and productivity differences across CMAs.

   Several issues arise in applying the Rosen-Roback framework to Canada. First, while most areas of

Canada are mainly English-speaking, areas such as Quebec, are predominantly French-speaking, while

areas such as New Brunswick, are largely bilingual. Different language groups naturally have preferences

for different areas, as most would prefer to live where their mother tongue is predominant. Roback (1988)

and Beeson (1991) estimate QOL advantages for different groups defined by education groups; we estimate

QOL for groups defined by mother tongue, a more pre-determined characteristic. We also discuss, for

what appears to be the first time, how the model may be aggregated across types, and be used to estimate

productivity differences across groups.

   Second, unionization rates in Canada are still high relative to the United States, but vary across regions.

This means that some areas may have high real wage levels not because of low amenities, but because of

a strong union presence. We find it most plausible to assume that union wage premia do not reflect urban

productivity or QOL differences, and use wage estimates purged of unionization effects.

   Third, federal and provincial governments play a large role in taxing income and redistributing it through

intergovernmental transfers. The role of taxes on residents is dealt with in the model using adjustments in

Albouy (2008a; 2009a). It is less clear how the model should accommodate intergovernmental transfers

and fiscal disparities due to natural resource wealth, documented in Albouy (2010). Thus, we exclude these

from the main analysis, and consider them in alternative results at the end.

   According to our estimates in Section 4, the CMA with the highest QOL is Victoria, followed by the

BC CMAs of Vancouver, Kelowna, Abbotsford, and then Toronto, Calgary, and Montreal. The rankings for

different language groups are almost completely mutually consistent in CMAs with significant quantities of

each: Anglophones, Francophones, and Allophones all seem to prefer Montreal to Ottawa-Hull.

   Our estimates of the productivity in tradeables, also the first of their kind for Canada, reveal Toronto to

                                                                                                            2
be the most productive CMA, followed by Calgary, Oshawa, Vancouver, and Ottawa-Hull. While the QOL

of Anglophones in Montreal appears to be almost the same as in Toronto, their productivity is lower than

that of Anglophones in Kingston. This is consistent with the reasoning in Albouy (2008b) that, since 1970,

Anglophones fled Montreal more from a loss of jobs than a loss of amenities.

        Under the assumption that there are no sizable differences in unobservable heterogeneity in the produc-

tivity of non-tradeables, we create aggregate measures of the value of urban amenities to households and

firms, i.e. QOL and productivity in tradeables. According to this metric, the most valuable CMA per hectare

is Vancouver, followed by Victoria, Toronto, Calgary, Kelowna, and Montreal.1

        While QOL greatly interests policy-makers and the general population, published indicators of QOL for

Canadian cities consist broadly of weighted sums of arbitrarily chosen amenities, with ad hoc weights. Such

indices are found in Cities Ranked & Rated, Places Rated Almanac, and Mercer’s Quality-of-Living Reports.

These shed light into what cities people appreciate the most only to the extent that the ad-hoc weighting

schemes used in their calculations actually reflect peoples’ values. The willingness-to-pay methodology

implemented here instead makes use of data on local wages and housing costs to identify the aggregate

value of the different amenities. We show in Section 5 that our estimates are generally in line with the

popular rankings, but that households put more weight on climate and arts and culture. Finally, in Section

6 we consider how our estimates would be influenced by including intergovernmental transfers, alternative

price data from the CPI, or using housing-cost data from rental units alone.2



2        Theoretical Model of Spatial Equilibrium

Quality-of-life and productivity differences across cities are measured from wage and housing-cost dif-

ferences across cities using the theoretical framework of Albouy (2008a, 2009a). This framework builds

upon that of Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982), but also accounts for non-labor income, housing production,
    1
      It should be noted that these rankings would change if interprovincial fiscal advantages were efficiently "equalized," as proposed
in Albouy (2010): in this case, cities in the Atlantic and Prairie provinces fall in value, while those in Ontario rise.
    2
      To our knowledge, the only attempt to measure QOL across Canadian cities in an economic framework, distantly related to
the one here, is Giannias (1998), who does so for 13 cities using 1981 data. This work measures QOL according to how housing
costs co-vary with six amenity measures, controlling for three housing characteristics, and assuming that incomes do not depend
on where households locate. This methodology depends on a highly parametric model with strict normality assumptions and a
linear housing price equation, which departs from more established log-linear specifications. Our model instead endogenizes wage
differences, controls for many worker and housing characteristics, is independent of any set of chosen amenities, and is illustrated
through graphs mapping the relationship of wage and housing-cost differences to QOL and productivity differences. Furthermore,
our analysis covers all 33 currently defined Census Metropolitan Areas (CMAs), which we sometimes refer to as "cities," as well
as the non-metropolitan areas of Canada, organized by province or territory.



                                                                                                                                     3
cost-of-living differences from non-housing sources, and inequalities in both federal and provincial taxation.

Furthermore, we account for multiple household types to allow for language groups, like Roback (1988) and

Beeson (1991), but in a richer setting that deals with issues of aggregation and productivity measurement.


2.1      Setup

The national economy contains many cities, indexed by j, which trade with each other and share several

types of mobile households, indexed by g 2 f1; ::; Gg. The population in city j is denoted as the vector

Nj = (N1j ; :::; NGj ). Each household consumes a numeraire traded good, x, and a group-specific non-traded

local good,3 yg , with local price, pjg , which varies by city and type. This accounts for the possibility that

households may consume housing in different neighborhoods or goods produced disproportionately by their

own type (e.g. Anglophones in Montreal live in certain neighborhoods and are more likely to consume

services produced by other Anglophones). In the empirical implementation of the model, the price of local

goods for type g is equated with the cost of housing paid by that type.4

       Firms produce traded and local goods out of land, capital, and labor. Within a city, factors receive

the same payment in either sector. Land, L, within each city is homogenous and immobile, and is paid a

city-specific price rj ; each city’s land supply, Lj (r), may depend positively on rj , with a finite elasticity

"jL;r 2 [0:1).5 Capital, K, is costlessly mobile across cities, and is paid the price { everywhere: this

price may be set either nationally or internationally, although for simplicity net foreign asset holdings are

set to zero. Households of each type g, Ng , are perfectly mobile within the country, have identical tastes

and endowments, and each supplies a single unit of labor. Because households care about local prices and

QOL, wages, denoted by the vector wj = (wgj ; :::; wG
                                                    j
                                                      ), may vary across cities. The national number of

worker-households is fixed at NT OT = (N1T OT ; :::; NGT OT ), so that the sum of populations across cities
P j         T OT . Households of each type own identical diversified portfolios of land and capital, which
  jN = N

pay an income Rg from land and Ig from capital, regardless of the city they live in. Gross income, mjg
   3
      The productivity differences in non-traded goods may be quite variable. Without separate data on land values across cities, it
is nearly impossible to identify them. However, Albouy (2009b) shows that this does not bias the quality-of-life estimates, and has
only a minor bias on the trade-productivity estimates for reasonable calibrations.
    4
      As shown in Roback (1980), the use of a single traded good may be used to approximate the case of multiple goods. Factor-price
equalization, as in the Hecksher-Ohlin model of trade does not occur, because factors are mobile and many cities may specialize
in the production of fewer tradable goods than factors. Furthermore, non-housing goods may be considered to be a combination of
traded goods and non-housing local goods.
    5
      The assumption of homogenous land is used for simplicity, as we do not directly observe land values in any of our datasets.
As discussed in Albouy and Lue (2011), land values within CMAs may differ significantly because of local amenities as well as
transportation costs. Our estimates may be taken as an average of the value of land within a city. Our QOL estimates implicitly
include a penalty for areas with higher transportation costs.


                                                                                                                                 4
Rg +Ig +wgj , varies across cities only as wages vary. Out of this income households pay a federal income tax

of (mg ), which is redistributed in lump-sum transfers by city, Tgj , which may vary by city. For expositional

ease, provincial taxes are discussed in the Appendix.

     Cities differ in two types of attributes: quality of life, which raises household utility and is given by the

vector Qj = (Qj1 ; :::; QjG ), and productivity in the traded-good sector, which varies by factor and is given

by the vector Aj = (Aj1 ; :::; AjG ; AjL ; AjK ). These attributes, in turn, depend on a vector of amenities, Zj =
                                                                                   e Zj and Aj = A
(Z1j ; :::; Zkj ), natural or artificial, according to some unknown functions Qj = Q             e Zj .

                                                             e g =@Zk > 0; for a production amenity, e.g.
For a consumption amenity, e.g. safety or clement weather, @ Q
                                              eg =@Zk > 0. It is possible that a single amenity affects both
navigable water or agglomeration economies, @ A

productivity and QOL.6

     Household preferences are modeled by a utility function Ug (x; yg ; Qg ), that is quasi-concave over x

and yg , and increasing in Qg . The expenditure function for a worker of type g in city j is eg (pjg ; ug ; Qjg )

minx;y fx + pjg y : Ug (x; y; Qjg )         ug g. Qg is normalized so that eg (pjg ; ug ; Qjg ) = eg (pjg ; ug )=Qjg , where

eg (pjg ; ug )   eg (pjg ; ug ; 1), meaning that one-percent increase in Qg is equivalent to a one-percent increase

in disposable income. Since households are fully mobile, their utility must be the same across all the cities

that they inhabit. Thus, the after-tax income households earn in each city should equal the expenditure

needed to obtain the common level of utility, ug , given local prices and QOL:7


                                           eg (pjg ; ug ; Qjg ) = mjg      (mjg ) + Tgj                                          (1)


for all types g and cities j where Ngj > 0.

     All input and goods markets are perfectly competitive, and firms produce under constant returns to scale.

Let the vector AjN = (Aj1 ; :::; AjG ) denote labor productivity, the vector NjX = (N1X
                                                                                     j        j
                                                                                        ; :::NGX ) denote labor

used to produce the traded good, and NjY g = (NYj g1 ; :::; NYj gG ) denote the labor used to produce each
                          P                                                                       P j
local good g, with NjY =        j                                                            j
                             g NY g ; similar notation is used for land and capital, with LY =      g LY g ,

etc. Then the production functions of representative traded-good and local-good firms are X j = FX (AjN
    6
      It is worth noting that amenities may be endogenous to quantities in the model, and that this poses different problems when
measuring values by using comparative statics. For example, an increase in population, N j , may lead to greater pollution, lowering
Qj . If a city were to receive a theme-park, improving Q, this would raise N , raising pollution, and indirectly decreasing Q.
The value of the theme-park could be measured empirically by controlling for pollution, although the value when accounting for
pollution externalities should not control for pollution. Both direct and indirect effects of amenities have to be taken into account
when using comparative statics to determine the causal effect of an amenity on the attributes and prices in a city.
    7
      The mobility condition need not apply to all households, but only a sufficiently large subset of mobile marginal households.



                                                                                                                                  5
NjX ; AjL LjX ; AjK KX
                     j
                       ) and Ygj = FY g (NjY g ; LjY g ; KYj g ), for all g, where FX and FY g are concave and

exhibit constant returns to scale. All factors are fully employed: NjX + NjY = Nj ; LjX + LjY = Lj and
 j
KX + KYj = K j . Unit cost in the traded-good sector is cX (wj ; rj ; {; Aj )                     minN;L;K fwj N + rj L + {K :

FX (AjN NjX ; AjL LjX ; AjK KX
                             j
                               ) = 1g. As markets are competitive, firms make zero profits in equilibrium,

so that

                                                        cX (wj ; rj ; {; Aj ) = 1                                                            (2)

in all cities j. A symmetric definition holds for the unit costs in the local-good sectors, cY g , except that,

because of data limitations, we assume uniform productivity for all g and j


                                                         cY g (wj ; rj ; {) = pjg                                                            (3)


for all types g and cities j where Ngj > 0.

    Scalars with superscripts j refer to city-specific values, while those without superscripts refer to national
                                                                                                   P
averages. The share of all income that goes to households of type g is denoted g NgT OT mg =( g0 NgT0 OT mg0 ),
                                                                                        j         j          j
with      = (    1 ; :::;   G );    within a city, the comparable notation is               = (   1 ; :::;   G ).   For households, de-

note the average share of gross expenditures spent on traded goods and local goods as sxg                                       xg =mg and

syg       pg yg =mg ; denote the shares of income received from labor, land, and capital income as swg

wg =mg ; sRg              Rg =mg , and sIg           Ig =mg .    Each share may be put into a vector of the form sx =

(sx1 ; :::; sxG ). Using averages, it is possible to write the aggregate expenditure shares, sy =                                        sy , and

income shares sw =                 sw , and so on. For firms producing traded goods, denote the cost shares of labor,

land, and capital as         wg NXg =X, L
                               Ng                               rLX =X, and         K       {KX =X, with            N   = (   N 1 ; :::; N G ),
                                       P
and the overall labor-cost share N = g                     Ng.    Denote similarly-defined cost shares in the local -good

sector    gN ,    gL ,   and       gK ,   with the cost-share of local -good g from labor type g 0 given by                   gN g 0 ,   so that

 gN    =(   gN 1 ; :::;     gN G ).



2.2      Measuring Quality of Life and Productivity

We begin by considering the case of where there is only one type of household, and continue with an

explanation of multiple types, showing under what assumptions we may aggregate results to reproduce the

single-type case.



                                                                                                                                              6
2.2.1   Single Household Type

To analyze the effect of city attributes on prices we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions (1), (2), and (3)

around the national average. Thus, for any variable z, z^j = ln z j                           ln z = z j        z =z, approximates the

percent difference in city j of z relative to the geometric average z, which is the value for a nationally rep-

resentative city. Log-linearized versions of (1), (2), and (3) describe how prices co-vary with city attributes.




                                        ^ j = sy p^j
                                        Q                    sw (1       0
                                                                              ^j
                                                                             )w        dT j =m                                        (4a)

                                        A^j =      Nw
                                                    ^   j
                                                            +      ^j
                                                                  Lr                                                                 (4b)

                                         p^j =     Nw
                                                    ^   j
                                                            +      ^j
                                                                  Lr                                                                  (4c)


These equations are first-order approximations around a nationally-representative city and so the share val-
                                                                        ^ j , from how high the cost-of-
ues are national averages. Equation (4a) measures the QOL differential, Q

living, sy p^j , is relative to after-tax nominal income, sw (1                       ^j ,
                                                                                   0 )w      and transfer differences, expressed as a
                                   ^ j expresses the fraction of income households are willing to pay – or
fraction of income, dT j =m. Thus, Q

if negative, to accept – to live in city j relative to a city with an average QOL. Equation (4b) measures the

productivity differential, A^j , from how high the labor costs,                Nw
                                                                                ^      j,    and land costs,     ^j ,
                                                                                                                Lr      are in traded-good

production. It measures the percent cost-savings that firms experience from locating in city j relative to

the national average. Equation (4c), constrains the local-good price differential, p^j , to equal the labor-cost
                     j,                                               ^j .
differential,   Nw
                 ^        plus the land-cost differential,           Lr       It is safe to assume that local-goods are more

land-intensive and less labor-intensive than traded goods, so that                       L    >   L   and   N   >   N

    In practice, wage and local -good price differentials are observable and so QOL differentials are mea-

surable directly from (4a). Land-rents are generally unobserved, making it difficult to measure productivity

directly from (4b). However, by assuming that local -good productivity is the same across cities, it is possible

to infer both land-rent and productivity differentials using only data on local -good costs and wages

                                                   1
                                           r^j =            p^j      Nw
                                                                      ^   j
                                                                                                                                       (5)
                                                    L
                                                    L j                              L
                                          A^j =         p^ +         N        N              ^j
                                                                                             w                                         (6)
                                                    L                                L




                                                                                                                                        7
Land rents are inferred in (5) by subtracting off the labor costs               Nw
                                                                                 ^j   from p^j – which in the case of housing

could be interpretable as construction costs – and dividing the remainder by the cost share of land,                      L.   The
                                                                                                  j,
productivity measure in () is based off of nominal wage levels through,                      Nw
                                                                                              ^        plus the cost share due to

land, inferred through local-good prices. The coefficient              L= L     > 1 on reflects how much more local-good

prices must be weighted when using them to proxy for land values, while the negative term in parentheses

removes the double-counting of labor costs in p^.

    The total value of amenity-differences for city j is equal to the QOL differential plus the productivity

differential times its share of expenditure


                                 ^j = Q
                                      ^ j + sx A^j                                                                             (7)
                                         sR                          sR    N             dT j
                                     =        p^j +   0
                                                          sw                     ^j
                                                                                 w
                                          L                                L             m

The second equality, expressed in terms of observable variables, results from substituting in (4a) and (4b):

Collecting terms and using (5), and simplifying, we obtain that the total amenity differential, which ex-

presses the social value of land, is equal to the differential value of private land rents, measured as a percent

of income, plus the fiscal externalities in terms of additional federal taxes paid net of federal transfers re-

ceived.
                                         ^ j = sR r^j +        0
                                                                      ^j
                                                                   sw w        dT j =m                                         (8)

    It is worth noting that if tradable goods are heterogeneous, a higher level of demand for goods produced

disproportionately in city j may be conflated with a higher level of productivity. For instance, if the world

price for oil is particularly high, and workers in Calgary are concentrated in the oil industry, then the marginal

revenue product of workers in Calgary may be relatively high, even if their marginal physical product is not.

Thus A^j may be interpreted as a combination of both real and pecuniary effects.

    Furthermore, cities could also vary in their productivity of local goods. As discussed in Albouy (2009b),

productivity in local goods cannot be identified without extensive data on land values, which is currently

unavailable in Canada. Under our other assumptions, lack of such identification does not affect our measures
                    ^ j ; the lack does cause our measures of tradable-good productivity, A^j , to be slightly
of quality-of-life, Q

underestimated in cities where local-good productivity is high. Inferred land values both private, r^, and




                                                                                                                                8
social, ^ j , are more severely underestimated in such cities, but these are not central to our analysis.8


2.2.2        Multiple Household Types and Aggregation

With multiple types, the log-linearized version of the mobility condition (1) is


                                               ^ jg = syg p^jg
                                               Q                        swg (1      0
                                                                                       ^gj
                                                                                    g )w         dT j =mg                              (9)


for each group g. Note that this requires each group’s price and wage differentials, p^jg and w
                                                                                              ^gj , but also each

group’s specific marginal tax rate,               0    expenditure share syg and income share swg . It is possible to define an
                                                  g,

                                ^j
aggregate quality-of-life index Q         ^ j that is consistent with the single-type index in (4a) if we define
                                          Q                j

                                                              P
the aggregate local -good price differential as p^j    (1=sy ) g jg syg p^jg , the aggregate wage as differential
                P
   ^ j (1=sw ) g jg swg w
as w                       ^gj , and assume that all groups face the same marginal tax rate 0 .

         With multiple labor types, the zero-profit condition for tradable-good producing firms is A^j =                              N

^j +
w             ^j ;
             Lr      where A^j             N
                                               ^j
                                               A       +         ^j
                                                               L AL   +      ^j
                                                                           K AK    which estimates productivity using the labor-cost
                                                 N
                         j                                                                                                       j
measure with             N    ^ j . A potential problem with this approximation is that the local cost shares,
                              w                                                                                                  N;   may

vary considerably from the national ones,                        N.    But, when each group g’s fraction of total labor costs in city
         j
j,       N g = N ;is   proportional to its share of total labor income in city j, i.e.,

                                                                j
                                                                Ng         j swg
                                                                      =    g         for all g                                        (10)
                                                                N            sw

                                                                                                                  j
                                        ^ j , reflects labor costs with local cost shares,
the single wage measure proposed above, w                                                                         N,   so that   Nw
                                                                                                                                  ^   j   =
 j
 N         ^ j . Thus, estimates from equation (4b) still measure overall productivity, as before, although they
           w

reflect the factors in proportion to how they are used locally, rather than nationally.

          In Appendix A.1, we show that using this same assumption it is possible to estimate the land-rent

differential using equation (5) from aggregate wage and housing-cost differences, using the approximations

 L       = (sR         sx   L )=sy   and   N   = (sw            sx    N )=sy .   Thus we can have a feasible estimate of productivity

from (6) above that estimates the marginal productivity of land through residential housing. Furthermore, if

federal marginal tax rates for groups are the same, then the total value of amenities is still given by (7).
     8
     Higher productivity in non-tradables tends to lower wages and prices by a relatively small amount, and in the same proportion
that trade productivity raises them. More generally, the measure of productivity we use strongly reflects higher levels of tradable
productivity and, more weakly, lower levels of non-tradable productivity.



                                                                                                                                          9
       As households are perfectly mobile and each type has homogenous tastes, we should expect households

to sort across CMAs according to their tastes for local amenities. The centrifugal forces of household

preferences may be countered by centripetal forces in production, if different labor types are imperfectly

substitutable. In fact, when labor types are imperfect substitutes, the relative productivity of individual

types is not inferrable from wage and price information alone. Such inference also requires information

on relative factor usage in the traded sector. Using the labor-demand equations for the traded sector, it

is possible to show that the relative demand for labor depends on relative wages and relative productivity

levels:
                                  ^j
                                  N         ^j =
                                            N                   ^1j
                                                            12 (w      ^2j ) + (
                                                                       w            12       1) (A^j1     A^j2 )      (11)
                                   1X        2X


where       12   is the elasticity of substitution between type-1 and type-2 labor.9 Intuitively, this (along with

fixed land supplies) produces downward sloping demand for particular labor types. For instance, one can

imagine that producers of tradable output in Montreal could find that having a few native English speakers to

be very productive for helping to export its products. However, because of provincial laws requiring the use

of French in the workplace, these workers would be less productive than comparable native-French speakers

if they were employed in equal proportion. Similarly, Allophones may have some idiosyncratic skills that

are imperfect substitutes for those possessed by other language groups, much as Ottaviano and Peri (2006)

found for immigrants relative to natives in the United States.

       As derived in Appendix A.1.2, equation (11) implies that the productivity of one type is

                                                  j         ^j        ^j +
                                                            N         N                ^2j
                                                                                   12 (w        ^1j )
                                                                                                w
                                   A^j2 =    j
                                                  N1
                                                       j
                                                             2X        1X
                                                                                                        + A^j         (12)
                                             N1   +    N2                 12       1

This formula implies that the greater the elasticity of substitution between the two labor types, the more

important wage differences are relative to employment differences in reflecting productivity differences.

When labor types are strong substitutes, wages must offset the productivity differences of different types: as

 12    ! 1, A^j2 = (w
                    ^2j          ^1j )
                                 w       j      j
                                         N 1 =( N 1   +   j
                                                          N 2)   + A^j , which in the case where N1 and N2 are the only two

factors is just A^2 = w
                      ^2 . But when substitution possibilities are more limited, firms are less able to bid up the

relative wage of more productive labor, and information on relative factor usage becomes more important.
   9
       This equation is often seen in the analysis of skill-biased technical change (e.g. Violante 2008).




                                                                                                                       10
3     Empirical Implementation

To apply our model to Canada, we estimate city-specific wage and price differentials using Census micro-

data for the reference year 2005 and calibrate the cost, income, expenditure, and tax parameters from other

sources.10


3.1     Data and the Estimation of Wage and Housing-Cost Differentials

We estimate wage and housing-cost differentials using the 20 percent sample of Canadian Census data from

the 2006 Masterfile Microdata Files. Most of the differentials apply to a Census Metropolitan Area (CMA),

which consist of municipalities located around an urban core with a population of at least 100,000. The

remaining differentials are for non-CMA areas grouped by province. In total, there are 33 CMAs and 13

non-CMA areas.


3.1.1    Wage Differentials and Union Adjustments

The inter-urban wage differentials come from a sample of full-time workers, ages 25 to 55, and control

for observable skill differences across workers. Thus, for each language group, determined by the mother
                                                                                      j
tongue of the worker, we regress log wages on CMA-indicators (                        w)   and on extensive controls (Xwi ) in
                                           j
the equation ln wij = Xwi          w   +   w   + "ij
                                                  w.
                                                     11 The estimated values of          j
                                                                                         w,   normalized to have a population-

                                                                           ^gj . We interpret them as the
weighted average of zero, are our estimates of the log-wage differentials, w

causal effect of city characteristics on a worker’s wage. Identifying these differentials requires that workers

                                                                                                          ^ j ; is
do not sort across cities according to their unobserved skills.12 The overall differential for each city, w

                            ^gj for each language group, weighted by the number of workers in each city.13
equal to the average of the w
   10
      The reference year for the earnings is the 2005 calendar year. For housing costs, it is the monthly average over the past 12
months with the reference day of interview being May 16, 2006. For renters, it is the current monthly rent paid.
   11
      We include a quartic in potential work experience, highest level education (12 indicators), field of study (17 indicators), occu-
pation (24 indicators), industry (15 indicators), immigrant status interacted with the visible minority status (except for Aboriginal
status), years since immigration, citizenship status and bilingualism interacted with mother tongue. These variables are all fully
interacted with gender. Appendix B provides greater detail on the covariates and regressions. The estimates of the coefficients of
the controls are available in an online appendix.
   12
      This assumption may not hold completely: Glaeser and Maré (2001) argue that up to one third of the urban-rural wage gap
could be due to selection, suggesting that at least two thirds of wage differentials are valid, although this issue deserves greater
investigation. At the same time, it is possible that the estimates could be too small, as some control variables, such as occupation
or industry, could depend on where the worker locates.
   13
      Note that in practice, some workers live and work in different CMAs. We determine the CMA of a worker by their place of
work, so that our productivity estimates are clearly characteristic of the city. The QOL estimates should on the whole be more
accurate, since they will represent the wages and costs faced by workers with relatively modest commutes. Regardless, the results
are almost identical if we assign wage differentials by place of residence, rather than place of work.



                                                                                                                                   11
       When controlling for location and additional controls, Allophones earn wages 19.7 percent lower than

Anglophones while Francophones earn 2.9 percent less.14 These differences within CMA’s could be due to

a variety of reasons, such as school quality or discrimination (Albouy 2008b).

       As we document in Appendix Table A3, union coverage rates in Canada are high and differ substantially

across CMAs, with coverage rates varying from 23 percent in Calgary to almost 50 percent in Quebec,

Sherbrooke, and Thunder Bay. To the extent that wages reflect marginal productivity and unions raise them

beyond this competitive rate, it is appropriate to adjust them in order to estimate productivity levels. It is

theoretically ambiguous whether union wage premia should be discounted when estimating QOL. If union

jobs are readily accessible to new migrants, and these higher premia are reflected in higher rents and other

costs-of-living, then it would be inappropriate to discount the premia. However, if workers union wage

premia do not result in higher local costs-of-living, then it is sensible to discount them. Otherwise, real

incomes in highly unionized areas may be high relative to the local QOL, and QOL estimates in highly

unionized areas will be biased downwards.

       Unfortunately the Census data does not contain information on union coverage. We were able to cal-

culate CMA-level unionization rates from the Labour Force Survey, although these rates are not available

by mother tongue. We eliminate inferred union-wage premia by multiplying the union coverage rates by

a premium of 7.7 log points, taken from Fang and Verma (2002), and subtracting them from the original

             ^ j , renormalizing them to have a population-weighted average value of zero.
estimates of w

       The importance of the public sector varies greatly by cities. For example, a little less than 40 percent

of workers are employed in the public sector in Ottawa compared to less than 15 percent in Toronto. Like

unionization, this potentially has an impact on wages. To control for this, we account for the percentage of

the workforce in each CMA that works in a public sector job.15
  14
      Although these differentials control for what official languages the worker speaks, the Census does not indicate how proficient
respondents are in their languages. It seems likely that self-reported bilingual Anglophones speak English better than self-reported
bilingual Francophones do, and vice versa.
   15
      We also imposed the restriction that w is constant across cities. In analyses that we do not report, we did find evidence that
there are some differences in the returns to characteristics across cities. For instance, university-educated workers receive less of a
premium for working in Vancouver than high-school-educated workers. This suggests that the former enjoy a higher quality-of-life
in Vancouver. While interesting, most of these return differences are relatively minor, and for the sake of simplicity, are left for
future work.




                                                                                                                                   12
3.1.2       Housing-Cost Differentials

Following previous studies (e.g. Gabriel and Rosenthal 2004), we use both housing values and gross rents,

including utilities, to calculate housing-cost differentials. For owned units, we multiply housing values times

a discount rate of 7.85 percent (Peiser and Smith 1985), and add utility costs, to impute rents comparable

to gross rents. We regress the logarithm of these rents on flexible controls (Xwi ) in the equation ln pij =
               j
Xpi    p   +   p   + "ij
                      p.
                         16 The coefficients   j
                                               p,   normalized to have a population-weighted average of zero, are our

estimates of the housing-cost differentials, p^j . Proper identification of housing-cost differences requires that

average unobserved housing quality, and the extent of foreign investment, do not vary systematically across

cities.17

       Controlling for CMA and additional controls, we find that Allophones have housing costs that are al-

most identical to Anglophones, while Francophones have housing costs that are 15 percent lower. The

lower housing costs of Francophones potentially reflect that Anglophones may live in more amenable areas

within CMAs, such in Montreal, where historic Anglophone neighborhoods are generally considered very

amenable. It may be that Anglophones face a more restricted housing market or enjoy better housing quality

that we cannot control for.


3.2        Calibration

The calibrated values for the parameters are similar to those for the United States found in Albouy (2009b),

except that we amend them for Canada to account for a smaller share of income received by labor, and a

smaller proportion of expenditures spent on locally-produced goods.


                                   sx = 0:67         L   = 0:025     L   = 0:25    sR = 0:10

                                   sy = 0:33        N    = 0:775     N   = 0:55 sw = 0:70

                                                     K   = 0:20      K   = 0:20    sI = 0:20
  16
      The controls, which are interacted with renter-status, include number of rooms (9 indicators), number of bedrooms (5 in-
dicators), number of rooms interacted with number of bedrooms, number of rooms per household member, type of building (7
indicators), age of building (9 indicators), and state of repair (2 indicators). For owner-occupied units, we include an indicator
for condominium status and interact the controls with mortgage status. See Appendix B for more detail. The estimates of the
coefficients of the controls are available in an online appendix.
   17
      Unobserved housing quality differences should be minor, as Malpezzi et. al. (1998) determine that housing-cost indices
derived from the U.S. Census in this way perform as well or better than most other indices. As well, in the admittedly limited data
available, foreign investments in major Canadian housing markets appear to be small. For instance, Tal (2011) uses Landcor data,
a comprehensive database on historical sales and current information on the BC residential and commercial markets, to document
that only 2.6% of all sales over the past five years can be accounted by owners whose tax notice is sent to addresses outside of
Canada.


                                                                                                                               13
Information on income and expenditure share differences by language group is lacking, and so we assume

they are the same, which allows us to use equation (10) for our estimates.

      The elasticity of substitution between different labor types is unknown. Ottaviano and Peri (2006)

estimate the elasticity of substitution between immigrants and non-immigrant workers to be about 6.5. It

would seem that the elasticity of substitution between workers of different language groups is much higher

than this elasticity, given that the workers were often born and raised in Canada, and thus have even more

similar skills.18 Thus, we use two potential values for : 1 and 40, where the latter illustrates the case of

imperfect substitutability.

      Although federal tax differences are included in the analysis, federal transfer and spending differences

are not. There are three ways that these spending differences could manifest themselves. To the extent that
                                            ^ j ; to the extent that they benefit firms, they contribute to A^j ;
they benefit households, they contribute to Q

to the extent that they are wasted by governments, they show up nowhere. Since it is not theoretically clear

where they belong, they are reported separately in Section 6.1.

      Calculated tax differentials depend on both federal and provincial tax rates. They include direct taxes on

income as well as indirect taxes on consumption: since this is a static model without an intertemporal savings

decision, the two are equivalent as taxes on consumption reduce the buying power of labor. We determine

provincial differentials using wage differences within province only. Across provinces, the average marginal

tax rate on labor income is 28 percent. See the Appendix for more details.19



4      Quality-of-Life and Productivity Estimates

4.1     Main Estimates

Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 report the estimated wage and housing-cost differentials by CMA or non-

CMA areas of provinces. Figure 1 graphs these and provides intuition for how we infer overall QOL and

productivity differentials, reported in columns 4 and 5. The figure displays the average mobility condition
                ^ j = 0, and the combined average zero-profit conditions from (6), with A^j = 0. The
from (4a), with Q

average mobility condition illustrates the housing costs households are willing to pay, on average, for a given
    18
       We include immigrant controls to capture differences in immigrant/Canadian born earning outcomes. See the Appendix for
more detail.
    19
       Many workers report receiving little income other than labor income. However, given the static nature of the model, a worker’s
choices should be modeled to account for a worker’s permanent income, which includes a large non-labor component, particularly
if implicit rental earnings from one’s own home are included.


                                                                                                                                 14
wage: any premium above that housing cost level is inferred to be payment for consumption amenities, and
                                                                      ^ j . The combined zero-profit condition
thus the vertical distance from that condition indicates overall QOL, Q

illustrates the rate at which land rents, inferred through housing costs, must fall, on average, as wages

rise: any premium over this is inferred to be payment for production amenities, and thus the vertical (or

horizontal) distance from that condition indicates overall firm productivity in the traded sector, A^j . Through

a change in the coordinate system, the two conditions in Figure 1 provide a set of axes for the new coordinate

system in Figure 2, which is in the space of productivity and QOL.

    Interestingly, Canada’s five largest CMA’s – Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Ottawa-Hull, and Calgary,

all have above-average productivity and QOL, as they lie above the average mobility-condition, and to

the right of the average zero-profit condition. The smaller cities of Halifax, and Kelowna all have above-

average QOL but much lower productivity, which is commensurate with their reputations as charming tourist

destinations. Kitchener, Oshawa, and Windsor have less-than-average QOL, but are quite productive given

their size, although this is likely to do with their proximity to Toronto and Detroit. Also in this category are

the Territories, where high wages simultaneously reflect the high marginal productivity of the workers out

there, as well as the need for those workers to be compensated for the harsh climate and remote location.

Finally, a large number of smaller cities, including

    Moncton, Regina, St. John’s, Thunder Bay, and Trois-Rivières fall in the category of cities with below-

average productivity and QOL, with the compensating benefit of being affordable. All of the non-CMA

areas of provinces (except for BC) also fall in this category, suggesting that on average neither firms nor

households find less urban areas to be exceptionally attractive.

    The rankings of the cities in terms of overall QOL, productivity, and combined value are given in Table 2.

Victoria has the highest QOL, followed by Vancouver, Kelowna, Abbotsford, and Toronto. Rounding out the

top ten are Calgary, Montreal, Sherbrooke, Ottawa-Hull, and Barrie. Saint John, Windsor, and Thunder Bay

take the bottom three spots. This list contrasts significantly with Giannias (1998), which places Edmonton

and Winnipeg in the top 4 of 13 cities, which here are ranked 17 and 24 out of 33.

    From the second column of Table 2, we see that Toronto is the leader in productivity, which is not

surprising given that it is the largest city, and home of the financial center of Canada. Second is Calgary,

only the fifth largest CMA at that time, but with a strong oil and gas industry. Third, is Oshawa, as it is

50 kilometers from Toronto, with a strong base in automobile manufacturing. Vancouver and Ottawa-Hull

round out the top five. All of these cities pay a disproportionate share of federal taxes per capita, as seen in

                                                                                                            15
column 7 of Table 1, as a result of being so productive. Despite being the second largest CMA in Canada,

Montreal is only in tenth place, possibly because of its language barrier with the rest of Canada and the

United States.

       The land-rent and total-value differentials are reported in columns 6 and 8 in Table 1, with their dif-

ference caused by the tax differentials in column 7, and the ranking reported in column 3 of Table 2. Their

calculation is made visually transparent in Figures 1 and 2 through the average iso-rent and iso-value curves:

cities above these lines have above-average rents and total values, respectively. From these we see that Vic-

toria has the highest private value of land, although Vancouver has the highest social value, as its higher

wage levels lead to greater positive tax externalities for other Canadians.


4.2      Estimates for Separate Language Groups

QOL measures broken down by mother tongue are presented in Table 3 for CMAs with at least 100,000

inhabitants with that mother tongue, and where they constitute at least 10 percent of the population. Calcu-

lating QOL measures for cities where a smaller number of individuals have a certain mother tongue raises

difficult econometric issues.20 On the whole, the QOL rankings for the different language groups are al-

most identical to those pooling everyone together. For instance, all of the groups prefer Montreal over

Ottawa-Hull. The only discrepancy is minor: unlike Anglophones, Allophones appear to view Hamilton

slightly more favorably than Ottawa-Hull, perhaps because they make up a larger fraction of the population.

Francophones do not seem to despise living in linguistically diverse CMAs, as Montreal and Ottawa-Hull

are their top two cities, while the worst two are Trois-Rivières and Chicoutimi-Jonquière. Allophones prefer

Canada’s three largest cities, Vancouver, Toronto, and Montreal, over all other ones, supporting the notion

that Allophones will prefer to live in areas with the greatest number of like-tongued speakers.

       The individual productivity of different language groups is given in Table 4 for just a few cities where

the supply of each group is large enough to produce credible estimates. Panel A considers the productivity

differences between Francophones and Anglophones in Montreal and Ottawa-Hull. In Montreal, average

productivity is 3 percent above the national average, and Francophones are better paid and much more heav-

ily employed than Anglophones. If both types of workers are perfect substitutes, then Francophones from
  20
    In places where a linguistic group is in a small minority, the calculated wage differentials tend to be relatively low and the
housing-cost differentials between language groups relatively high. This would seem to suggest that these groups find places
where the mother tongue are very amenable. See Warman (2007) for Canadian analysis and evidence of enclaves. It is likely that
these individuals have idiosyncratic attachments, such as spouses, that cause them to sacrifice real income in order to live in these
places.


                                                                                                                                 16
Montreal are 4 percent more productive than the average Francophone, while Anglophones are 4 percent

less productive, making them about as productive as Anglophones in Kingston. If Anglophones provide

special skills that cannot be easily substituted for by Francophone labor, then the productivity differences

are even larger: with an elasticity of substitution of 40, an Anglophone worker in Montreal is only 10 per-

cent less productive, comparable Anglophones in Saskatoon, and wages are as high as they are only because

Francophones cannot easily replace them. The results for Ottawa-Hull are much less extreme since their

national wage and employment differentials are roughly the same.

     Panel B considers the productivity differences between Anglophones and Allophones in Toronto and

Vancouver. In both CMAs, Allophones earn less of a premium than Anglophones do, but are hired in a

greater proportion, relative to the national average. Thus, the less substitutable Allophone labor is for An-

glophone labor, the closer their relative productivity differentials. It appears that Anglophones in Vancouver

have productivity levels just behind Calgary and ahead of Oshawa.



5    Relationship with Popular Rankings and Amenities

The press abounds with popular rankings of Canadian cities according to many characteristics aimed at

capturing "livability." Here, we compare our rankings based on revealed preference with the livability ratings

from Places Rated Almanac and Cities Ranked and Rated. The popular measures are not grounded in theory

and are largely ad-hoc, they reflect popular perceptions of what characteristics make cities “nice” to live in.

Unlike the rankings based on willingness-to-pay, the popular rankings also incorporate low cost-of-living

and good job-market opportunities as “amenities”. In the hedonic framework above, if these factors are

properly weighted, they should make all of the cities offer the same utility, making them equally "livable."

In practice, the popular rankings put less weight on cost-of-living and job-market opportunities than the

framework suggests.21

    Table 5 reports the correlation coefficients between the rankings in these reports and the overall QOL

ranking shown in Table 1. The correlations are all strongly positive, with the correlation between the two

popular rankings being somewhat stronger than that between either popular ranking and the economic one.

These correlations are strong despite the fact that the popular rankings include offsetting cost-of-living and

job-market opportunities. The general consistency of the rankings seems to be mutually reinforcing to both
   21
      For instance, in Places Rated, cost-of-living and employment opportunities, are counted as 2 among 9 amenities, all of which
receive equal weight.


                                                                                                                              17
the economic and popular measures of QOL.

         Table 6 estimates the relationship between the economic QOL estimates and various subindices given

to cities by Places Rated Almanac. The overall livability index in the Almanac puts equal weight on all of

the estimates. Hedonic estimates based on the economic measures of QOL indicate that only the indices

for climate and arts and culture have a significant relationship with households’ willingness-to-pay. This

holds true whether or not CMAs are weighted by population. With only 24 overlapping CMAs in the

sample, this test does have low power; indeed factors related to health, crime, and education may be very

important in households’ location decisions. But it appears unlikely that Places Rated was correct to assign

each sub-index the same coefficient: our economic QOL index suggests that the restriction that all of the

subindices should have equal coefficients is strongly rejected by the data. Understandably, Canadians care

tremendously about climate, and apparently quite a bit about arts and culture, or other amenities that are

correlated with those sub-indexes.



6        Additional Considerations

The model presented above has the advantage of requiring limited data, and of being intuitive to graph. Yet,

additional considerations should be examined which may affect the estimates, in particular with regards to

the role of non-housing costs, differences in non-tax federal fiscal benefits, and the use of rents instead of

housing prices. Given that it is not clear whether or not these considerations should be incorporated into the

estimation of QOL and productivity differentials, and given that they would also be based on incomplete

data, available only at the provincial level, they are presented separately in Table 7. The preceding results

are also summarized at the provincial and regional levels here.22


6.1        Intergovernmental Transfers

An adjustment for intergovernmental transfers and provincial source-based tax revenues is made in column

9. Recall that if these payments benefit households, they should be subtracted from QOL; if they benefit

firms, the should be subtracted from productivity: in either case they should be subtracted from the total

value. On the other hand, if these payments benefit neither households nor firms, than they should be

ignored altogether. Assuming that the payments do affect the total value in some form, they raise the value
    22
    CMA-level adjustments for QOL and total value, assuming that federal transfers are passed on directly to households, are
presented in Tables A1 and A2.


                                                                                                                        18
of Ontario and Quebec, while the Atlantic and the Prairie provinces are seen as less valuable. As analyzed

in greater detail in Albouy (2010), this is mainly driven by equalization payments, except for Alberta and

Saskatchewan, which receive large fiscal benefits by retaining the revenues from taxes on natural resources,

rather than sharing them federally.


6.2      Non-Housing Costs

According to intercity estimates of the Consumer Price Index, non-housing cost differences are not always

proportional to housing-cost differences, as we assumed above. If non-housing costs in an area are high rel-

ative to housing costs, then the cost-of-living measure approximated by housing costs is biased downwards

in that area. This causes QOL measures in areas with high non-housing costs to be biased downwards. This

may be the case in more remote areas of Canada, such as the Territories, where housing is relatively cheap,

but other goods are expensive because of transportation costs.23

       Unfortunately, only one city per province has detailed CPI information. As a result, we need to assume

that provincial cost differences are reflected in the representative CMAs, typically each province’s largest.

These adjustments, in column 10, suggest that QOL and total values may be underestimated in the Atlantic

provinces, especially Newfoundland, and overestimated in Quebec.


6.3      Housing Rents

Our main analysis measures housing costs by combining actual rents with imputed rents for owner-occupied

units. There may be reason to doubt the accuracy of these imputed rent measures, especially during our time

period, as housing prices in some markets rose considerably up until 2006. We construct alternate measures

using only rented units, which we plot in Appendix Figure A1 against our main estimates of housing costs.

As seen in column 11 of Table 7, rents tend to differ less in value across provinces, although using these

measures has a fairly minor effect on the overall rankings.

       We believe rent-only measures are less accurate than our main measures. Rental units tend to be more

centrally located than owned units, and hence less representative of the overall CMA, especially as the
  23
    Unfortunately, the intercity CPI estimates do not reliably measure housing costs as they rely on a subsample of new housing
generally built on the urban fringe. "The sample of builders for each metropolitan area is determined through the use of local
market intelligence and verified against relevant building permit data. Where possible, prices are collected from builders who
develop entire subdivisions, usually on large tracts of land." The Census sample is more reliable as it samples all housing. For
example in Vancouver, the CPI estimates that housing is only 10 percent over the national average, as opposed to 43 percent
according to the Census data.



                                                                                                                            19
majority of Canadians own their homes. In addition home-ownership rates are generally higher in larger

CMAs. Our main housing-cost measures are less prone to potential bias resulting from sample-selection

issues.



7      Conclusion

This paper presents the first hedonic estimates of QOL and local productivity differences for Canada, ac-

counting for heterogeneity in mother tongues and unionization rates. These estimates are rather sensible and

intuitive, with the QOL measures exhibiting a strong positive correlation with popular rankings. We find

Victoria has the greatest quality of life, Toronto has the highest productivity, and Vancouver has the most

valuable combination of the two. Among cities that they jointly inhabit, Canada’s different language groups

appear to largely agree on what cities are more attractive, even when they live in different neighborhoods.

Local productivity is largely determined by size, but is also affected by other factors such as predominant

language, access to natural resources, and proximity to other large cities.

    Overall, our estimates measure how valuable different Canadian cities are, not only in producing the

goods that households value, but also in delivering the amenities that households want. Most Canadians

seem to prefer the amenities of larger metropolitan areas and are willing to consume fewer goods in order to

live in them. Despite Canada’s enormous wealth in natural resources, the greatest resource Canadians seem

to value in production and consumption is each other.



References

Albouy, David (2008a) “Are Big Cities Really Bad Places to Live? Improving Quality-of-Life Estimates

across Cities.” NBER Working Paper No. 14472. Cambridge, MA.

Albouy, David (2008b) “The Wage Gap between Francophones and Anglophones: A Canadian Perspective,

1970-2000.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 41, pp. 1211-1238.

Albouy, David (2009a) “The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation.” Journal of Political Econ-

omy,




                                                                                                        20
Albouy, David (2009b) “What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Value of Ameni-

ties.” NBER Working Paper 14981. Cambridge, MA.

Albouy, David (2010) “Evaluating the Efficiency and Equity of Federal Fiscal Equalization.” NBER Work-

ing Paper No. 16144. Cambridge, MA.

Beeson, Patricia E. (1991) “Amenities and Regional Differences in Returns to Worker Characteristics.”

Journal of Urban Economics, 30, pp. 224-241.

Beeson, Patricia E. and Randall W. Eberts (1989) “Identifying Productivity and Amenity Effects in Interur-

ban Wage Differentials.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 71, pp. 443-452.

Bernard, A., R. Finnie and B. St-Jean (2008) “Interprovincial Mobility and Earnings.” Perspectives on

Labour and Income, Statistics Canada.

Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger and John P. Hoehn (1988) “New Estimates of Quality of Life in Urban

Areas.” American Economic Review, 78(1), pp. 89-107.

Chen, Yu and Stuart Rosenthal (2008) “Local Amenities and Life-Cycle Migration: Do People Move for

Jobs or Fun?” Journal of Urban Economics, 64, pp. 519–537.

Coulombe, Serge (2000) “New Evidence of Convergence across Canadian Provinces: the Role of Urbaniza-

tion.” Regional Studies, 34, pp. 713-25.

Coulombe, Serge and Frank C. Lee (1995) “Convergence across Canadian Provinces, 1961 to 1991.” Cana-

dian Journal of Economics, 28, pp. 886-898.

Fang, Tony and Anil Verma (2002) “Union Wage Premium.” Perspectives on Labour and Income, Statistics

Canada.

Gabriel, Stuart, and Stuart Rosenthal (2004) “Quality of the Business Environment Versus Quality of Life:

Do Firms and Households Like the Same Cities?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, pp. 438-444.

Giannias, Dimitrios A. (1998) “A Quality of Life Based Ranking of Canadian Cities.” Urban Studies, 35,

pp. 2241-2251.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1991) “The Structure of Local Public Finance and the Quality of Life.”

Journal of Political Economy, 99, pp 774-806.

                                                                                                      21
Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri (2006) “Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on Wages.” UC

Davis mimeo.

Peiser, R. B. and L. B. Smith (1985) “Homeownership Returns, Tenure Choice and Inflation.” Real Estate

Economics, 13, pp. 343-360.

Roback, Jennifer (1982) “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy, 90, pp.

1257-1278

Roback, Jennifer (1988) “Wages, Rents, and Amenities: Differences among Workers and Regions.” Eco-

nomic Inquiry, 26, pp. 23-41.

Rosen, Sherwin (1979) “Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” in P. Mieszkowski and M.

Straszheim, eds. Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: John Hopkins Univ. Press.

Shapiro, Jesse (2006) “Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects of Human Capi-

tal.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, pp. 324-335.

Tal, Benjamin (2011) “Canadian Housing Prices-Beware of the Average. ” Consumer Watch Canada CIBC

July 7, 2011.

Warman, Casey (2007) “Ethnic Enclaves and Immigrant Earnings Growth.” Canadian Journal of Eco-

nomics, 40, pp. 401-422.

Violante, Giovanni (2008) “Skill-Biased Technical Change.” in Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume, eds.,

New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition. (Palgrave Macmillan)




                                                                                                     22
    Appendix

A       Additional Theoretical Details
A.1     Multiple Household Types
A.1.1    Land-Rent Estimate
With multiple types, the estimate of land rents are over-determined, but the cost-shares are typically un-
known:
                                               1
                                        r^j =      p^jg   gN w^j
                                                                  gL

Instead of trying to estimate land rents directly, we take an indirect approach, using the fact that aggregate
value of land rents differences should equal the weighted value of amenities minus federal tax payments,
and then substituting in our disaggregated indices:
                                  ^ j + sx A^X
                         sR r^j = Q                                0
                                                                          ^j
                                                                       sw w
                                  X                                                        X       j
                                       j
                                =      g syg p^jg                      ^gj + sx
                                                                   swg w                             ^gj
                                                                                                   Ngw     + sx        ^j
                                                                                                                      Lr
                                      g                                                       g
                                                 X                               j
                                           j                     j
                                 = sy p^                         g swg        sx N g          ^gj + sx
                                                                                              w           ^j
                                                                                                         Lr
                                                     g

Solving again for the land-rent differential,
                                                         "                                                           #
                                               1                          X                           j
                             j                                     j                     j
                            r^ =                             sy p^                       g swg     sx N g      ^gj
                                                                                                               w
                                      sR        sx   L                        g

                j            j
and assuming    Ng= N   =    g swg =sw

                                                             "                                                    #
                                               1                           X
                             r^j =                            sy p^j                 j
                                                                                     g   (swg      sx       ^gj
                                                                                                         N) w
                                      sR        sx       L                     g
                                               1
                                  =                          sy p^j       (sw            sx      ^gj
                                                                                              N )w
                                      sR        sx       L
                                               sy                        sw         sx    N
                                  =                          p^j                              ^j
                                                                                              w
                                      sR        sx       L                         sy
                                       1
                                  =            p^j           Nw
                                                              ^    j
                                          L

So each type just needs to be weighted by their share of income when producing rent and productivity
estimates.

A.1.2    Factor-Specific Productivity Estimates
Factor-specific productivity differences do have first-order effects on quantities in the model. For exam-
ple, in the case where partial elasticities of substitution across factors within sectors are equal, the relative



                                                                                                                            i
employment of 1-types relative to 2-types is given by

                            ^j
                            N           ^j =
                                        N                           ^1j
                                                                12 (w          ^2j ) + (
                                                                               w                 12         1) A^j1            A^j2
                              1X         2X

The productivity differential may be split into the two components for the labor types of interest, and all of
the other factors:
                                                  G
                                                  X
                   j ^j         j ^j                      j ^j                j ^j           j ^j                j ^j                 j ^j          j
           A^j =   N 1 A1   +   N 2 A2       +            N g Ag      +       L AL      +    K AK         =      N 1 A1    +          N 2 A2   +         A^j
                                                  g=3

then
                                                   1
                                            A^j1 = j              A^j          j ^j
                                                                               N 2 A2
                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                      A^j
                                                          N1
                                                          1 h ^j                                                                i
                                A^j1        Aj2   =       j
                                                             A                     j
                                                                                   N1   +     j
                                                                                              N2       A^j2          j
                                                                                                                         A^j
                                                          N1

Substituting back in

            ^j     ^j =                                                             1 h ^j                                                               i
            N1     N2                ^1j
                                 12 (w            ^2j ) + (
                                                  w                  12       1)    j
                                                                                       A                      j
                                                                                                              N1   +      j
                                                                                                                          N2          A^j2     j
                                                                                                                                                   A^j
                                                                                    N1

which implies
                                                                                                                                j
                                            j             ^j
                                                          N          ^j +
                                                                     N                 ^1j
                                                                                   12 (w             ^2j )
                                                                                                     w           A^j                A^j
                        A^j2 =         j
                                            N1
                                                  j
                                                            1          2
                                                                                                             +       j              j
                                       N1   +     N2                          12        1                            N1   +         N2

We assume that all of the other factors have the same relative productivity levels, i.e. A^j = A^j it follows
that
                                       j       ^j N ^ j + 12 (w
                                              N                 ^2j w^1j )
                            A^j2 = j N 1 j      2     1
                                                                           + A^j
                                    N1 +   N2            12   1

It is easy to take the limit 12 ! 1 then                    N1
                                                          N1+ N2
                                                                  (w^2j            ^1j )+ A^j :When
                                                                                   w                               12     = 0, relatively more productive
factors are used less, A^j =
                        2
                                 N1   ^j
                                     (N
                                 N1+ N2               1
                                                            ^ j ) + A^
                                                            N    2


A.2    Provincial and Federal Taxes Combined
Individual provinces may not only have significant tax rates on income, but also significant wage differences
within them. This means that the tax differentials faced by households in different cities consist of two com-
ponents: a federal component and a provincial component. Let the tax burden be given by two components,
a federal F and a provincial, P : (m) = F (m) + P (m). Assuming that federal revenues are distributed
evenly across the country, and provincial revenues are distributed even within the province, the federal tax
differential is

            d j  d j d j                           0 j                    0
                = F + P = sw                       Fw
                                                    ^       + sw          P   ^j
                                                                              w             ^ P = sw
                                                                                            w                    0
                                                                                                                 F   +         0
                                                                                                                               P      ^j
                                                                                                                                      w      sw    0 P
                                                                                                                                                   Pw
                                                                                                                                                    ^
             m    m   m
where w ^ P is the wage differential of the province on average. At the provincial level, the provincial burden
is even and so we may easily calculate

                                                      QP = sy p^P                  1         0
                                                                                             F       ^P
                                                                                                     w

                                                                                                                                                               ii
While for a given city the formula is slightly more complicated.
                                 ^ j = sy p^
                                 Q             sw     0
                                                          +   0
                                                                  ^j
                                                                  w    0 P
                                                      F       P        Pw
                                                                        ^


B    Data and Estimation
We use Canadian Census data from the 2006 Master Microdata Files to calculate wage and housing-cost
differentials. The wage differentials are calculated for workers ages 25 to 55, who report working at least 30
hours a week, 26 weeks a year. The CMA assigned to a worker is determined by their place of work. The
wage differential of an CMA is found by regressing log hourly wages on individual covariates and indicators
for a worker’s CMA, using the coefficients on these CMA indicators. The covariates consist of

      12 indicators of educational attainment: no degree (default); high school degree; other trade; reg-
      istered apprentice; college <1 years; college 1 to 2 years; college 2+ years; university certificate;
      bachelors degree; above bachelor; degree in medicine, dentistry, veterinary medicine or optometry;
      masters; doctorate;

      a quartic in potential experience (years of school are calculated using the 2001 Master Microdata Files
      for the highest level of education);

      17 indicators for major field of study: education (default); arts; humanities; social and behavioural
      sciences; commerce; bio science; engineering and applied science; health; math and physical science;
      other; natural resource; protect and transport; law; public administration; technologies; computers;
      information sciences; transportation;

      15 indicators of industry (2002 NAICS): agriculture (default); other primary; manufacturing; con-
      struction; transportation and storage; communication and utilities; wholesale trade; retail trade; fi-
      nance, insurance, and real estate; business services; public administration federal; public administra-
      tion other; education; health and social services; accommodations, food, and beverage services; other
      services;

      24 indicators of occupation (2006 NOC-S): senior management (default); other management; pro-
      fessional occupations in business and finance; financial, secretarial and administrative occupations;
      clerical; sciences; professional health; assist health; social science, government service and religion;
      teachers and professors; arts, recreation and sports; wholesale trade; retail trade; food; protective ser-
      vices; childcare/home support; sales and service occupations n.e.c.; contractors and supervisors in
      trades/transportation; construction trades; other trades; transport/equipment; trades helpers; primary
      industry; machine operators and assemblers in manufacturing including supervisors; laborer manu-
      facturing;

      An indicators for immigrant status, and controls for time since immigration and citizenship status;

      5 indicators of minority status (Aboriginal, Black, Chinese, South Asian, and other) with the last 4
      interacted with immigrant status;

      Indicators for bilingualism interacted with mother tongue – French, English, or other – and for other
      mother tongue interacted with speaking only French and only English;

All covariates are interacted with gender.



                                                                                                             iii
    We first run the regression of log wages on the individual covariates and CMA indicators using census-
person weights. From the regressions a predicted wage is calculated using individual characteristics alone
to form a new weight equal to the predicted wage times the census-person weight. The new weights (which
have only a small effect) are then used in a second regression, which regresses the residuals from the first
regression on mother tongue and CMA indicators. The coefficients on the CMA indicators are taken as
the overall wage effect. For the mother-tongue specific wage effects, the residuals from the first regression
are regressed on CMA indicators interacted with mother tongue indicators, using the coefficients on these
interactions.
    Housing-cost differentials are calculated using the logarithm of housing costs, which are either reported
gross rents or imputed rents derived from housing values. The differential housing cost of a CMA is calcu-
lated in a manner similar to wages, except using a regression of rent on a set of covariates at the unit level.
The covariates for the adjusted differential are

      9 indicators for the number of rooms (1 room (default), 2 rooms, ..., 10 or more rooms), 5 indicators
      for the number of bedrooms (no bedrooms (default), 1 bedroom, ..., 5 or more bedrooms), number of
      rooms interacted with number of bedrooms, and the number of rooms per household member;

      7 indicators for the type of building: single-detached house (default); semi-detached or double house;
      row house; apartment/flat in a duplex; apartment in a building that has five or more storeys; apartment
      in a building that has fewer than five storeys; other single-attached house; movable dwelling;

      9 indicators for when the building was built: built in 1920 or before (default); built during period
      1921-1945; built during period 1946-1960; built during period 1961-1970; built during period 1971-
      1980; built during period 1981-1985; built during period 1986-1990; built during period 1991-1995;
      built during period 1996-2000; built during period 2001-2006;

      2 indicators for the condition of the dwelling: only regular maintenance (default); minor repairs;
      major repairs;

      an indicator for condominium status (owned units only).

All of the variables are interacted with indicators for rental status and among owner-occupied units, an
indicator for the presence of a mortgage. Housing-cost differentials are calculated to a series of regressions
similar to the ones above, with the mother tongue of the housing unit determined by the household head.
     To calculate the marginal tax rates faced by a nationally representative agent in each of the provinces,
we first divide the total population into 17 income groups (from 1-10.000 to 250.000+). We then use Income
Statistics (Table 2A, Taxable Returns by Income Class) from Canada Revenue Agency Data to calculate the
share of the total population in each of the income groups. Subsequently, we obtain the marginal income
tax rate (federal plus provincial) that applies to each income group and each province, using the midpoint
of each income group as the income of the group. The marginal tax rates for year 2006 are obtained from
Walter Harder.
     Non-housing cost data are taken from CANSIM and averaged over 2006. They cover the cities of
St. John’s, NL; Charlottetown-Summerside, PEI; Halifax, NS; Saint John, NB; Montreal, QC; Ottawa, ON;
Toronto, ON; Winnipeg, MB; Regina, SK; Edmonton, AB; and Vancouver, BC. Federal transfer differentials
are calculated using the total federal intergovernmental transfers data in 2005-2007 from CANSIM Table
384-0011. CMA level unionization rates are calculated using the 2005 Labour Force Survey Master File.
It is the proportion of unionized workers to the number of workers. The fraction of the employment in
each CMA that is accounted for by the public sector is also calculated using the 2005 Labour Force Survey
Master File.”


                                                                                                            iv
                    TABLE 1: PRICES, ATTRIBUTES, AND VALUES ACROSS CANADIAN CITIES
                                              Observed Prices      Attribute     Value Capitalization
                                                      Housing Quality Product-     Land       Tax                         Total
                   City/Area Name Population  Wages    Costs  of Life      ivity   Rent     Burden                        Value
                                        (1)    (2)       (3)    (4)         (5)     (6)        (7)                         (8)
Panel A: Census Metropolitan Areas
                        Vancouver 2,047,650   0.04      0.45   0.13        0.07    1.70      0.009                        0.180
                           Victoria  320,920  -0.04     0.46   0.17        0.02    1.91     -0.012                        0.179
                           Toronto 4,966,660  0.10      0.29   0.05        0.10    0.93      0.022                        0.115
                           Calgary 1,053,840  0.09      0.24   0.04        0.09    0.78      0.021                        0.098
                          Kelowna    159,490  -0.07     0.24   0.11       -0.03    1.09     -0.018                        0.091
                          Montréal 3,534,850  0.02      0.14   0.04        0.03    0.52      0.008                        0.061
                        Abbotsford   154,830  -0.03     0.12   0.06       -0.01    0.56     -0.007                        0.049
                       Ottawa-Hull   825,790  0.07      0.11   0.00        0.06    0.29      0.015                        0.044
                            Guelph   125,070  0.04      0.05   0.00        0.03    0.13      0.007                        0.020
                          Hamilton   676,780  0.03      0.05   0.00        0.03    0.14      0.006                        0.020
                           Oshawa    326,890  0.11      0.02   -0.04       0.08   -0.16      0.028                        0.012
                         Edmonton 1,013,400   0.03      -0.01  -0.02       0.02   -0.12      0.006                        -0.006
                            Québec   701,420  -0.02     -0.01  0.00       -0.01   -0.01     -0.005                        -0.006
                          Kitchener  441,420  0.05      -0.02  -0.03       0.03   -0.18      0.010                        -0.007
                              Barrie 174,420  -0.04     -0.03  0.01       -0.03   -0.02     -0.014                        -0.016
                          Kingston   147,230  -0.05     -0.04  0.00       -0.04   -0.07     -0.015                        -0.023
                        Sherbrooke   182,330  -0.08     -0.05  0.02       -0.06   -0.02     -0.024                        -0.026
                      Peterborough   114,580  -0.06     -0.05  0.01       -0.05   -0.09     -0.018                        -0.027
            St. Catharines-Niagara   381,170  -0.02     -0.12  -0.04      -0.02   -0.45     -0.006                        -0.050
                          Brantford  122,420  -0.03     -0.13  -0.03      -0.03   -0.45     -0.009                        -0.054
                            Halifax  366,790  -0.11     -0.16  0.01       -0.09   -0.39     -0.018                        -0.056
                           London    447,310  0.01      -0.15  -0.06      -0.01   -0.64      0.002                        -0.062
                           Windsor   316,170  0.09      -0.21  -0.11       0.05   -1.06      0.026                        -0.080
                           Sudbury   155,990  0.03      -0.23  -0.09       0.00   -0.96      0.006                        -0.090
                     Trois-Rivières  138,160  -0.01     -0.25  -0.08      -0.03   -0.99      0.000                        -0.099
             Chicoutimi-Jonquière    149,440  0.01      -0.28  -0.09      -0.02   -1.13      0.006                        -0.106
                          Winnipeg   677,500  -0.08     -0.29  -0.05      -0.09   -0.99     -0.014                        -0.114
                         Saskatoon   228,080  -0.10     -0.30  -0.05      -0.10   -0.98     -0.018                        -0.117
                             Regina  190,790  -0.04     -0.34  -0.09      -0.06   -1.26     -0.001                        -0.127
                          Moncton    123,580  -0.13     -0.35  -0.05      -0.13   -1.11     -0.024                        -0.135
                      Thunder Bay    120,720  -0.01     -0.39  -0.13      -0.04   -1.54      0.000                        -0.154
                          St. John's 178,170  -0.13     -0.44  -0.09      -0.13   -1.50     -0.025                        -0.175
                         Saint John  119,800  -0.11     -0.49  -0.11      -0.13   -1.73     -0.016                        -0.189
Non-CMA Areas
                 British Columbia 1,327,040   -0.05     -0.05  0.01       -0.04   -0.08     -0.010                        -0.018
             Northwest Territories    40,770  0.19      -0.06  -0.12       0.13   -0.66      0.038                        -0.028
                             Yukon    29,960  0.04      -0.12  -0.06       0.02   -0.55      0.009                        -0.047
                            Alberta 1,153,770 -0.03     -0.16  -0.04      -0.04   -0.58     -0.009                        -0.066
                            Ontario 2,530,520 -0.06     -0.20  -0.04      -0.06   -0.68     -0.016                        -0.084
                            Québec 2,386,520  -0.08     -0.29  -0.06      -0.09   -0.99     -0.021                        -0.120
             Prince Edward Island    133,830  -0.25     -0.48  -0.04      -0.23   -1.36     -0.049                        -0.185
                           Nunavut    29,270  0.25      -0.55  -0.31       0.13   -2.75      0.050                        -0.225
                   New Brunswick     473,080  -0.19     -0.58  -0.10      -0.19   -1.93     -0.039                        -0.232
                       Nova Scotia   532,270  -0.23     -0.59  -0.09      -0.22   -1.88     -0.049                        -0.237
                          Manitoba   445,220  -0.19     -0.63  -0.12      -0.20   -2.08     -0.043                        -0.251
                     Saskatchewan    529,430  -0.20     -0.75  -0.15      -0.22   -2.54     -0.045                        -0.299
                    Newfoundland     320,930  -0.18     -0.95  -0.23      -0.23   -3.39     -0.036                        -0.375

                             Canada    30,616,270       0.09       0.30        0.07       0.06       0.71      0.020      0.082

Wage and housing cost data are taken from the Census 2006 Masterfiles. Wage differentials are based on the average
logarithm of hourly wages for full-time workers ages 25 to 55, controlling for observable skills. Housing cost differentials
based on the average logarithm of rents and housing price, controlling for observable housing characteristics. Quality-of-life,
productivity, land rent, tax burden, and total value differentials are based off of formulas explained in Section 2.2.1 in the text
for the one household-type case. Fuller details on the data are in the Appendix
                                TABLE 2: CENSUS METROPOLITAN AREA RANKINGS
          Quality-of-Life Ranking                  Productivity Ranking      Total Value Ranking
  1       Victoria                            Toronto                   Vancouver
  2       Vancouver                           Calgary                   Victoria
  3       Kelowna                             Oshawa                    Toronto
  4       Abbotsford                          Vancouver                 Calgary
  5       Toronto                             Ottawa-Hull               Kelowna
  6       Calgary                             Windsor                   Montréal
  7       Montréal                            Guelph                    Ottawa-Hull
  8       Sherbrooke                          Kitchener                 Abbotsford
  9       Ottawa-Hull                         Hamilton                  Guelph
 10       Barrie                              Montréal                  Hamilton
 11       Halifax                             Edmonton                  Oshawa
 12       Peterborough                        Victoria                  Edmonton
 13       Kingston                            Sudbury                   Kitchener
 14       Québec                              London                    Québec
 15       Hamilton                            Abbotsford                Barrie
 16       Guelph                              Québec                    Kingston
 17       Edmonton                            St. Catharines-Niagara    Peterborough
 18       Kitchener                           Chicoutimi-Jonquière      Sherbrooke
 19       Brantford                           Kelowna                   St. Catharines-Niagara
 20       St. Catharines-Niagara              Brantford                 Brantford
 21       Oshawa                              Barrie                    Halifax
 22       Saskatoon                           Trois-Rivières            London
 23       Moncton                             Kingston                  Windsor
 24       Winnipeg                            Thunder Bay               Sudbury
 25       London                              Peterborough              Trois-Rivières
 26       Trois-Rivières                      Regina                    Chicoutimi-Jonquière
 27       St. John's                          Sherbrooke                Winnipeg
 28       Regina                              Winnipeg                  Saskatoon
 29       Sudbury                             Halifax                   Regina
 30       Chicoutimi-Jonquière                Saskatoon                 Moncton
 31       Saint John                          Saint John                Thunder Bay
 32       Windsor                             Moncton                   St. John's
 33       Thunder Bay                         St. John's                Saint John
Rankings based off of data in table 1.
     TABLE 3: WAGE, HOUSING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS BY MOTHER
                                      TONGUE

                                                           Fraction of                Housing    Quality-of
 Rank                               Name Population Size      Total       Wages        Cost        Life
Panel A: Anglophones
       1                         Victoria   275,930           0.86        -0.04         0.48        0.175
       2                      Vancouver    1,215,480          0.59         0.06         0.52        0.143
       3                        Kelowna     136,450           0.86        -0.07         0.25        0.113
       4                      Abbotsford    111,720           0.72        -0.04         0.17        0.074
       5                         Toronto   2,823,580          0.57         0.14         0.38        0.059
       6                         Calgary    805,620           0.76         0.10         0.28        0.049
       7                        Montréal    448,710           0.13        -0.02         0.12        0.049
       8                    Ottawa-Hull     561,760           0.51         0.07         0.14        0.014
       9                          Guelph    101,260           0.81         0.02         0.08        0.013
      10                        Hamilton    521,760           0.77         0.04         0.09        0.012
      11                            Barrie  155,420           0.89        -0.04        -0.02        0.009
      12                        Kingston    130,340           0.89        -0.05        -0.04        0.006
      13                   Peterborough     106,690           0.93        -0.06        -0.05        0.006
      14                          Halifax   338,550           0.92        -0.11        -0.17        0.004
      15                       Edmonton     795,610           0.79         0.03         0.02       -0.011
      16                       Kitchener    337,780           0.77         0.04         0.02       -0.016
      17                       Brantford    108,240           0.88        -0.03        -0.12       -0.028
      18          St. Catharines-Niagara    309,680           0.81        -0.02        -0.11       -0.030
      19                         Oshawa     285,270           0.87        0.11          0.03       -0.041
      20                       Saskatoon    198,190           0.87        -0.10        -0.29       -0.046
      21                       Winnipeg     515,180           0.76        -0.08        -0.27       -0.047
      22                          London    366,120           0.82         0.01        -0.13       -0.050
      23                          Regina    170,940           0.90        -0.04        -0.33       -0.082
      24                        St. John's  174,350           0.98        -0.13        -0.44       -0.084
      25                         Sudbury    101,230           0.65        0.00         -0.31       -0.101
      26                         Windsor    234,100           0.74         0.09        -0.19       -0.102
      27                      Saint John    111,370           0.93        -0.12        -0.51       -0.105
      28                    Thunder Bay     101,930           0.84        -0.01        -0.38       -0.122

Panel B: Francophones
       1                      Montréal       2,359,840        0.67        0.06         0.21        0.045
       2                  Ottawa-Hull         366,230         0.33         0.10         0.21       0.027
       3                   Sherbrooke         165,740         0.91        -0.08        -0.03       0.020
       4                       Québec         672,750         0.96        -0.02        -0.01       0.006
       5                Trois-Rivières        134,530         0.97        -0.01        -0.25       -0.078
       6          Chicoutimi-Jonquière        146,680         0.98         0.01        -0.28       -0.093

Panel C: Allophones
       1                      Vancouver       806,880         0.39        0.00         0.32         0.107
       2                         Toronto     2,080,620        0.42         0.04         0.15        0.028
       3                        Montréal      726,300         0.21        -0.10        -0.13        0.008
       4                         Calgary      231,480         0.22        0.06         0.06        -0.007
       5                        Hamilton      144,830         0.21         0.01        -0.12       -0.046
       6                     Ottawa-Hull      178,380         0.16         0.05        -0.09       -0.052
       7                      Edmonton        195,240         0.19         0.01        -0.18       -0.066
       8                       Winnipeg       132,890         0.20        -0.12        -0.49       -0.099

Wage and housing-cost differentials are calculated by language group according to the component orthogonal to
observable characteristics but related to the CMA indicators interacted with language-group indicators.
  TABLE 4: RELATIVE PRODUCTIVITY OF SPECIFIC MOTHER TONGUES IN
                         SELECTED CITIES

Panel A: Francophones and Anglophones               Mother-tongue-specific productivity
                 Relative Log Ratio                     σ=∞                 σ = 40
                           Employ Total            Franco- Anglo- Franco- Anglo-
           CMA Wages        ment    Prod            phone    phone    phone      phone

         Montréal    0.075      2.802     0.029      0.038     -0.036    0.048     -0.100
      Ottawa-Hull    0.028      0.560     0.068      0.085     0.057     0.094     0.051

Panel B: Allophones and Anglophones
                  Relative Log Ratio                    σ=∞                  σ = 40
                            Employ Total            Allo- Anglo-         Allo-    Anglo-
            CMA Wages        ment    Prod           phone phone          phone    phone

         Toronto -0.097         0.878     0.101      0.046     0.143     0.058      0.135
       Vancouver -0.064         0.643     0.073      0.034     0.098     0.043      0.092

Wage and employment ratios expressed in logarithms relative to the national log ratio
(i.e. subtracting the national log ratio). Productivity levels are relative to others in the
TABLE 5: CORRELATION OF HEDONIC QUALITY-OF-LIFE AND
PLACES RATED ALMANAC "LIVABILITY" & CITIES RANKED AND
                  RATED RANKINGS

                                  Places Rated       Cities Ranked &
                                    Almanac                Rated
                                       (1)                  (2)

       Hedonic QOL Rank               0.70                 0.72
     Places Rated Almanac                                  0.84




      TABLE 6: QUALITY OF LIFE, PRODUCTIVITY, AND
     DISAGGREGATED AMENITIES FROM PLACES RATES
                          Quality of Life Quality of Life
                           (unweighted)    (pop weight)
                                 (1)            (2)
          Arts & Culture       0.08            0.13
                              (0.04)          (0.05)
                 Climate        0.20           0.16
                              (0.06)          (0.05)
                  Crime        0.05            0.04
                              (0.06)          (0.05)
               Education        0.07           0.06
                              (0.07)          (0.08)
              Recreation       -0.01           -0.03
                              (0.07)          (0.06)
                  Health        0.07           0.08
                              (0.07)          (0.06)
          Transportation       -0.04           0.00
                              (0.07)          (0.07)
                Constant       -0.21           -0.24
                              (0.06)          (0.06)

      Adjusted R-squared              0.59                 0.63
   Number of Observations              24                   24

      p -value of test that all
       coefficients are equal         0.005               0.007

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions in the second column
are weighted by the sum of individuals in each CMA.
  TABLE 7: PRICES, ATTRIBUTES, AND VALUES ACROSS CANADIAN REGIONS AND PROVINCES WITH ADDITIONAL ADJUSTMENTS
                                                Observed Prices            Attribute     Value Capitalization                    Adjusted Total Values
                                                        Housing       Quality Product-    Land        Tax           Total     Transfer Non-Hous Housing
         City/Area Name        Population       Wages     Costs       of Life      ivity   Rent     Burden          Value      Differ    Cost      Rents
                                  (1)            (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)     (6)        (7)           (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)

Panel A: Provinces
        British Columbia       4,009,930         -0.01       0.24       0.08       0.02        0.98     -0.002      0.096       0.090      0.071      0.028
                 Ontario      11,873,140          0.04       0.04      -0.01       0.03        0.08      0.007      0.014       0.040      0.038      0.017
                  Alberta      3,221,010          0.03       0.02      -0.01       0.02        0.01      0.005      0.006      -0.069      0.001      0.009
   Northwest Territories       7,373,310         -0.03      -0.07      -0.01      -0.02       -0.22     -0.006     -0.028      -0.007     -0.060     -0.026
                 Quebec          40,770           0.19      -0.06      -0.12       0.13       -0.66      0.038     -0.028      -0.233     -0.028     -0.050
                  Yukon          29,960           0.04      -0.12      -0.06       0.02       -0.56      0.009     -0.047      -0.235     -0.047     -0.036
             Nova Scotia        899,060          -0.17      -0.39      -0.04      -0.16       -1.17     -0.034     -0.151      -0.180     -0.091     -0.075
                Manitoba       1,122,720         -0.12      -0.41      -0.08      -0.13       -1.37     -0.024     -0.161      -0.200     -0.139     -0.104
   Prince Edward Island         133,830          -0.25      -0.48      -0.04      -0.23       -1.36     -0.049     -0.186      -0.221     -0.125     -0.100
         New Brunswick          716,460          -0.15      -0.52      -0.10      -0.16       -1.74     -0.030     -0.204      -0.241     -0.146     -0.116
           Saskatchewan         948,300          -0.13      -0.53      -0.11      -0.15       -1.81     -0.027     -0.208      -0.265     -0.160     -0.115
                 Nunavut         29,270           0.25      -0.55      -0.31       0.13       -2.75      0.050     -0.225      -0.506     -0.225     -0.303
          Newfoundland          499,100          -0.15      -0.70      -0.16      -0.18       -2.47     -0.031     -0.278      -0.347     -0.186     -0.165

Panel B: Regions
                      West    7,330,940           0.01       0.12       0.04       0.02        0.47      0.002      0.049       0.006      0.038      0.017
                   Central    19,246,450          0.01      -0.01      -0.01       0.01       -0.05      0.001     -0.004       0.020     -0.004     -0.001
                    Prairie   2,071,020          -0.13      -0.47      -0.09      -0.14       -1.60     -0.026     -0.185      -0.233     -0.150     -0.109
                   Atlantic   2,248,450          -0.17      -0.50      -0.08      -0.17       -1.62     -0.033     -0.196      -0.236     -0.129     -0.108

Calculation of differentials in columns 1 through 8 explained in table 1. Transfer differential based on federal integovernmental transfers and province-level
source-based revenues, decribed in Albouy (2010). Non-housing cost adjustment based on CPI data for principal city for province. "Housing Rents" uses
only housing-cost measures based on rental units, as opposed to all units.
                                       Figure 1: Housing Costs versus Wage Levels across CMAs, 2006
                                0.5




                                                                                    Victoria    Vancouver
                                0.4
                                0.3




                                                                                                             Toronto
                                                                           Kelowna                          Calgary
                                0.2




                                                                                               Montréal
                                                                                                     Ottawa-Hull
                                                                               Abbotsford
                                0.1
Log Housing-Cost Differential




                                                                                                Hamilton
                                                                                                  Guelph
                                                                                                               Oshawa
                                0.0




                                                                                   QuébecEdmonton
                                                                                Barrie      Kitchener
                                                                             Kingston
                                                                                  BC
                                                                       Peterborough
                                                                    Sherbrooke                                                  NWT
                                -0.1




                                                                     St. Catharines-Niagara
                                                                                Brantford          YT
                                                                  Halifax             ABLondon
                                -0.2




                                                                                ON                    Windsor
                                                                                           Sudbury
                                                                              Trois-Rivières
                                -0.3




                                                                          Chicoutimi-Jonquière
                                                                    Winnipeg
                                                                           QC
                                                                 Saskatoon
                                                              Moncton           Regina
                                -0.4




                                                                                     Thunder Bay
                                                              St. John's
                                       PEI
                                -0.5




                                                                Saint John
                                                                                                                                             NUN
                                -0.6




                                             NS     NB
                                                   MB
                                -0.7




                                                  SK
                                -0.8
                                -0.9




                                                       NL

                                                       -0.2                  -0.1                  0.0                 0.1             0.2
                                                                                       Log Wage Differential
                                                  Census Metropolitan Area                                     Non-CMA Areas of Province

                                                  Avg Mobility Condition, slope= 1.44                          Avg Zero-Profit Condition: slope = -7.31

                                                  Avg Iso-Rent Curve: slope = 0.55                             Avg Iso-Value Curve: slope = 0.02
                                                 Figure 2: Estimated Productivity and Quality of Life
                                                                                                Victoria
                               0.15




                                                                                                               Vancouver

                                                                                     Kelowna
                               0.10
                               0.05




                                                                                       Abbotsford
                                                                                                                       Toronto
                                                                                                    Montréal        Calgary

                                                                     Sherbrooke
                                                                                    BC                    Ottawa-Hull
                               0.00




                                                                   Halifax         Barrie
                                                                         Peterborough
                                                                               Kingston
                                                                                      Québec
Relative Quality of Life (Q)




                                                                                                    Hamilton
                                                                                                      Guelph
                                                                                             Edmonton
                                                                                Brantford       Kitchener
                                   PEI                                St. Catharines-Niagara
                               -0.05




                                                                               ON AB                         Oshawa
                                                               Saskatoon
                                                         Moncton  Winnipeg               London    YT
                                                                       QC
                                                                           Trois-Rivières
                                       NS             St. John's           Regina       Sudbury
                               -0.10




                                                                       Chicoutimi-Jonquière
                                             NB        Saint John
                                                                                                     Windsor                     NWT
                                            MB
                                                                          Thunder Bay
                               -0.15




                                       SK
                               -0.20




                                       NL
                               -0.25
                               -0.30




                                                                                                                                 NUN

                                        -0.225            -0.150              -0.075                0.000               0.075             0.150
                                                                            Relative Productivity (Ax)
                                                 Census Metropolitan Area                                   Non-CMA Areas of Province

                                                 Avg Iso-Wage Curve: slope = 3.33                           Avg Iso-Price Curve: slope = -0.66

                                                 Avg Iso-Rent Curve: slope = -0.38                          Avg Iso-Value Curve: slope = -0.67
        TABLE A1: ALTERNATIVE QUALITY-OF-LIFE MEASURES USING ADJUSTMENTS
                                         Transfer-adjusted Non Housing Cost-
                            Base QOL           QOL          Adjusted QOL     Rent-adjusted QOL
                         Value     Rank   Value      Rank   Value     Rank    Value       Rank
                          (1)       (2)    (3)        (4)    (5)       (6)     (7)         (8)

                     Victoria     0.167   1     0.161   1      0.113    1        0.056    3
                  Vancouver       0.131   2     0.125   2      0.078     3       0.039     5
                    Kelowna       0.108   3     0.102   3      0.083     2       0.059     2
                  Abbotsford      0.055   4     0.050   6      0.046    4        0.002    15
                     Toronto      0.047   5     0.073   4      0.038    8        0.024    7
                     Calgary      0.039   6    -0.037   21     0.004    14      -0.003    16
                    Montréal      0.039   7     0.060   5     -0.021    22       0.011    13
                 Sherbrooke       0.016   8     0.037    7    -0.018    20       0.012    12
                 Ottawa-Hull      0.010   9     0.035   8     -0.003    16       0.013    11
British Columbia, non-CMA         0.008    .    0.002    .     0.021     .      -0.024     .
                        Barrie    0.007   10    0.033   9      0.040    6        0.053    4
                      Halifax     0.006   11   -0.023   19     0.035    9        0.060    1
                Peterborough      0.005   12    0.031   10     0.041     5       0.021     8
                    Kingston      0.003   13    0.029   11     0.038    7        0.021     9
                      Québec      0.003   14    0.024   14    -0.036    26       0.019    10
                    Hamilton      0.001   15    0.027   12     0.023    10      -0.009    20
                      Guelph     -0.002   16    0.024   13     0.020    11      -0.004    18
                   Edmonton      -0.019   17   -0.095   28    -0.020    21      -0.006    19
                    Kitchener    -0.028   18   -0.002   15     0.004    15      -0.012    21
                    Brantford    -0.032   19   -0.006   16     0.014    12      -0.016    24
      St. Catharines-Niagara     -0.035   20   -0.009   17     0.010    13      -0.013    22
        Prince Edward Island     -0.035    .   -0.070    .     0.025     .       0.051     .
          Alberta, non-CMA       -0.042    .   -0.118    .    -0.024     .      -0.008     .
                     Oshawa      -0.043   21   -0.017   18    -0.017    19      -0.022    27
          Ontario, non-CMA       -0.044    .   -0.018    .     0.012     .      -0.029     .
                   Saskatoon     -0.050   22   -0.107   30    -0.032    25       0.005    14
                    Moncton      -0.052   23   -0.089   26    -0.016    18       0.035     6
                    Winnipeg     -0.054   24   -0.093   27    -0.047    28      -0.004    17
                     London      -0.057   25   -0.031   20    -0.007    17      -0.021    26
             Yukon Territory     -0.060    .   -0.248    .    -0.060     .      -0.048     .
          Quebec, non-CMA        -0.063    .   -0.042    .    -0.065     .      -0.041     .
               Trois-Rivières    -0.079   26   -0.058   22    -0.085    32      -0.045    29
                    St. John's   -0.085   27   -0.154   33    -0.028    24      -0.019    25
                       Regina    -0.086   28   -0.143   32    -0.063    31      -0.013    23
                     Sudbury     -0.087   29   -0.061   23    -0.028    23      -0.049    30
     Nova Scotia, non-CMA        -0.088    .   -0.117    .    -0.001     .       0.007     .
       Chicoutimi-Jonquière      -0.094   30   -0.073   24    -0.097    33      -0.057    31
 New Brunswick,non-CMA           -0.104    .   -0.141    .    -0.037     .      -0.004     .
                   Saint John    -0.105   31   -0.142   31    -0.050    29      -0.040    28
                     Windsor     -0.111   32   -0.085   25    -0.054    30      -0.071    33
         Northwest Territory     -0.116    .   -0.321    .    -0.116     .      -0.138     .
        Manitoba, non-CMA        -0.118    .   -0.157    .    -0.067     .      -0.047     .
                Thunder Bay      -0.125   33   -0.099   29    -0.044    27      -0.063    32
   Saskatchewan, non-CMA         -0.152    .   -0.209    .    -0.074     .      -0.027     .
  Newfoundland, non-CMA          -0.225    .   -0.294    .    -0.101     .      -0.068     .
           Nunavut Territory     -0.309    .   -0.590    .    -0.309     .      -0.387     .
          TABLE A2: ALTERNATIVE TOTAL VALUE MEASURES USING ADJUSTMENTS
                                         Transfer-adjusted Non Housing Cost-
                            Base Value         Value        Adjusted Value   Rent-adjusted Value
                          Value     Rank  Value      Rank   Value     Rank    Value       Rank
                           (1)       (2)   (3)        (4)    (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)

                  Vancouver       0.180   1     0.174   1       0.127     1       0.088      2
                     Victoria     0.179   2     0.173   2       0.125     2       0.068     3
                     Toronto      0.115   3     0.141   3       0.106     3       0.092     1
                     Calgary      0.098   4     0.023   11      0.063     5       0.056     5
                    Kelowna       0.091   5     0.085   4       0.066     4       0.042     6
                    Montréal      0.058   6     0.079   6      -0.002     15      0.030      9
                 Ottawa-Hull      0.056   7     0.080   5       0.043     6       0.059      4
                  Abbotsford      0.049   8     0.043    9      0.039      9     -0.005     16
                      Guelph      0.020   9     0.046   7       0.042     7       0.018     10
                    Hamilton      0.020   10    0.046    8      0.042      8      0.010     11
                     Oshawa       0.012   11    0.038   10      0.038     10      0.033     7
                   Edmonton      -0.006   12   -0.082   24     -0.007     17      0.007     13
                    Kitchener    -0.008   13    0.019   12      0.024     11      0.009     12
                      Québec     -0.009   14    0.011   13     -0.048     23      0.007     14
                        Barrie   -0.016   15    0.010   14      0.017     12      0.030     8
British Columbia, non-CMA        -0.018    .   -0.024    .     -0.005      .     -0.050      .
                    Kingston     -0.023   16    0.003   15      0.012     13     -0.005     17
                Peterborough     -0.027   17   -0.001   16      0.009     14     -0.010     18
         Northwest Territory     -0.028    .   -0.233    .     -0.028      .     -0.050      .
                 Sherbrooke      -0.029   18   -0.009   17     -0.063     24     -0.033     21
             Yukon Territory     -0.047    .   -0.235    .     -0.047      .     -0.036      .
      St. Catharines-Niagara     -0.051   19   -0.024   18     -0.005     16     -0.028     20
                    Brantford    -0.055   20   -0.028   19     -0.008     18     -0.038     22
                      Halifax    -0.057   21   -0.086   25     -0.028     21     -0.002     15
                     London      -0.062   22   -0.036   20     -0.012     19     -0.027     19
          Alberta, non-CMA       -0.067    .   -0.142    .     -0.048      .     -0.033      .
                     Windsor     -0.080   23   -0.054   21     -0.023     20     -0.040     23
          Ontario, non-CMA       -0.084    .   -0.058    .     -0.028      .     -0.070      .
                     Sudbury     -0.091   24   -0.065   22     -0.031     22     -0.053     25
               Trois-Rivières    -0.102   25   -0.081   23     -0.109     30     -0.068     29
       Chicoutimi-Jonquière      -0.110   26   -0.089   26     -0.113     31     -0.073     30
                    Winnipeg     -0.114   27   -0.153   28     -0.107     29     -0.063     28
                   Saskatoon     -0.117   28   -0.174   30     -0.099     26     -0.062     27
          Quebec, non-CMA        -0.124    .   -0.103    .     -0.125      .     -0.101      .
                       Regina    -0.128   29   -0.185   31     -0.105     28     -0.055     26
                    Moncton      -0.137   30   -0.174   29     -0.101     27     -0.050     24
                Thunder Bay      -0.154   31   -0.128   27     -0.073     25     -0.092     31
                    St. John's   -0.175   32   -0.244   33     -0.118     32     -0.109     32
        Prince Edward Island     -0.186    .   -0.221    .     -0.125      .     -0.100      .
                   Saint John    -0.189   33   -0.226   32     -0.135     33     -0.125     33
           Nunavut Territory     -0.225    .   -0.506    .     -0.225      .     -0.303      .
 New Brunswick,non-CMA           -0.233    .   -0.270    .     -0.166      .     -0.133      .
     Nova Scotia, non-CMA        -0.237    .   -0.266    .     -0.150      .     -0.142      .
        Manitoba, non-CMA        -0.251    .   -0.290    .     -0.200      .     -0.180      .
   Saskatchewan, non-CMA         -0.299    .   -0.356    .     -0.222      .     -0.174      .
  Newfoundland, non-CMA          -0.375    .   -0.445    .     -0.251      .     -0.218      .
              TABLE A3: ADDITIONAL STATISTICS BY CMA, 2006
                                                         Fraction who
                          Union Coverage   Employment   work in CMA of   Log CPI Non-
                 CMA           Rate           Rate         residence       Housing
             St. John's       0.401          0.778           0.974          -0.003
               Halifax        0.346          0.818           0.980           0.010
              Moncton         0.310          0.845           0.943          -0.014
            Saint John        0.342          0.812           0.973          -0.014
 Chicoutimi-Jonquière         0.541          0.751           0.951          -0.053
               Québec         0.492          0.835           0.956          -0.053
           Sherbrooke         0.499          0.789           0.885          -0.053
        Trois-Rivières        0.542          0.791           0.850          -0.053
              Montréal        0.377          0.788           0.975          -0.053
          Ottawa-Hull         0.454          0.825           0.984           0.037
              Kingston        0.460          0.783           0.935           0.037
         Peterborough         0.430          0.841           0.834           0.037
               Oshawa         0.425          0.841           0.566           0.037
               Toronto        0.239          0.813           0.979           0.037
             Hamilton         0.328          0.822           0.737           0.037
St. Catharines-Niagara        0.348          0.812           0.897           0.037
             Kitchener        0.296          0.843           0.848           0.037
             Brantford        0.312          0.824           0.721           0.037
                Guelph        0.295          0.867           0.717           0.037
               London         0.333          0.827           0.936           0.037
              Windsor         0.421          0.775           0.953           0.037
                 Barrie       0.276          0.877           0.595           0.037
              Sudbury         0.456          0.771           0.977           0.037
          Thunder Bay         0.497          0.797           0.976           0.037
             Winnipeg         0.423          0.837           0.973          -0.041
                Regina        0.444          0.855           0.981          -0.029
            Saskatoon         0.436          0.844           0.974          -0.029
               Calgary        0.228          0.847           0.982          -0.004
            Edmonton          0.298          0.821           0.977          -0.004
              Kelowna         0.253          0.830           0.956           0.009
           Abbotsford         0.343          0.808           0.644           0.009
            Vancouver         0.340          0.792           0.986           0.009
               Victoria       0.384          0.825           0.983           0.009
        NL,non-CMA            0.438          0.619                          -0.003
                   PEI        0.377          0.798                          -0.004
         NS,non-CMA           0.345          0.734                           0.010
        NB,non-CMA            0.338          0.724                          -0.014
        QC,non-CMA            0.479          0.779                          -0.053
        ON,non-CMA            0.389          0.808                           0.037
        MB,non-CMA            0.436          0.839                          -0.041
         SK,non-CMA           0.367          0.838                          -0.029
        AB,non-CMA            0.257          0.848                          -0.004
        BC,non-CMA            0.402          0.790                           0.009
                                             Figure A1: Housing Costs versus Wage Levels across CMAs, 2006


                                0.3

                                                                                                                                  Toronto
                                0.2


                                                                                                                                             Vancouver
                                                                                                                 Ottawa-Hull
                                                                                                            Barrie             Calgary             Victoria
                                0.1




                                                                                                              Oshawa          Kelowna
Log Housing-Rent Differential




                                                                                                                     Montréal
                                                                                                                 Guelph
                                                                                                         Kitchener
                                                                                                           Québec
                                                                                                         Edmonton
                                                                                                               Hamilton
                                0.0




                                                                                                Halifax Kingston
                                                                                                   Peterborough
                                                                                                London             Abbotsford
                                                                                    St. Catharines-Niagara
                                                                                                    AB
                                                                                                    Sherbrooke
                                                                                                Brantford
                                                                                                        YT
                                -0.1




                                                                              Moncton Windsor
                                                                                  Regina Sudbury          NWT
                                                                                  Saskatoon
                                                                                   Winnipeg                  BC
                                                                                 Trois-Rivières ON
                                                                       Chicoutimi-Jonquière
                                -0.2




                                                                       Thunder Bay
                                                                          PEI            QC
                                                                      St. John's
                                -0.3




                                                                 NB
                                                                  Saint John
                                                                 NS

                                                    SK
                                -0.4




                                                            MB

                                       NL
                                -0.5




                                            -0.9   -0.8   -0.7     -0.6    -0.5     -0.4   -0.3   -0.2    -0.1     0.0     0.1     0.2       0.3      0.4     0.5
                                                                                  Log Housing-Cost Differential
                                                             Census Metropolitan Area                            Non-CMA Areas of Province

                                                             Diagonal                                            Fitted line: slope = 0.57
