                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       BANKRUPTCY AS IMPLICIT HEALTH INSURANCE

                                               Neale Mahoney

                                           Working Paper 18105
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w18105


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2012




I thank my advisers Liran Einav, Caroline Hoxby, and Jonathan Levin for their guidance and support.
I am grateful to Didem Bernard and Ray Kuntz at AHRQ for help with the restricted access MEPS
data, Richard Hynes for sharing data on asset exemptions, and Amanda Kowalski for sharing data
on insurance market regulations. I thank Martin Anderson, Marika Cabral, Amy Finkelstein, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Tal Gross, Kathy Swartz, Alessandra Voena, Gui Woolston, and numerous seminar participants for
their comments. Financial support from a Kapnick Fellowship, Ric Weiland Fellowship, and Shultz
Fellowship is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance
Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 18105
May 2012
JEL No. H51,I13,K35

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the implicit health insurance households receive from the ability to declare bankruptcy.
Exploiting cross-state and within-state variation in asset exemption law, I show that uninsured households
with greater seizable assets make higher out-of-pocket medical payments, conditional on the amount
of care received. In turn, I find that households with greater wealth-at-risk are more likely to hold health
insurance. The implicit insurance from bankruptcy distorts the insurance coverage decision. Using
a microsimulation model, I calculate that the optimal Pigovian penalties are similar on average to the
penalties under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).


Neale Mahoney
RWJF Scholar in Health Policy Research
1730 Cambridge Street, S410
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
neale.mahoney@gmail.com
1     Introduction

A large literature evaluates the effects of government policy on health insurance coverage.1 The

question of why so many U.S. households are uninsured is less well understood.2 To better un-

derstand the insurance coverage decision, this paper examines a mechanism that has received

little attention but may be important to households on the margin of insurance choice: implicit

insurance from the ability to declare bankruptcy.

      The implicit insurance from bankruptcy arises from the confluence of three factors. First, due

to federal law, hospitals are required to provide emergency treatment on credit—and in most cases

provide nonemergency care without an upfront payment as well. Second, under Chapter 7 of the

U.S. bankruptcy code, households can discharge medical debt, giving up assets above exemption

limits in return.3 Third, because of the deadweight cost of the bankruptcy process, households

and creditors have have incentives to reach negotiated agreements that avoid formal bankruptcy

filings.

      Bankruptcy, as a result, provides households with a form of high-deductible health insurance.

Households are exposed to the financial risk from medical shocks up to the level of assets that

can be seized in bankruptcy and insured against financial risk above this level. This implicit

insurance affects the demand for health insurance. For households with lower levels of seizable

assets, bankruptcy insurance may crowd out conventional coverage. Health insurance is wealth

insurance, to a certain degree, and is less valuable to those with fewer assets.

      The main objective of this paper is to assess the quantitative importance of this mechanism.

Hospitals have complex objective functions that may only place partial weight on profits. They

may choose to provide charity care even when unconstrained by the threat point of bankruptcy.

Households may view bankruptcy insurance as an incomplete source of coverage, better suited to

acute health shocks than ongoing chronic conditions. They may worry about other costs—such as

reduced access to the credit markets—from using this mechanism.
    1 See Gruber and Simon (2008) for a review of the take-up and crowd-out effects of public insurance expansions. See
Gruber (2005) for a review of the impact of tax subsidies on the employer provision of insurance. See Liu and Chollet
(2006) for a review of the effects of tax policy on insurance take-up in the nongroup market.
    2 In a review of the literature Gruber (2008) concludes, “There are a variety of hypotheses for why so many individ-

uals are uninsured, but no clear sense that this set of explanations can account for the 47 million individuals.”
    3 The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) of 2005 was implemented after the

period I analyze. It prevents households with more than the state median income from filing under Chapter 7 in most
circumstances. The households most affected by the reform are unlikely to be on the margin of insurance choice.


                                                           1
     I assess the economic significance of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy with two sets of

empirical analysis. First, I examine how out-of-pocket costs paid by the uninsured are affected

by the assets these households would give up in bankruptcy. Second, I examine how insurance

coverage is affected by a household’s seizable assets.

     A number of unobserved factors make identifying the impact of bankruptcy an empirical chal-

lenge. I address these issues by isolating cross-state and within-state variation in the state-level

asset exemption laws that specify the type and level of assets that can be seized in bankruptcy.

These laws vary considerably. Kansas, for example, allows households to exempt an unlimited

amount of home equity and up to $40,000 in vehicle equity. Neighboring Nebraska allows house-

holds to keep no more than $12,500 in home equity or take a $5,000 wildcard exemption that can

be used for any type of asset.

     I create simulated instrumental variables (Currie and Gruber, 1996) to isolate different types

of variation in these laws. I construct a cross-state instrument by calculating the mean level of

seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived

in each state. This provides what Currie and Gruber (1996) call a “convenient parameterization” of

the generosity of each state’s asset exemption laws, purged of variation due to the characteristics

of each state’s actual residents.

     I construct a within-state simulated instrument by partitioning the constant, nationally rep-

resentative sample into demographic groups based on plausibly exogenous household charac-

teristics.4 The mean level of seizable assets for each demographic group in each state captures

within-state heterogeneity in how asset exemption laws interact with cross-group variation in

wealth.5 When I include controls for demographic groups and state fixed effects, this instrument

isolates within-state variation in asset exemption law, addressing concerns that the results might

be driven by unobserved state-level factors. My preferred instrument combines both the cross-

state and within-state variation in what I term a pooled simulated instrument.

     Using these sources of variation and cost data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
   4 These groups are defined by the full interaction of age group, race, family structure, and education level.
   5 Among   states with the same average level of asset exemption generosity, states with relatively larger vehicle and
wildcard exemptions (and relatively smaller homestead exemptions) are more generous to demographic groups with
a larger share of wealth in these assets (and a lower share of home equity). In particular, the slope of the relationship
between wealth and seizable assets is steeper in states with relatively more generous vehicle and wildcard exemptions
(and relatively smaller homestead exemptions) as low-wealth demographic groups have a large share of assets in these
categories.


                                                           2
(MEPS), I find that uninsured households with more seizable assets make greater out-of-pocket

medical payments, conditional on the amount of care received. My preferred estimate indicates

that a log-point increase in seizable assets raises out-of-pocket payments by 34 percent for house-

holds with higher levels of medical utilization (more than $5,000 in annual charges). Consistent

with the high-deductible nature of this insurance, I find no effect for households with lower levels

of utilization (less than $5,000 in annual charges) and no effect on the extensive margin (positive

charges).

     Using the same sources of variation and data from the Survey of Income and Program Partic-

ipation (SIPP) and Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), I find that households with higher

levels of seizable assets are more likely to have health insurance. My preferred estimate indicates

that a log-point increase in seizable assets raises the probability of insurance coverage by 2.5 to 3.6

percentage points on a base of 77 percent.

     The magnitude of the coverage effect is economically significant. The estimates indicate that

if the bankruptcy laws of the least debtor-friendly state of Delaware were applied nationally, ap-

proximately 8 percent of the uninsured would take up coverage. With a take-up semielasticity of

-0.09 (Congressional Budget Office, 2005), achieving the same increase would require a premium

subsidy of 21 percent.6

     A natural question raised by the coverage result is how much households know about the

implicit insurance from bankruptcy. A growing literature suggests that local information flows

are important to the consumer bankruptcy decision (Gross and Souleles, 2002; Fay, Hurst and

White, 2002; Miller, 2011). Households may have general impressions about financial risk from

the news media or the experience of peers. I examine these perceptions with a web-based survey of

individuals on the margin of insurance choice. More than 50 percent of the sample knows someone

who has declared bankruptcy. I find that a log-point increase in seizable assets is associated with

a 0.10 standard deviation increase in an index of perceptions of financial risk.

     I take the analysis a step further by examining the implications of this mechanism for health

insurance mandates. Bankruptcy insurance is inefficient because households do not face the full

social cost of being uninsured.7 Yet bankruptcy insurance may have the advantage of inducing
  6 The Congressional Budget Office (2005) estimate is based on premium variation due to state-level community rating

and premium compression regulations. As I discuss below, this estimate is in the center of the range in the literature.
  7 This is not a novel point. In discussing efficiency arguments for mandating that employers provide health insur-



                                                          3
less moral hazard than conventional health insurance coverage. This tradeoff suggests a system

of corrective “Pigovian penalties” that expose households to the full social cost of the implicit

insurance from bankruptcy.8

     I quantify the welfare effects of different penalties by calibrating a utility-based, microsimula-

tion model of insurance choice. The optimal Pigovian penalties average $343 and increase social

surplus by $66 to $131 per person. The penalties under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) average

$445 and increase surplus by $27 to $69 per person or 39 to 52 percent of the optimum. This short-

fall is almost completely due to a negative correlation between the Pigovian and ACA penalties.

While the Pigovian penalties are decreasing in the level of seizable assets, due to means testing the

ACA penalties are increasing in this variable. Thus, there is a core tension between the progressive

case for means-tested penalties and the Pigovian argument for penalties that should be decreasing

in household wealth.

     This paper is related to three strands of literature. By analyzing the interaction between im-

plicit and conventional insurance, this paper is closely related to research by Brown and Finkel-

stein (2008) on long-term care insurance and the implicit insurance from spending down assets to

qualify for Medicare. It is related to research by Anderson (2012) on Medigap insurance and the

implicit insurance from the Medicaid Medically Needy Program. Like these papers, I find that im-

plicit health insurance can cause substantial crowd-out. But studying health insurance mandates,

this paper complements recent work by Kolstad and Kowalski (2012). A key difference is that this

paper is concerned with evaluating the case for increased coverage, while Kolstad and Kowalski

(2012) focus on how to most efficiently increase coverage taking this goal as given. Finally, this

paper shares similarities with a literature that examines the effect of medical debt on bankruptcy

filings (Himmelstein et al., 2005; Dranove and Millenson, 2006; Gross and Notowidigdo, 2009).

Unlike those papers, this study treats bankruptcy as a negotiation threat-point, not a dependent

variable to be explained. In this, my approach more closely resembles the “informal bankruptcy”

viewpoint advanced by Dawsey and Ausubel (2004), who show that credit card debt is charged

off without a bankruptcy filing in the majority of cases.
ance, Summers (1989) cites the “externality that arises from society’s unwillingness or inability to deny care completely
to those in desperate need, even if they cannot pay.”
    8 For this exercise, I assume that uninsured households are not already subsidized through the tax code or some

other channel.



                                                           4
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents the institutional background on

personal bankruptcy and medical care. Section 3 provides an overview of the data. Sections 4

discusses the identification strategy. The main empirical results are presented in Section 5. The

microsimulation model is presented in Section 7. Section 8 examines the welfare effects of health

insurance mandates. Section 9 discusses other implications of this implicit insurance. Section 10

concludes.



2      Institutional Background

The implicit insurance from bankruptcy arises from the combination of three institutional features:

the fact that most medical care is provided on credit even when repayment is unlikely, the ability

of households to discharge this debt in bankruptcy, and the incentive for households and creditors

to come to a negotiated solution to avoid the deadweight loss from a formal bankruptcy filing.

      The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) requires that hospitals

treat patients with emergency medical conditions, and prohibits hospitals from delaying treatment

to inquire about insurance status or means of payment.9 As a matter of practice, most hospitals

provide nonemergency medical care on credit as well. Hospitals generally lack the infrastructure

to bill patients at the point of service (LeCuyer and Singhal, 2007) and rarely deny service when

repayment is unlikely.10

      Having received medical care on credit, bankruptcy law allows households to write off this

debt in exchange for assets or future earnings. Chapter 7 is the most popular form of personal

bankruptcy, accounting for approximately 70 percent of all filings (White, 2007). Under Chapter

7, households can discharge most unsecured debt, such as credit card debt, installment loans, and

medical bills. In return, creditors can seize assets above exemption levels that vary by asset type

and state of residence.

      Chapter 13 is the other bankruptcy option. Under Chapter 13, households discharge most

unsecured debt in exchange for payments out of disposable income over the following three to
    9 U.S.C.   42 §1395dd.
    10 In a survey of nonprofit hospitals, 90 percent reported never denying any medical services to patients with no insur-

ance (IRS, 2007). For-profit hospitals seem to operate similarly. For example, Duggan (2000) rejects the hypothesis that
for-profit hospitals have a lower preference for charity care. Delgado et al. (2010) find that the majority of emergency
departments offer preventative care to uninsured patients.



                                                              5
five years. By statute, these payments must be of at least the value that creditors would receive in

Chapter 7. They are rarely larger because, in the period I study, all households have the option to

file for Chapter 7.11 Following Fay, Hurst and White (2002), I use seizable assets under Chapter 7

to characterize payments under both chapters of the bankruptcy code.

     Households, however, do not have to formally declare bankruptcy to receive the implicit in-

surance it provides. Under the threat point of bankruptcy, households and medical providers

often resolve payments without an actual bankruptcy filing. There are multiple junctures where

this occurs. Discounts on the list price of treatment—known as charity care—are offered at the

point of service to the obviously indigent.12 After treatment, many hospitals encourage financially

strapped households to negotiate discounts, requiring the submission of information on income

and assets (such as W-2s and mortgage payments) as part of their charity care applications.13 Even

when charity care is not provided, the lion’s share of medical debt is charged off in the collection

process. Despite contracting with debt collectors, providers recover only about 10 to 20 percent of

bills submitted to the uninsured (LeCuyer and Singhal, 2007).

     Overall, bad debt from the uninsured was estimated at $16 billion to $18 billion in 2004

(LeCuyer and Singhal, 2007). While the exact proportion of debt discharged without a bankruptcy

filing is unknown, Himmelstein et al. (2009) find that the ratio of “medical” to “nonmedical”

bankruptcies, according to their definition, is the same for households with and without insur-

ance coverage, suggesting that a large portion of the uninsured’s medical debt is charged off with

a formal bankruptcy. This is not unique to medical debt. Dawsey and Ausubel (2004) report that

the majority of credit card debt is charged off in what they call “informal bankruptcy”.
  11 The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA), effective in October 2005, established
a “means test” for Chapter 7. It restricted households earning more than the state median income from filing under
Chapter 7 in most circumstances. The households most affected by the reform are unlikely to be marginal to the
mechanism I analyze.
  12 Federal and state laws also influence charity care provision. Nonprofits use charity care to meet their Community

Benefit requirement. Some states subsidize care to the indigent through unpaid care pools. I account for these factors
in the empirical analysis.
  13 When this information is not provided, hospitals run credit checks on indebted patients, filing suit if they find

evidence of a mortgage or savings that could be claimed (“In Their Debt,” Baltimore Sun, December 12-24, 2008).




                                                          6
3     Data Overview

I use three main data sources for the empirical analysis. I examine the effect on costs using data

from the 1996 to 2005 waves of the MEPS. The survey has detailed information on medical costs

and insurance coverage. At the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) data center

in Rockvillle, Maryland, encrypted state identifiers and newly edited asset and debt variables are

also available.14

      I examine the effect on coverage using the 1996 to 2005 SIPP and 1999 to 2005 waves of the

PSID.15 Both data sets have information on insurance coverage and wealth as well as publicly

available state identifiers.16

      In all data sets, I aggregate the data to the household level and weight the observations by

family size for interpretation at the individual level. I inflation-adjust monetary variables to 2005

dollars using the CPI-U. I exclude from the baseline sample households that have one or more

members who are enrolled in public insurance or that have a head who is eligible for public Medi-

care insurance (i.e., age 65 or older).17 Due to the survey question reference periods, the MEPS and

PSID are most naturally analyzed at the annual level, while the SIPP is best analyzed by month.


3.1    Asset Exemptions

I codify assets exemptions using The New Bankruptcy: Will It Work For You?, a do-it-yourself guide

to personal bankruptcy (Elias, 2007). Table 1 shows these exemptions. Contemporaneous home-

stead exemptions exhibit substantial variation, ranging from zero in seven states to unlimited in

eight others; vehicle exemptions range from zero in 15 states to at least $10,000 in five others; and

wildcard exemptions, which can be applied to any asset, show a similar degree of variation. Cal-

ifornia residents can file under two different exemption systems, and residents of 14 other states

can file under the federal exemption system if they choose. The last column shows historical

homestead exemptions from 1920 (Goodman, 1993).
  14 Bernard, Banthin and Encinosa (2009) find that the estimates of net worth in the MEPS are comparable to those in

the SIPP.
  15 The first version of this paper used only the PSID. I replicated the analysis in the larger SIPP to increase the precision

of the estimates. The consistent results across both data sets increases my confidence in the findings.
  16 I have examined the effect on coverage and found similar results using the restricted-access MEPS.
  17 In the MEPS, I drop the 3.6 percent of households with missing wealth variables. In the SIPP, I drop the 0.9 percent

of observations where health insurance is imputed.



                                                              7
3.2    Seizable Assets

A key variable in the empirical analysis is seizable assets. This variable measures the net wealth

a household would give up if it were forced to declare bankruptcy at the time of the survey. Let

wi denote the vector of assets and debts for household i, and let e j denote the vector of exemption

laws in state j.18 Following Fay, Hurst and White (2002), seizable assets is given by assets that can

be seized in bankruptcy (gross seizable assets) minus debt that can be discharged in bankruptcy

(dischargeable debt) plus fees (filing cost):


        wS (wi , e j ) = Gross_Seizable_Assets(wi , e j ) − Dischargeable_Debt(wi ) + Filing_Cost.


Gross seizable assets are calculated as the sum of assets above the exemption level in each statu-

torily defined asset category:19,20

                                                    n      
      Gross_Seizable_Assets(wi , e j ) = max            max Home_Equityi − Homestead_Exemption j , 0
            
      + max Vehicle_Equityi − Vehicle_Exemption j , 0
            
      + max Retirement_Assetsi − Retirement_Exemption j , 0
            
      + max Financial_Assetsi − Financial_Exemption j , 0
                                      o
      + Other_Assetsi − Wildcard j , 0 .


Dischargeable debt is defined as unsecured debt. Filing costs, which include an estimate of legal

fees, are set to $2,000, as estimated by Elias (2007). Neither of these variables are affected by state of

residence. For households with multiple options (e.g., state or federal), I calculate seizable assets

under each option and assign households that one that minimizes their seizable assets.

      Panel A of Table 2 shows summary statistics for seizable assets by insurance status in the
  18 Households   with one adult are assigned the individual exemptions. Households with a married couple are as-
sumed to file jointly and are assigned the joint filer exemptions, which are twice the individual exemptions in most
states.
  19 Calculating seizable assets by asset types ignores potential gains from reallocating wealth into asset categories with

unused exemptions immediately before a bankruptcy filing. This seems appropriate since such reallocation is explicitly
prohibited under bankruptcy law and judges have broad discretion to root out this type of behavior (Elias, 2007).
  20 Following the law, the formulation allows the wildcard exemption to be applied towards Other_Assets and assets

in excess of the exemption in the other asset categories.




                                                            8
SIPP.21 Seizable assets are right skewed with a median of $39,007 and a mean of $227,429. Gross

seizable assets average $234,147. Due to the large homestead exemptions in many states, seizable

home equity accounts for less than a quarter of this amount. Dischargeable debt levels are small,

averaging $8,967 per household.

      Seizable assets diverge sharply by insurance status. Fifty-six percent of the uninsured would

give less than $5,000 in a bankruptcy filing, and 64 percent would give up less than $10,000. Forty-

nine percent of households with private insurance would give up more than $50,000, and 66 per-

cent would give up at least $10,000. The threshold rule that household obtain health insurance

if and only if they have more than $10,000 in seizable assets explains two-thirds of the variation

in coverage. More details on the seizable assets calculations can be found in Online Appendix

Section A.


3.3    Medical Costs

Medical costs variables from the MEPS are shown in Panel B of Table 2. Annual medical charges,

defined as the list price of medical services used that year, average $7,113 per household. Total

payments, defined as the sum of payments received, are substantially less than charges. This is

due to discounts negotiated by insurance providers and charity care or bad debt. For the privately

insured, total payments average $4,819 per household. Ninety-four percent of these payments are

either out-of-pocket or made by private insurance providers. For the uninsured, total payments

average $1,475 per household. Fifty percent of these payments are out-of-pocket. Miscellaneous

payments, such as payments from charity care pools, workers’ compensation, or automobile in-

surance, account for most of the rest.


3.4    Insurance Coverage

Panel C of Table 2 shows insurance status in the baseline sample using SIPP data. Twenty-three

percent of the sample is uninsured, 72.1 percent has insurance through an employer or union, and

4.9 percent has individually purchased coverage. Given the low rate of individually purchased

coverage, I am unable to detect differential responses on this outcome.
 21 Values   are similar in the PSID and MEPS and are available from the author upon request.




                                                           9
3.5       Perceptions of Financial Risk

I conduct a survey to examine perceptions of the implicit and explicit ways in which the threat-

point of bankruptcy might limit the financial risk from being uninsured. The sample is designed

to target households that are more likely to be on the margin of insurance choice.22 The sample

is composed of single, childless adults age 27 to 49, screening out occupations with less than 10

percent uninsured in the March Supplement of the 2010 Current Population Survey. The survey

was conducted online on members of a commercial survey panel in September, 2011.23

         The survey asks three main questions on financial risk and 22 questions on demographic and

financial characteristics to be used as covariates. (A complete copy of the survey is included as

Online Appendix Section D.) Table 3 shows that survey participants are most likely to be age 30 to

34 (31.5 percent), female (65.1 percent), white (80.0 percent), and college educated (63.8 percent).

One-third of participants are unemployed or not in the labor force; the median income is between

$10,000 and $25,000; the median wealth is between $0 and $10,000.24

         The screening on occupation and demographics—combined with selection into the commer-

cial panel—does a good job isolating individuals on the margin of insurance choice: Slightly more

than half (56.6 percent) of the sample has insurance coverage. And 52.5 percent know someone

who has declared personal bankruptcy.

         The three main questions on financial risk are ordered in the manner that an uninsured indi-

vidual might chronologically go through the negotiation process with a medical provider. While

the primary intention is to examine how responses to these questions covary with bankruptcy

laws, the novelty of the questions makes simple tabulations of separate interest.

         The first question asks, Average medical costs for a broken leg are $12,000. Suppose you are unin-

sured, break your leg, and receive medical treatment at the nearest hospital. If you negotiate with the

hospital, how much do you think you would end up owing? Responses to this question are diverse,

with the sample split evenly between less than $4,000; between $4,000 and $8,000; and greater

than $8,000.
  22 The  survey is thus not nationally representative, and results should not be extrapolated out of context.
  23 Ithank Steve Collupy at C&T Marketing for helping administer the survey.
  24 Wealth is constructed by aggregating across car value and remaining loan payment, home value and remaining

mortgage payment, money in checking and savings account, and unsecured debt. Since survey responses are categori-
cal (e.g., $2,000-$5,000), I assign each categorical response the central value in its bin.




                                                       10
      The next question examines whether, and to what degree, hospitals are perceived as following

through on unpaid bills. It asks, Suppose you ignore the medical bills. Which of these outcomes do you

think is most likely? Approximately two-thirds of survey participants choose The hospital will send

a debt collector to come after your paycheck and/or property (e.g., car, home). Approximately one-third

select The debt collector will bother you for a while but then eventually give up. Less than 5 percent pick

You probably won’t hear from the hospital or debt collector at all.

      The final question examines perceptions about bankruptcy law. Survey participants are asked,

Suppose you declare bankruptcy to get rid of the medical bills. Which one of these outcomes do you think

is most likely? The responses indicate that bankruptcy is viewed to be highly creditor-friendly.

Approximately half of the respondents choose You will have to fill out a bunch of paperwork and pay

a filing fee but you can keep your money and your property. One-quarter select You will have to give up

any money in your checking or savings account but can keep your property. And one-quarter choose You

will have to give up any money in your checking or savings account and your property (e.g., car, home).



4     Empirical Strategy

In this section, I discuss the empirical strategy I use to test the central predictions of the mecha-

nism: that households with more seizable assets face increased financial risk if uninsured and are

more likely to hold conventional health insurance as a result. I start by presenting the second-stage

estimating equation; I then discuss identification issues and the instrumental variables strategy.


4.1    Second Stage

I estimate regression models of an outcome yi on seizable assets wijS and controls. Letting i indicate

households and j indicate states, the second-stage equation is


                                               yi = αw ln wijS + Xij0 α X + eij ,                                               (1)


where Xij is a vector of household and state characteristics, and eij is the error term.25
   25 I take the log of seizable assets because of the long right tail of this variable in the data. In the preferred specification,

I bottom-code seizable asset at the filing cost of $2,000 and include an indicator for bottom-coding as a control. I fail to
reject this functional form compared to more flexible alternatives. The qualitative findings are robust to bottom-coding
at other values and to a linear functional form.


                                                                11
      I examine the effect on costs by regressing log annual out-of-pocket costs on log seizable assets

and controls for households and state characteristics.26 In some specifications, I also control for

medical utilization with a polynomial in annual charges. This is potentially important because

the sign of the unconditional effect of seizable assets on out-of-pocket payments is theoretically

ambiguous due to offsetting insurance and moral hazard effects.27,28 My primary analysis focuses

on the sample of uninsured households with positive medical utilization. I also examine whether

bankruptcy impacts the extensive margin of whether households receive care.

      I examine the effect on coverage by regressing insurance coverage on log seizable assets and

controls for households and state factors.29 I use a probit functional form in the preferred specifi-

cation for the standard reason that the dependent variable is limited to the unit interval. I show

that linear probability models produce similar estimates.30 I exclude households with publicly

provided insurance from the baseline sample as these households are less likely to make active

decisions about health insurance coverage; I include these households in robustness checks to

show that the estimates are not influenced by sample selection.


4.2    Identification Issues

Consistently estimating the parameters of interest poses four distinct identification problems. The

first issue is omitted variables: that the outcome and seizable assets may be jointly determined by

unobserved factors. For instance, in the second-stage coverage equation, unobserved risk prefer-

ences could generate positive bias if more risk-adverse households are more likely to accumulate

precautionary savings and purchase insurance. Unobserved health shocks could generate nega-

tive bias by depleting assets and increasing preferences for coverage.
   26 I set the dependent variable to zero when out-of-pocket payments are zero. This is rarely the case. In the sample

analyzed, less than 4 percent of households make zero out-of-pocket payments.
   27 To be more explicit, consider the effect of reducing a household’s level of seizable assets. Due to the mechanical

effect of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy, out-of-pocket payments should decrease. Due to moral hazard, house-
holds may increase their medical utilization, raising out-of-pocket costs and potentially offsetting the mechanical effect
in the opposite direction.
   28 Controlling for charges raises its own problems if charges are endogenous to bankruptcy laws. The estimates are

very similar with and without this control.
   29 I define insurance coverage by the percent of household member-months insured and an indicator for more than

50 percent of member-months covered depending upon the specification.
   30 The case for the probit over the linear probability model is that it tends to produce more homogenous estimates

across instrumental variable specifications. This is because the local average treatment effect (LATE) from the linear
probability model naturally varies across instruments that isolate variation in subgroups with different baseline cover-
age levels.



                                                           12
      The second concern is reverse causality: that households that choose bankruptcy insurance

have a strategic incentive to reduce their seizable assets to lessen their financial losses in the event

of a bankruptcy filing.

      The third concern is measurement error: that because the measurement of assets is notoriously

difficult, the coefficient on seizable assets might be attenuated toward zero.

      The fourth concern is endogenous asset exemption laws: that the state-level laws that specify

the type and amount of assets that can be seized in bankruptcy may be correlated with unobserved

state-level factors. For instance, a high-profile incident of medical bankruptcy covered in the local

press might both increase insurance take-up and provided a legislative impulse for higher asset

exemptions, biasing estimates of the effect on coverage toward zero.


4.3    Cross-State and Within-State Variation

I address these identification issues by constructing simulated instrumental variables (Currie and

Gruber, 1996) that isolate cross-state and within-state variation in seizable assets solely due to

legislative differences in asset exemption law.31

      I construct a cross-state simulated instrument by taking a constant, nationally representative

sample of households (I use the entire sample) and calculating their mean level of seizable assets

as though they faced the asset exemption laws of each state. For state j, the instrument is given by

                                                    1
                                            zj =
                                                   |I|   ∑ ln wS (wi , e j ),                                     (2)
                                                         i∈ I


where wS (wi , e j ) is seizable assets for household i with wealth wi under assets exemption laws e j

in state j and I is the entire set of households in the data. This instrument provides what Currie

and Gruber (1996) call a “convenient parameterization” of the generosity of each state’s asset

exemption laws, purged of variation due to the characteristics of each state’s actual residents.

      My preferred simulated instrument builds upon this cross-state instrument to additionally

capture within-state variation in asset exemption law. Among states with the same level of asset
  31 Thereis very little panel variation in these exemptions. As I discuss in more detail below, real exemption levels
have been remarkable stable over time since 1920. In particular, most of the changes since the Bankruptcy Reform Act
of 1978 have been small updates to account for inflation. I thank Richard Hynes for sharing data that allowed me to
examine this phenomenon.




                                                                13
exemption generosity on average, states with relatively larger vehicle and wildcard exemptions

(and relatively smaller homestead exemptions) are relative more generous to demographic groups

with a larger share of wealth in these assets (and a lower share of home equity). In particular, the

slope of the relationship between wealth and seizable assets is steeper in states with relatively

more generous vehicle and wildcard exemptions (and relatively smaller homestead exemptions)

since lower wealth demographic groups have a large share of assets in these categories.

     To construct this pooled simulated instrument, I first divide the sample into k = 1 . . . K demo-

graphic groups based on plausibly exogenous household characteristics. In particular, I use the

full interaction of age group, race, education group, and family structure to define these groups.32

For each demographic group k and state j, the instrument is given by

                                               1
                                             | Ik | i∑
                                    z jk =              ln wS (wi , e j ) for k = 1 . . . K,                              (3)
                                                     ∈I
                                                     k



where wS (wi , e j ) is defined as before and Ik is the entire set of households in demographic group

k. The instrument thus varies by state-by-demographic group. I include a set of dummy variables

for each demographic group k = 1 . . . K as controls in all specifications with this instrument to

partial out cross-group variation in seizable assets levels.

     By capturing both cross-state and within-state variation, this pooled simulated instrument has

a number of advantages over the cross-state instrument introduced above. First, it increases first-

stage power by harnessing a greater amount of plausibly exogenous variation in seizable assets

across households. Second, by capturing a broader amount of variation, the instrument identifies

effects that are local to a larger share of the population and therefore closer to the parameter of

interest for broad-based counterfactuals. Third, the instrument allows me to estimate models that

isolate within-state variation in asset exemption law. This is achieved by adding state fixed effects

to specifications with the pooled simulated instrument.
  32 Age groups are 18-24, 25-29, 30-34,. . . , 60-64; race is black and white; education groups are high school or less, some

college or college degree, and some graduate school or a graduate degree; and family structure is single, single parent,
childless couple, and couple with one or more children.




                                                               14
4.4    First Stage

The first-stage equation for household i that actually resides in state j is given by


                                 ln wijS = β z z jk + Xij0 β X + Dk0 β k + µij ,                   (4)


where z jk is the pooled instrument and Dk is a vector of dummy variable for demographic groups

1 . . . K. The cross-state first stage uses the cross-state instrument z j and does not require the

dummy variables.

      Together these instruments allow me to isolate variation in seizable assets solely due to cross-

state, within-state, or pooled variation in asset exemption law. The first three identification con-

cerns (omitted variables, reverse causality, measurement error) are addressed by all of the instru-

ments. Similar results with the cross-state and within-state instruments should alleviate concerns

about the exogeneity of the demographic groups used to construct the pooled simulated instru-

ment. The within-state instrumental variables strategy addresses the fourth concern (unobserved

state-level factors) as the state fixed effects directly absorb any unobserved state-level variation

that might be correlated with asset exemption law and the outcome variable.


4.5    Legislative Origins

The legislative origins of state asset exemptions provides further support for the exogeneity of

the identifying variation. Homestead exemptions emerged over the second half of the nineteenth

century as the result of an idiosyncratic set of historical circumstances. Describing the key fac-

tors that led to the establishment of state homestead exemption levels, Goodman (1993) cites no

less diverse a list than “Texas colonizers and western developers, labor and land reformers, an-

timonopoly Jacksonian egalitarians, defenders of family security and women’s property rights,

Southern planters and yeomen devastated by the Civil War.”

      Since then, states have added vehicle and wildcard exemptions to keep up with changes in

asset ownership. But, by and large, the real generosity of asset exemptions has been remarkably

stable. In his book Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America, Skeel (2001) notes that

most of the changes in asset exemptions over the twentieth century have been inflation updates.



                                                      15
      The downside of this stability is that it precludes an identification strategy that uses state-by-

year difference-in-differences. Yet there is an upside as well. Because asset exemptions are largely

the result of historical idiosyncrasies, they are less likely to be correlated with contemporaneous

political or economic factors.

      Appendix Figure A2 provides quantitative support for this argument. To assess the stability

of asset exemptions, I construct a historical analogue to the cross-state instrument: mean log seiz-

able home equity under inflation-adjusted 1920 homestead exemptions for the nationally repre-

sentative sample of households as though they lived in each state.33 Panel A plots the cross-state

instrument (y-axis) against its cross-state historical analogue (x-axis) for the 38 states that had

homestead exemptions in 1920. If asset exemptions grew proportionally, the slope of this relation-

ship would be 1. The corresponding regression has a slope (standard error) of 1.18 (0.32) and is

not statistically distinguishable from 1. The R-squared is 0.43, with the New England states in the

lower right corner being the most prominent outliers.34

      Panels B and C examine the relationship between contemporaneous asset exemptions and

contemporaneous political and economic factors. Panel B shows that there is no correlation be-

tween the cross-state simulated instrument and the share of the electorate that voted for John

Kerry in the 2004 presidential election; Panel C shows that the cross-state simulated instrument

and 2005 unemployment rate are similarly uncorrelated.35



5     Results

5.1    First Stage

I start by presenting estimates of the implied first stage. Table 4 shows estimates from ordinary

least squares (OLS) regressions of log seizable assets on the pooled, within-state, and cross-state

instrumental variables in the SIPP.36 Standard errors are clustered at the level of the instrument.37
  33 An earlier draft of this paper showed estimates of the coverage effect using a simulated instrumented that isolated

this historical variation. The estimates are qualitatively similar.
  34 A keyword search of newspaper articles in a six-month window around major changes in Massachusetts and Con-

necticut assets exemptions failed to reveal any information on the reasons for these increases.
  35 I have also examined and found no correlation between asset exemptions and measures of firm size, household

income, racial composition, and wage garnishment levels.
  36 First-stage estimates in the MEPS and PSID are similar and available from the author upon request.
  37 Standard errors are clustered at the state level in specifications with the cross-state instrument and at the state-by-

demographic group level in specifications with the pooled simulated instrument. While an argument can be made for


                                                            16
The first stage with the pooled instrument (column 1) is strong with an F-statistic of 300 on the

excluded instrument. The coefficient on the instrument is not statistically distinguishable from 1,

which is consistent with zero correlation between asset exemption law and wealth across states.38

The within-state and cross-state relationships (columns 2 and 3) are similarly powerful with F-

statistics of 186 and 349. Appendix Figure A1 visually depicts the cross-state first stage.


5.2    Effect on Costs

I next examine the effect of bankruptcy law on the financial risk faced by the uninsured. Panel A

of Figure 1 shows the relationship between payments (y-axis) and charges (x-axis) for households

with private insurance and the uninsured. Charges are the list price of medical care and should

be thought of as a proxy for the level of medical utilization.39 Payments are the sum of out-of-

pocket payments and payments from private insurance providers. (Payments by the uninsured

are therefore simply out-of-pocket payments.) The plot was created by averaging payments and

charges at twentieths of the charge distribution.

      Panel A shows that payments for the privately insured scale up proportionally with charges.

The slope is approximately 60 percent reflecting the “negotiated discount” that private insurers

obtain off list prices. For households without coverage, payments scale up at the same rate to

about $2,000 and then flatten out abruptly. Indeed, out-of-pocket payments made by the unin-

sured closely resemble those by an insured household with a high-deductible health plan.

      Panel B examines how the relationship between out-of-pocket payments and charges varies

across uninsured households with lower (< $50,000) and higher (≥ $50,000) levels of seizable as-

sets. The plot was created by averaging payments and charges at twentieths of the charge distri-

bution. The figure shows that for lower levels of medical utilization, uninsured households make

very similar out-of-pocket payments. For higher levels of utilization, out-of-pocket payments
clustering the errors in all specifications at the state level, this in my view is a critique of the identifying assumption
rather than the level of clustering. If there is, for example, positive correlation in insurance coverage across demo-
graphic groups within a state, then the pooled instrumental variable will produce downward biased estimates of the
parameter of interest. A reader who is concerned about this possibility should therefore focus on the cross-state speci-
fications that completely avoid this problem.
   38 This should not necessarily be interpreted as evidence against a casual effect of asset exemption law on asset and

debt levels holding other factors equal. By simultaneously increasing interest rates (Gropp, Scholz and White, 1997)
and raising the incentive to hold assets, higher asset exemptions could generate offsetting supply and demand effects
that result in the zero net effect found here.
   39 I will address issues related to the potential endogeneity of this variable below.




                                                            17
sharply diverge. Households with less seizable assets have their out-of-pocket payments trun-

cated, while households with more seizable assets have their out-of-pocket payments continue

to increase with charges, albeit at a somewhat lower rate. The plot further supports the view of

bankruptcy as a form of high-deductible health insurance that predominantly impacts households

with higher levels of utilization.

       Panels C to F of Figure 1 show the cross-state relationship between out-of-pocket payments (y-

axis) and seizable assets (x-axis). To account for the high-deductible nature of this insurance, I split

the sample into households with more or less than $5,000 in annual medical charges.40 In these

samples, mean out-of-pocket payments are $1,268 and $149 respectively. The data is averaged by

state with circles proportional to the number of observations.

       Panels C and D show the raw correlation between log out-of-pockets payments and log seiz-

able assets averaged by state. For households with higher charges (Panel C), there is a robust

upward-sloping relationship, consistent with bankruptcy as a form of high-deductible health in-

surance. For household with lower charges (Panel D), the relationship is slightly downward slop-

ing.

       Panels E and F show the graphical analogue to a reduced form regression: log out-of-pocket

payments against the cross-state simulated instrument average by state. The reduced form paints

a similar picture. There is a strong upward sloping relationship for households with more than

$5,000 in annual charges (Panel E) and a slightly downward sloping relationship for households

with lower charges (Panel F).

       Table 5 shows estimates of the effect on costs. Panels A and B show estimates from regressions

of log out-of-pocket costs on log seizable assets in the samples with more and less than $5,000 in

annual charges. Panel C examines extensive margin effects with linear probability model regres-

sions of an indicator for positive charges on log seizable assets in the sample of all uninsured

households. Moving from left to right, the table shows OLS specifications (columns 1 and 2) and

two-stage least squares (2SLS) specifications (columns 3 to 8) that isolate the pooled, within-state,

and cross-state variation in asset exemption law. I control for charges in the even columns to ac-

count for potential moral hazard effects and exclude this control in the odd columns because of

the potential endogeneity of this variable.
 40 The   plots and regressions are similar when I split the sample at $4,000 and $6,000.


                                                            18
    Panel A provides evidence of an economically significant effect of seizable assets on out-of-

pocket costs for households with more than $5,000 in annual charges. The preferred pooled IV es-

timates (columns 3 and 4) indicate that a log-point increase in seizable assets raises out-of-pocket

payments by 41 percent (exp(0.34) − 1) percent on a based of $1,268. The estimates are slightly

lower (23 percent = exp(0.21) − 1) in the OLS specifications and slightly higher in the specifi-

cations that use within-state variation (49 percent = exp(0.41) − 1). The estimates are virtually

identical with and without the charge controls. The cross-state estimates are very similar to the

preferred pooled IV estimates (38 percent = exp(0.32) − 1) but less precisely estimated.

    Panel B provides evidence of a flat if not slightly downward-sloping relationship between

seizable assets and out-of-pocket payments for households with less than $5,000 in annual medical

charges. The preferred pooled IV estimates (columns 3 and 4) indicate that a log-point increase in

seizable assets reduces out-of-pocket payments by 5 to 15 percent (exp(0.05) − 1 to exp(0.14) − 1)

on a base of $149. The standard errors are too large to rule out a nonzero effect. But even with

greater precision, effects of this magnitude are unlikely to be economically significant given the

low base level of spending. The within-state and cross-state IV estimates are similar to the pre-

ferred pooled IV specification and also statistically indistinguishable from zero. I interpret the

positive OLS estimates as likely upward biased due to the potential correlation between unob-

served household factors and the treatment and billing behavior of medical providers.

    Panel C indicates that there is no effect on the extensive margin. Using the pooled IV estimate

(column 3), I can reject effects outside -1.6 to 0.8 percentage points on a base of 76.1 percent with a

95 percent confidence interval. The estimates are very similar across specifications.

Summary and Interpretation

    To summarize, I find a strong positive relationship between seizable assets and out-of-pocket

payments for households with higher utilization, a slightly downwardly sloping relationship for

households with lower utilization, and zero effect on the extensive margin. Thus the impact of

bankruptcy on financial risk is exactly what you would expect from a high-deductible health

plan.41
  41 There is reason to think that the effect for households with higher utilization might be an underestimate of the

long-run impact of bankruptcy insurance on exposure to financial risk. Medical providers sometimes allow house-
holds to make payments in multiple installments. The MEPS does a poor job capturing these payments as it only elicits
out-of-pocket payments for medical events that occurred in the approximately five-month look-back period. If house-


                                                         19
      While not statistically significant, the negative point estimates for lower utilization house-

holds are consistent with a model in which medical providers partially offset the lower receipts

from higher charge households with more aggressive collections from households with lower

charges. For instance, Gruber and Rodriguez (2007), using rich financial processing data for a

group of physicians, provide evidence on cross-subsidization within the uninsured. In this context

the offset is far from complete. Combining the estimates for high and low utilization households,

the pooled IV estimates imply that a log-point increase in seizable assets raises out-of-pocket pay-

ments on net by between 21 and 24 percent.


5.3    Effect on Coverage

Having provided evidence that uninsured households with more seizable assets face greater fi-

nancial risk, I now examine the crowd-out effects of this implicit insurance. Figure 2 presents

visual evidence, plotting insurance coverage (y-axis) against seizable assets (x-axis). Plots in the

left column use data from the SIPP; plots in the right column use data from the PSID. The top row

(Panels A and B) shows the raw data: insurance coverage against log seizable assets averaged by

state. The bottom row (Panels C and D) shows the analogue to a reduced form regression: insur-

ance coverage against the cross-state simulated instrument averaged by state. The circles in each

plot are proportional to the number of observations.

      The plots confirm the crowd-out prediction: insurance coverage is substantially higher for

households with more wealth at risk and lower for households with limited financial exposure.

The outliers are predominately states with relatively few observations.

      Table 6 presents the main coverage estimates. Panel A shows estimates in the SIPP; Panel B

shows estimates in the PSID. Column 1 shows the marginal effect calculated at the mean from

a non-IV probit regression; column 2 adds state fixed effects to this specification. Columns 3 to

5 show marginal effects from IV probit regressions that use pooled, within-state, and cross-state

variation in asset exemption law. All specifications include demographic and state controls, year

fixed effects, and an indictor for the bottom-coding of seizable assets.42 Block bootstrap standard
holds with higher amounts of illiquid seizable assets (e.g., seizable home equity) are more likely to make installment
payments, then out-of-pocket payments in the data would underestimate financial risk for higher seizable assets house-
holds, making the estimated parameter a downward biased measure of the effect on bankruptcy insurance on long-run
exposure to financial risk.
  42 The demographic controls are demographic-group dummies (fully interaction of age group, race, education group,



                                                         20
errors clustered at the level of the instrument are shown in all specifications.

     The preferred pooled IV estimates (column 3) indicate that a log-point increase in seizable

assets raises insurance coverage by 2.5 to 3.6 percentage points on a base of 77 percent. Both

estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level. The within-state and cross-

state estimates are very similar, ranging from 1.7 to 4.6 percentage points. The non-IV estimates

range from 1.8 to 2.3 percentage points.

     Appendix Section B examines the sensitivity of the effect on coverage across a number of

dimensions. I show that the estimates are similar when I estimate the model using different sample

restrictions and when I control for potentially jointly determined covariates.

Summary and Interpretation

     To summarize, I find that a log-point increase in seizable assets raises insurance coverage

by 2.5 to 3.6 percentage points, with similar estimates across a range of alternative identification

strategies and specifications. To put this magnitude context, I calculate how changes in asset

exemption law would impact insurance coverage. I stress that these counterfactuals are intended

for illustrative purposes only. Changing asset exemption laws could have broad consequences for

credit markets that are not examined in this paper. And as I discuss below, policies that increase

insurance coverage may not in all cases be welfare enhancing.

     I conduct the counterfactuals of applying the exemption laws of the most and least debtor-

friendly states to every state nationwide. Texas has the most debtor-friendly asset exemption

laws, allowing households to exempt the full value of their homestead and take a $60,000 wild-

card exemption. If these laws were applied nationally, seizable assets levels would decline by

approximately 1.2 log points on average, and the preferred pooled IV estimate indicate that the

fraction of uninsured households would rise by 2.4 to 4.2 percentage points, or 10.6 to 18.5 percent.

     Delaware has the least debtor-friendly laws, with no homestead exemption and a $500 wild-

card exemption. Applying Delaware asset exemptions nationwide would increase seizable assets

by approximately 0.6 log points, and reduce the fraction of uninsured households by 1.7 to 1.9
and family structure) and a fourth-order polynomial in annual income. State controls are for individual market in-
surance regulations from Kowalski, Congdon and Showalter (2008) (count of mandated benefits and indicators for
any wiling pharmacist, any willing provider, community rating, and guaranteed issue regulations), hospital owner-
ship structure (nonprofit share of beds, for-profit share of beds), Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) payments per
capita, Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC) per capita, and the presence of a charity care pool or fund.



                                                         21
percentage points, or 7.4 to 8.2 percent .

      This is an economically significant magnitude. To see this, consider the premium subsidy

required to increase coverage by the same 1.7 to 1.9 percentage points. A central estimate of the

premium semielasticity of insurance take-up is -0.084 (Congressional Budget Office, 2005).43 Using

this estimate, inducing the same increase in coverage requires a premium subsidy of 20.3 to 22.5

percent.


5.4    Perceptions of Financial Risk

The cost and coverage results suggest a model where the ability to declare bankruptcy limits

household exposure to financial risk and in turn suppresses demand for conventional health in-

surance coverage. In the stylized model that I present below, households know their distribution

of health risk and level of seizable assets and use an expected utility framework to determine

whether to purchase health insurance.

      Assuming that households know these distributions exactly is obviously an exaggeration.

What matters is that households have some knowledge of the financial risk from being uninsured.

For example, if households learn from the news media or peers that medical providers frequently

seize home equity, then homeowners may be more likely to purchase insurance coverage—even if

they know relatively little about the particularities of bankruptcy law in their states of residence.

      I investigate this information channel more rigorously by conducting a survey on the financial

risk from being uninsured and examining how survey responses vary with asset exemption laws

across states. The survey sample is prescreened on occupation and demographics to be on the

margin of insurance choice. Slightly more than half (56.6 percent) of the sample has insurance

coverage, and 52.5 percent knows someone who has declared bankruptcy.

      I ask the survey participants three main questions that are intended to elicit their perceptions

of financial risk. The questions are ordered in the manner that an uninsured individual might

go through the negotiation process with a medical provider. Paraphrasing considerably, the first

question is, What would an uninsured individual owe for a $12,000 medical bill? The second question
   43 The Congressional Budget Office (2005) estimate is identified off premium variation due to state-level community

rating and premium compression regulations. The estimate is central to the small number of estimates in the literature.
It is smaller than the estimate of Gruber and Poterba (1994), who use the introduction of a tax subsidy for insurance
purchases by the self-employed and is larger than the estimate from Marquis and Long (1995). See Liu and Chollet
(2006) for a review of estimates in the literature.


                                                          22
is, What would happen if this bill was ignored? The third question is, What can be seized in a bankruptcy

filing? For each question, survey participants select from among responses that indicate different

levels of perceived financial risk. (See Section 3 for details.)

     Figure 3 plots the responses to these questions (y-axis) against the cross-state simulated instru-

ment (x-axis).44 Survey responses are ordered from the bottom to the top by increasing perception

of financial risk. The plots are created by averaging the data by the categorical y-axis variable.

     Panel A shows that survey respondents perceive the uninsured will owe more in states with

higher levels of seizable assets. Panel B shows that hospitals are perceived to more aggressively

pursue unpaid bills in states where more assets can be seized. Panel C shows that survey respon-

dents perceive that more assets can be seized in bankruptcy in states with higher levels of seizable

assets, although the relationship is more noisy than the two above.

     Table 7 shows regression analogues to these plots. In columns 1 to 6, the dependent variable

is an indicator for increased financial risk, defined at the categorical level that most closely splits

the sample.45 Columns 7 and 8 show the effect on a standardized summary index that takes

a weighted average of the three outcomes, where the weights are given by the inverse of the

covariance matrix of the normalized outcome variables (Anderson, 2008). Odd columns show

bivariate regressions of the outcome variable on the simulated instrument; even columns include

controls for household demographic and financial factors. Standard errors in all specifications are

clustered by state.

     The standardized summary index estimates (columns 7 and 8) show a robust, positive re-

lationship between perceptions of financial risk and cross-state variation in bankruptcy law. A

log-point increase in seizable assets is associated with a 0.09 standard deviation increase in per-

ceptions of financial risk. This magnitude seems reasonable. The preferred coverage estimates of

2.5 to 3.6 percentage points imply effects of 0.14 (=0.025/(0.773 × 0.227)) to 0.20 (=0.041/(0.770

× 0.230)) standard deviations. The effect is virtually unchanged with the inclusion of the demo-
graphic and financial controls and statistically significant at the 5 percent level in both specifica-

tions. The estimates for the three individual questions are all positive, although only the effect
  44 Since  these questions are about a hypothetical individual, it is inappropriate to examine how these questions vary
with the survey respondents’ actual seizable assets. I find very similar effects when I control for financial characteristics
in the regression specifications.
   45 The indicator is 1 if the response is greater than $6,000 owed for a broken leg, seize assets for what would happen

if ignore bills, and seize financial assets and property or seize financial assets for what is seized in a bankruptcy filing.


                                                             23
for the second question is statistically distinguishable from zero. The estimates are too similar to

permit an ordering of their relative importance.



6          Microsimulation Model

6.1         Model

To examine policy implications, I calibrate a microsimulation model of health insurance choice in

the presence of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy. The model has households and medical

providers. Households have a representative agent with expected utility preferences over wealth

w = wS + w E , where wS is seizable assets and w E is exempt assets.46 They face medical shocks

with list price m drawn from a distribution F with nonnegative support and choose whether to

purchase health insurance to protect against this financial risk. Medical providers are obligated

to provide medical services m and then attempt to recover the costs.47 I assume that household

wealth is common knowledge and that medical providers face a small (possibly nonpecuniary)

cost to pushing households into formal bankruptcy.48

           Model timing proceeds as follows: (1) households decide whether to purchase health insur-

ance, (2) households receive medical shock m, (3) medical providers submit bill s, and (4) house-

holds decide whether to declare bankruptcy. I solve the model in reverse order.

           Conditional on receiving medical bill s, households can either not declare bankruptcy (yield-

ing wealth w E + wS − s) or declare bankruptcy (yielding wealth w E ). Maximizing wealth, house-

holds declare bankruptcy if and only if s > wS .49 Conditional on a medical shock with list price

m, medical providers submit a bill s ≤ m to households. With a cost of pushing households into

bankruptcy, the optimal bill is given by s∗ = min{m, wS }, which is simply the cost m truncated at

the level of seizable assets wS .

           The cap on financial risk affects insurance choice. To see this, consider a stylized health in-

surance contract with deductible m̄ and no other features. Under this contract, households are
    46 I
       discuss endogenizing wealth at the end of this section.
    47 Providersoften outsource this function to debt collection companies.
   48 In a previous version of the paper, I allowed medical providers to have only partial information on household

wealth and to face a proportional cost to recovering assets in bankruptcy. This model generated both formal (statutory)
and informal (negotiated) bankruptcy but otherwise similar predictions.
   49 Fay, Hurst and White (2002) find empirical support for this strategic model of bankruptcy in contrast to a non-

strategic model where households file due to unanticipated adverse events.


                                                          24
exposed to medical costs up to deductible m̄ and insured above this level.50 Under bankruptcy,

households are exposed to medical costs up to their level of seizable assets wS and insured above

this amount. Thus conventional and bankruptcy insurance are very similar: The only difference

is that with conventional insurance the deductible is m̄ and with bankruptcy insurance the de-

ductible is wS .

      This simple model captures the main empirical findings. First, out-of-pocket payments are

increasing in seizable assets. This is driven by households with higher changes as the bankruptcy

deductible is more likely to bind. For households with lower changes, out-of-pocket payments are

unaffected as the variation in seizable assets is above this level. Second, holding wealth constant,

insurance coverage is increasing in seizable assets. Conventional and bankruptcy insurance are

substitutes so less generous bankruptcy insurance makes conventional insurance more valuable.

      The coverage prediction is robust to natural extensions of the model. For example, allowing

insured households to receive more or better medical treatment (Doyle, 2005) increases the incen-

tive to purchase coverage, but households with fewer seizable assets are still relatively less likely

to insure. Similarly, increasing the cost of bankruptcy to account for factors such as stigma (Gross

and Souleles, 2002) or reduced access to credit (Musto, 1999) does not affect the basic prediction.

Endogenizing the level of seizable assets actually strengthens the relationship because households

that choose to forgo coverage have an additional incentive to reduce their seizable assets.


6.2       Simulation

I simulate the model by separately calculating the willingness to pay (WTP) and premium for

a conventional health insurance plan for each household in a nationally representative sample.

Households purchase insurance if and only if their WTP is greater than the premium.51 I use the

sample of households in the 2005 PSID and continue to exclude households with public insurance

or a member age 65 or older.

      For a given household, WTP for conventional insurance with deductible m̄ is the value v that
  50 In practice, health insurers negotiate discounts off medical charges. However, as shown in Panel A of Figure 1,
uninsured households seem to receive these discounts as well. To account for discounts in the model, one could replace
m with discounted costs with no impact on the predictions.
  51 Implicit in this formulation is the assumption that households with employer-sponsored insurance pay for this

coverage with a wage offset. Summarizing the empirical literature, Gruber (2000) concludes that the costs of healthcare
are fully shifted to wages on average, justifying this approach.



                                                          25
equates that household’s expected utility with conventional insurance to its expected utility with

the implicit insurance from bankruptcy:

                         h                    i   h                 i
                       Em u w − v − min{m, m̄} = Em u w − min{m, wS } .                                        (5)


I assume that each household is represented by a single member with constant relative risk-

aversion (CARA) utility.52 I show results with risk aversion parameters of α = 2.5 × 10−5 (low

risk aversion), α = 5.0 × 10−5 (moderate risk aversion), and α = 7.5 × 10−4 (high risk aversion).

Multiplying by the median wealth level of $40,318, these parameters can be interpreted as relative

risk coefficients of γ = 1, 2, and 3.

    I construct household-level medical cost distributions by integrating over individual-level

medical cost distributions for cells defined by the full interaction of age group, sex, and insurance

status in the 2005 MEPS. To calculate counterfactual cost distributions that insured households

would face without coverage, I deflate the empirical cost distributions by a moral hazard factor

of 1.25, the change in utilization found in the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Finkelstein

et al., 2011). I inflate costs for the uninsured by the same factor.

    These changes in medical utilization also have a direct effect on household utility. I approxi-

mate the consumption value of changes in utilization by assuming that health insurance decreases

the price of medical care from 1 to 0 on the margin and that households have linear demand be-

tween these points.53 These assumptions imply that the consumption value of changes in utiliza-

tion is simply the triangle under the demand curve or 0.5 of the change in expenditure.54 The WTP

for conventional insurance is calculated with 0.5 of the increase in utilization added to wealth in-

side the utility function.

    Premiums are based on expected costs above the deductible and are also allowed to vary at

the household level according to the household-specific medical cost distributions. To account

for administrative costs, I scale up these costs by the factor λ = 1.1.55,56 For a given deductible,
  52 Using a CARA specification avoids the problems associated with nonpositive wealth. Calibrations with CRRA

utility and a consumption floor generate stronger results.
  53 A log-log demand curve does not seem appropriate since I want to model demand when the marginal price is zero.
  54 Consumer surplus with linear demand is given by ∆CS = 1 ∆p · ∆q. Since ∆p = 1, ∆CS = 1 ∆q.
                                                              2                             2
  55 This value is taken from Pauly and Nichols (2002).
  56 There is an argument that raising insurance coverage will generate positive feedback effects. According to the

argument, the increase in coverage will reduce cross-subsidization from the insured, lowering insurance premiums



                                                        26
premiums are given by:

                                                    h              i
                                          p = λ · Em max{m − m̄, 0} .


In Appendix Section C, I discuss the construction of the medical cost distributions and premi-

ums in more detail. I show that the calibrated premiums closely match quoted premiums in the

individual market.



7    Health Insurance Mandates

I use the microsimulation model to examine the implications of this mechanism for health insur-

ance mandates. From a policy design perspective, bankruptcy insurance has a number of potential

drawbacks: It may force the uninsured to receive care in emergency rooms, which may not be the

most appropriate setting (Delgado et al., 2010); it may result in too little preventative care, inflat-

ing overall costs (Institute of Medicine, 2002); there are transaction costs to negotiation under the

threat point of bankruptcy and externalities to formal bankruptcy when it occurs. For this exer-

cise, however, I focus on a single problem: Because households do not face the full social cost of

being uninsured, too many choose to be uninsured on the margin.57

     Conventional health insurance has well-documented inefficiencies as well. Relative to bankruptcy,

moral hazard is particularly relevant.58 With conventional health insurance, physicians and pa-

tients have incentives to supply and demand excess medical care. With bankruptcy insurance,

physicians are motivated by their professional ethics and the threat of lawsuits, but may have

greater exposure to the social cost of their decisions. And patients have less leverage to demand

excess treatment. Thus, some households may optimally choose to rely on bankruptcy even if

exposed to a Pigovian penalty for the expected social cost of using this mechanism.
and thereby further raising insurance coverage. Empirically, the results from Section 5 suggest that the costs of unpaid
care to a first approximation are equally borne by insured and uninsured households and therefore do not generate
this positive feedback loop. In the preferred pooled IV specifications, the uninsured cross-subsidize between 8 and 23
percent of the cost of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy with higher out-of-pocket payments when they have lower
charges. Since the uninsured are about 15 percent of the population, it seems reasonable to assume that a reduction in
unpaid care will be equally incident on insured and uninsured households and therefore not generate the hypothesized
general equilibrium response.
  57 I assume that insurance is not already subsidized through the tax code or some other channel.
  58 Empirically, adverse selection does not seem to affect insurance choice on the extensive margin (Cutler and Zeck-

hauser, 2000; Cardon and Hendel, 2001).



                                                          27
       Table 8 shows the welfare effects of the optimal Pigovian and ACA penalties. For each penalty

system, I allow households to choose between conventional insurance at the simulated premiums

and bankruptcy insurance at the cost of the penalty. I show results when the model is calibrated

to low, moderate, and high levels of risk aversion which generate baseline coverage rates of 65,

81, and 90 percent. Actual insurance coverage is 77 percent in the sample. The results are shown

relative to a baseline in which households can choose bankruptcy at no cost.

       Panel A shows coverage and welfare under the optimal Pigovian penalties, defined as ex-

pected costs for each household in excess of their level of seizable assets. The optimal penalties

average $343 per person but vary broadly with seizable assets. Across risk-aversion levels, the

penalties induce more than 90 percent of the uninsured to take up coverage. As indicated by the

higher willingness to pay and higher costs, these households purchase more generous coverage

than they had from bankruptcy. The net effect is an increase in surplus of $66 to $131 per person.59

       Panel B shows the welfare effects of the ACA penalties. When fully implemented in 2016,

these penalties will equal the greater of $625 or 2.5 percent of income per household, up to a

maximum of $2,085. Under these penalties, deflated to 2005 levels assuming trend inflation, take-

up ranges from 34 to 51 percent. Willingness to pay and costs rise by less than under the optimal

penalties. The net effect is a increase in surplus of $27 to $69 per person or 39 to 52 percent of the

optimum.

       This shortfall is almost completely due the correlation between the ACA and optimal penal-

ties. Equating the mean level of the ACA and optimal penalties has virtually no effect on net

surplus. Because the ACA penalties are increasing in income while the optimal penalties are de-

creasing in seizable assets, the ACA and optimal penalties are negatively correlated (ρ = −0.34).

When it comes to mandates, progressivity and Pigovian efficiency directly conflict.



8      Discussion

The main focus of this paper is to examine how the implicit insurance from bankruptcy affects

out-of-pocket payments and the level of insurance coverage. Given the large number of uninsured

and the vigorous debate over policies to increase coverage, this seems like the primary question
    59 The
        effects are nonmonotonic with risk aversion because this parameter affects both the baseline coverage rate and
the responsiveness of households to the penalty.


                                                         28
of interest. However, the implicit insurance from bankruptcy has a number of more nuanced

implications. I briefly discuss some of them below.

High-Deductible Health Plans

     High-deductible health plans (HDHP) were intended by their proponents to expand insur-

ance coverage.60 The idea was that by offering low premiums, these plans would be expand cov-

erage among the young and healthy who are more likely to be uninsured. Yet despite a concerted

effort by policymakers and insurance companies, they have not been successful in this regard

(Fronstin and Collins, 2008). The implicit insurance from bankruptcy is an appealing explanation

for this failure. Because more than half the uninsured have less than $5,000 in seizable assets,

HDHPs are the type of health plan that is most crowded out by this mechanism.

“Mini-Med” Plans

     A related issue is the popularity of “mini-med” plans. These are plans with annual caps on

coverage of a few thousand dollars and low monthly fees. For example, McDonald’s “McCrew

Care” in Montana provides its employees up to $2,000 in annual benefits for $56 per month.61

Many have questioned whether these plans are actually “insurance” since they provide essentially

no coverage for large health shocks. Yet if mini-med plan enrollees have few seizable assets,

this is exactly the insurance theory implies they should demand as it fills in the gap below the

“deductible” of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy.

The Insurance Generosity Gap

     In his review of the literature, Gruber (2008) asks why most U.S. households appear to be

underinsured or overinsured but are rarely in between. Implicit insurance from bankruptcy can

explain this finding. Without bankruptcy, households face a standard continuous tradeoff be-

tween insurance generosity and other goods. Implicit insurance generates a notch: Households

receive some implicit insurance without giving up other goods. Convex preferences give rise to

an insurance generosity gap, with households sorting into more-generous conventional health in-

surance and less-generous implicit insurance from bankruptcy. Bankruptcy insurance can explain
  60 In2005, qualifying HDHP were required to have deductibles of between $2,000 to $5,250 for a family and between
$1,000 and $2,650 for an individual.
  61 See http://www.mcmontana.com/11844/1370/McCrew-Care---Health-Insurance/ for details.




                                                        29
why there are many households with first-dollar or no coverage, and few households with $10,000

deductible plans.

Rising Risk, Falling Coverage

    Chernew, Cutler and Keenan (2005) show that more than half the decrease in insurance cov-

erage during the 1990s can be explained by rising premiums. Yet as the authors explain, from

the standpoint of economic theory, this is counterintuitive. With standard risk preferences, ris-

ing costs should lead to increased coverage. Taking bankruptcy into account, however, reverses

this intuition. The decrease in coverage can be explained by households substituting away from

conventional health insurance and choosing bankruptcy insurance that is increasing in actuarial

value without increasing in price.



9   Conclusion

Understanding why households are uninsured is fundamental to positive and normative analy-

sis of health insurance policy—yet the insurance-coverage decision is not well understood. The

objective of this paper is to examine how the implicit insurance from bankruptcy bears on this

decision.

    In the first part of the paper, I argue that the fact that most medical care is provided on credit

coupled with the fact that this debt can be discharged for seizable assets in bankruptcy provides

households with implicit high-deducible health insurance.

    I next evaluated the quantitative importance of this mechanism. Exploiting cross-state and

within-state variation in asset exemption law, I show that uninsured households with greater

seizable assets make higher out-of-pocket medical payments, conditional on the amount of care

received. In turn, I find that households with greater wealth-at-risk are more likely to hold health

insurance coverage. Health insurance is wealth insurance, to a certain degree, and is less valuable

to those with fewer assets.

    The final part of the paper examined ways in which the implicit insurance from bankruptcy

might inform the design of health insurance policy. Because households do not pay for bankruptcy

insurance, too many households choose to be uninsured on the margin. Using a utility-based,



                                                 30
microsimulation model of insurance choice, I estimate that the optimal Pigovian penalties are

similar on average to the penalties under the ACA.




                                              31
References
Anderson, Martin. 2012. “Selection and Public Insurance: Evidence from Medicaid and Medi-
 care.” Mimeo.

Anderson, M.L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Interven-
 tion: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Journal
 of the American Statistical Association.

Bernard, D.M., J.S. Banthin, and W.E. Encinosa. 2009. “Wealth, Income, and the Affordability of
  Health Insurance.” Health Affairs, 28(3): 887.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance:
  Medicaid and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review.

Cardon, J.H., and I. Hendel. 2001. “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence from
  the National Medical Expenditure Survey.” RAND Journal of Economics.

Chernew, Michael, David M. Cutler, and Patricia Seliger Keenan. 2005. “Increasing Health In-
 surance Costs and the Decline in Insurance Coverage.” Health Services Research.

Congressional Budget Office. 2005. “The Price Sensitivity of Demand for Nongroup Health In-
 surance.”

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
 Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” The Journal of Political Economy.

Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2000. “The Anatomy of Health Insurance.” Hand-
 book of Health Economics.

Dawsey, Amanda E., and M. Ausubel, Lawrence. 2004. “Informal Bankruptcy.” Mimeo.

Delgado, M. Kit, Colleen D. Acosta, Adit A. Ginde, N. Ewen Wang, Matthew C. Strehlow,
 Yash S. Khandwala, and Carlos A. Camargo. 2010. “National Survey of Preventive Health Ser-
 vices in U.S. Emergency Departments.” Annals of Emergency Medicine.

Doyle, Joseph J. 2005. “Health Insurance, Treatment and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as
 Health Shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Dranove, David, and Michael L. Millenson. 2006. “Medical Bankruptcy: Myth Versus Fact.”
 Health Affairs.

Duggan, Mark G. 2000. “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending.” The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics.

Elias, Stephen. 2007. The New Bankruptcy: Will It Work For You? NOLO.

Fan, W., and M.J. White. 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial Activity.”
  The Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 543–567.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White. 2002. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision.” The
  American Economic Review.



                                               32
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J.P. Newhouse, H. Allen, and K.
  Baicker. 2011. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” NBER
  Working Paper.

Fronstin, Paul, and Sara R. Collins. 2008. “Findings from the 2007 EBRI/Commonwealth Fund
  Consumerism in Health Survey.” EBRI Issue Brief.

Goodman, Paul. 1993. “The Emergence of Homestead Exemption in the United States: Accom-
 modation and Resistance to the Market Revolution, 1840-1880.” The Journal of American History.

Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J. White. 1997. “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit
 Supply and Demand.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “An Empirical Analysis of Personal Bankruptcy
 and Delinquency.” Review of Financial Studies.

Gross, Tal, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2009. “Medicaid and Consumer Bankruptcies.” Mimeo.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Health Insurance and the Labor Market.” Handbook of Health Economics.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2005. “Tax Policy for Health Insurance.” Tax Policy and the Economy.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2008. “Covering the Uninsured in the United States.” Journal of Economic Liter-
 ature.

Gruber, Jonathan, and David Rodriguez. 2007. “How Much Uncompensated Care Do Doctors
 Provide?” Journal of Health Economics.

Gruber, Jonathan, and James Poterba. 1994. “Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase Health
 Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd-Out 10 Years Later: Have Recent Public In-
 surance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics.

Himmelstein, David U., Deborah Thorne, Elizabeth Warren, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2009.
 “Medical Bankruptcy in the United States, 2007: Results of a National Study.” The American
 Journal of Medicine.

Himmelstein, David U., Elizabeth Warren, Deborah Thorne, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2005.
 “Illness and Injury as Contributors to Bankruptcy.” Health Affairs.

Institute of Medicine. 2002. Care Without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late.

IRS. 2007. “Hospital Compliance Project: Interim Report.” Internal Revenue Service Report.

Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2012. “Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
 Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform.” Mimeo.

Kowalski, Amanda E., William J. Congdon, and Mark H. Showalter. 2008. “State Health Insur-
 ance Regulations and the Price of High-Deductible Policies.” The Berkeley Electronic Press.

LeCuyer, Nick A., and Shubham Singhal. 2007. “Overhauling the U.S. Health Care Payment
  System.” The McKinsey Quarterly.



                                                 33
Liu, Su, and Deborah Chollet. 2006. “Price and Income Elasticity of the Demand for Health In-
  surance and Health Care Services: A Critical Review of the Literature.” Mathematica Policy
  Research, Inc.

Marquis, M.S., and S.H. Long. 1995. “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the Non-Group
 Market.” Journal of Health Economics.

Miller, Michelle M. 2011. “Help Me! Help Me! Evidence that Social Networks Decrease the
 Probability of Bankruptcy.” Mimeo.

Musto, David K. 1999. “The Reaquistion of Credit Following Chapter 7 Personal Bankruptcy.”
 Mimeo.

Pauly, Mark V., and Len M. Nichols. 2002. “The Nongroup Health Insurance Market: Short on
  Facts, Long on Opinions and Policy Disputes.” Health Affairs.

Skeel, David A. 2001. Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America. Princeton Univer-
  sity Press.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits.” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 79(2): 177–183.

White, Michelle. 2007. “Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards.” Journal of Economic Perspectives.




                                              34
                                                                                          Figure 1: Plots of the Effect on Costs

                                          $30,000                                                                                                        $8,000
                                                                           Privately Insured                                                                                       Seizable Assets < $50K
                                                                           Uninsured


               Private and OOP Payments
                                                                                                                                                                                   Seizable Assets ≥ $50K
                                                                                                                                                         $6,000
                                          $20,000




                                                                                                                                     OOP Payments
                                                                                                                                                         $4,000

                                          $10,000
                                                                                                                                                         $2,000



                                                                 $-                                                                                                      $-
                                                                      $-            $25,000              $50,000          $75,000                                             $-      $10,000           $20,000          $30,000   $40,000
                                                                                               Charges                                                                                                  Charges

                                                      (a) Payments by Insurance Status                                               (b) Payments by Uninsured by Seizable As-
                                                                                                                                     sets
                                                             9




                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                             8
                                          Log OOP Payments




                                                                                                                                              Log OOP Payments
                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                             6
                                                             5




                                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                      7             8                9               10        11                                    7               8                   9                 10         11
                                                                                        Log Seizable Assets                                                                                   Log Seizable Assets



                       (c) Higher Charges: Log OOP vs. Seiz- (d) Lower Charges: Log OOP vs. Seizable
                       able Assets                           Assets
                                                        9




                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                           8
                                          Log OOP Payments




                                                                                                                                              Log OOP Payments
                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                 7




                                                                                                                                              5
                                                        6
                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                 7              8                  9                 10        11                                    7                8                  9                 10        11
                                                                                    Cross-State Simulated Instrument                                                                      Cross-State Simulated Instrument



                       (e) Higher Charges: Log OOP vs. Cross- (f) Lower Charges: Log OOP vs. Cross-
                       State IV                               State IV

Notes: Panel A shows payments against charges for privately insured and uninsured households.
Payments are the sum of out-of-pocket payments and payments from private insurers. Panel B shows
out-of-pocket payments against charges for uninsured households with higher (≥ $50,000) and lower (<
$50,000) seizable assets. Both plots are created by averaging payments and charges at twentieths of the
charge distribution. Panels C and D plot insurance coverage against log seizable assets averaged by state
for households with higher (≥ $5,000) and lower (< $5,000 ) charges. Panels E and F plot insurance
coverage against the cross-state simulated instrument averaged by state for households with higher (≥
$5,000) and lower (< $5,000) charges. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets for
a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in each state.
Household-level estimates weighted by number of individuals per household for interpretation at the
individual level. The circles in panels C to F are proportional to the number of observations in each state.
Pooled 1996-2005 MEPS, excluding households with public insurance or a member age 65 or older,
inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

                                                                                                                                    35
                                                                Figure 2: Plots of the Effect on Coverage
                      95




                                                                                                                95
        Insurance Coverage (Percent)




                                                                                                  Insurance Coverage (Percent)
                                85




                                                                                                                          85
                    75




                                                                                                              75
         65




                                                                                                   65
                      55




                                                                                                                55
                                       8.5           9.5                      10.5    11.5                                       8.5            9.5                     10.5     11.5
                                                           Log Seizable Assets                                                                        Log Seizable Assets



                                        (a) SIPP: Coverage vs. Seizable Assets                                                    (b) PSID: Coverage vs. Seizable Assets
                      95




                                                                                                                95
        Insurance Coverage (Percent)




                                                                                                  Insurance Coverage (Percent)
                                85




                                                                                                                          85
                    75




                                                                                                              75
         65




                                                                                                   65
                      55




                                                                                                                55




                                       8.5           9.5                      10.5    11.5                                       8.5            9.5                      10.5     11.5
                                                   Cross-State Simulated Instrument                                                           Cross-State Simulated Instrument



                                         (c) SIPP: Coverage vs. Cross-State IV                                                     (d) PSID: Coverage vs. Cross-State IV

Notes: Panel A plots insurance coverage against log seizable assets averaged by state using data from the
SIPP. Panel B shows the exact same plot using data from the PSID. Panel C plots the reduced form:
insurance coverage against the cross-state simulated instrument averaged by state using data from the
SIPP. Panel D shows the same plot using data from the PSID. The circles in each plot are proportional to
the number of observations in each state. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets
for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in each state. Pooled
1996-2005 SIPP and 1999-2005 PSID, excluding households with public insurance or a member age 65 or
older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.




                                                                                             36
                           Figure 3: Survey Responses on Perceptions of Financial Risk



          >$8K                                                              Seize assets




         $4-8K                                                                       Bother




          <$4K                                                                      Nothing

                 10.45          10.5     10.55         10.6                                     10.3           10.4   10.5   10.6

                          Cross-State Simulated Instrument                                      Cross-State Simulated Instrument

      (a) What Would Uninsured Owe for $12K Medical Bill?                    (b) What Would Happen If Uninsured Ignore Bills?

What happens if bills disregarded?


                                           Property and
                                        financial assets



                                       Financial assets




                                             Nothing


                                                               10.52        10.56        10.6          10.64


                                                              Cross-State Simulated Instrument

                                                 (c) What is Seizable in Bankruptcy Filing?

 Notes: Plots show survey responses on the perceptions of financial risk from being uninsured (y-axis)
 against the cross-state simulated instrument (x-axis). Larger y-axis values are indicative of ordinally
 greater financial risk. Panel A shows responses to the question: Average medical costs for a broken leg are
 $12,000. Suppose you are uninsured, break your leg, and receive medical treatment at the nearest hospital. If you
 negotiate with the hospital, how much do you think you would end up owing? Panel B shows responses to the
 question: Suppose you ignore the medical bills. Which of these outcomes do you think is most likely? Answers to
 this question are ranked in severity from (a) you probably won’t hear from the hospital or debt collector at all to
 (b) the debt collector will bother you for a while but then eventually give up to (c) the hospital will send a debt
 collector to come after your paycheck and/or property (e.g., car, home). Panel C shows responses to the question:
 Suppose you declare bankruptcy to get rid of the medical bills. Which one of these outcomes do you think is most
 likely? Responses are ordered in severity from (a) you will have to fill out a bunch of paperwork and pay a filing
 fee but you can keep your money and your property to (b) you will have to give up any money in your checking or
 savings account but can keep your property to (c) you will have to give up any money in your checking or savings
 account and your property (e.g., car, home). The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets
 for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in each state. The
 points are constructed by averaging the data by the categorical y-axis variables. The survey was
 conducted in September, 2011 on a web-based commercial panel of single, childless adults age 27 to 49,
 screening out occupations with less than 10 percent uninsured in the March Supplement to the 2010
 Current Population Survey. N = 800.

                                                                       37
                                   Table 1: Asset Exemption Laws by State

                                                        Contemporaneous?exemptions                                   Homestead
                                                                    Other                                            exemptions
                                                                  financial              Wildcard no-    Federal    for town lots
       State                  Homestead   Vehicle   Retirement      assets    Wildcard   homestead      available      in 1920
       Alabama                 10,000        0      Unlimited        0        6,000        6,000           No          2,000
       Alaska                  67,500     7,500     Unlimited     3,500          0            0            No           n/a
       Arizona                 150,000    10,000    Unlimited      300           0            0            No          4,000
       Arkansas               Unlimited   2,400      40,000          0         500          500           Yes          2,500
       California--system 1    75,000     4,600     Unlimited     1,825          0            0            No          5,000
       California--system 2       0       2,975     Unlimited        0        19,675       19,675          No           n/a
       Colorado                90,000     6,000     Unlimited        0           0            0            No          2,000
       Connecticut             150,000    3,000     Unlimited        0        2,000        2,000          Yes          1,000
       Delaware                   0          0      Unlimited        0         500          500            No            0
       District of Columbia   Unlimited   5,150     Unlimited        0        17,850       17,850         Yes           n/a
       Florida                Unlimited   2,000     Unlimited        0        2,000        2,000           No           n/a
       Georgia                 10,000     7,000     Unlimited        0        11,200       11,200          No          1,600
       Hawaii                  40,000     5,150     Unlimited        0           0            0           Yes           n/a
       Idaho                   50,000     6,000     Unlimited        0        1,600        1,600           No          5,000
       Illinois                15,000     2,400     Unlimited        0        4,000        4,000           No          1,000
       Indiana                    0          0      Unlimited        0        20,000       20,000          No           600
       Iowa                   Unlimited   1,000     Unlimited        0         200          200            No           n/a
       Kansas                 Unlimited   40,000    Unlimited        0           0            0            No           n/a
       Kentucky                10,000     5,000     Unlimited        0        2,000        2,000           No          1,000
       Louisiana               25,000        0      Unlimited        0           0            0            No          2,000
       Maine                   70,000     10,000    Unlimited        0        12,800       12,800          No           500
       Maryland                   0          0      Unlimited        0        22,000       22,000          No            0
       Massachusetts          1,000,000   1,400     Unlimited     1,250          0            0           Yes           800
       Michigan                 7,000        0      Unlimited        0           0            0            No          1,500
       Minnesota               200,000    7,600     Unlimited        0           0            0           Yes           n/a
       Mississippi             150,000       0      Unlimited        0        10,000       10,000          No          3,000
       Missouri                15,000     6,000     Unlimited        0        1,250        1,250           No          1,500
       Montana                 200,000    5,000     Unlimited        0           0            0            No           n/a
       Nebraska                12,500        0      Unlimited        0           0         5,000           No          2,000
       Nevada                  400,000    30,000    1,000,000        0           0            0            No          5,000
       New Hampshire           200,000    8,000     Unlimited        0        8,000        8,000          Yes           500
       New Jersey                 0          0      Unlimited        0        2,000        2,000          Yes          1,000
       New Mexico              60,000     8,000     Unlimited        0        1,000        4,000          Yes          1,000
       New York                20,000        0      Unlimited        0        10,000       10,000          No          1,000
       North Carolina          13,000     3,000     Unlimited        0        8,000        8,000           No          1,000
       North Dakota            80,000     2,400      200,000         0           0         15,000          No           n/a
       Ohio                    10,000     2,000     Unlimited      800         800          800            No          1,000
       Oklahoma               Unlimited   6,000     Unlimited        0           0            0            No           n/a
       Oregon                  33,000     3,400      15,000       15,000       800          800            No           n/a
       Pennsylvania               0          0      Unlimited        0         600          600           Yes           300
       Rhode Island            200,000    20,000    Unlimited        0           0            0           Yes            0
       South Carolina          10,000     2,400     Unlimited        0           0         2,000           No          1,000
       South Dakota           Unlimited      0       500,000         0        4,000        4,000           No           n/a
       Tennessee                7,500        0      Unlimited        0        8,000        8,000           No          1,000
       Texas                  Unlimited      0      Unlimited        0        60,000       60,000         Yes          5,000
       Utah                    40,000     5,000     Unlimited        0           0            0            No          2,000
       Vermont                 150,000    5,000     Unlimited     1,400       8,400        8,400          Yes          2,000
       Virginia                   0       4,000      35,000          0        32,000       32,000          No           500
       Washington              40,000     5,000     Unlimited        0        4,000        4,000          Yes          1,000
       West Virginia              0       4,800     Unlimited        0        51,600       51,600          No          1,000
       Wisconsin               40,000        0      Unlimited     2,000       10,000       10,000         Yes           n/a
       Wyoming                 20,000     4,800     Unlimited        0           0            0            No          2,500
       Federal                 18,500     5,900     Unlimited        0        20,450       20,450         n/a           n/a
       Averages*               58,821     4,884      298,333       501        6,592        7,073          27%          1,679



Notes: Contemporaneous exemptions for couples filing jointly from Elias (2007) and historical exemptions
for couples filing jointly from Goodman (1993). Under contemporaneous law, California residents can
choose between system 1 and 2 and residents can choose federal exemptions in states where federal
exemptions are available. Wildcard no-homestead exemption is available to households which do not take
the homestead exemption. For the historical exemptions, states that did not exist and states that had
acre-based exemptions are denoted as n/a. States that did not have homestead exemptions are assigned a
value of zero.
*Excludes states with unlimited or n/a exemptions.


                                                                 38
   Table 2: Summary Statistics: Seizable Assets, Medical Costs, and Insurance Coverage

                                                                                         Percentile
                                                      Mean        Std.)Dev.)   25th        50th         75th
                                           Panel)A:)Seizable)Assets
All (n = 1,907,703)
  Seizable)assets                                   $227,429     $2,677,038    $2,489     $39,007     $219,759
    Gross)seizable)assets                           $234,147     $2,677,529    $4,071     $44,579     $225,073
      Seizable)home)equity)(70.1%)homeownership)     $49,081      $96,498        $0         $0         $59,708
      Other)seizable)assets                          $2,249         $162       $2,123     $2,206       $2,396
    Dischargeable)debt                               $8,967       $22,323        $0       $2,000       $8,747
Privately Insured (n = 1,645,557)
  Seizable)assets                                   $244,424     $2,700,800    $3,476     $52,935     $246,024
    Gross)seizable)assets                           $251,524     $2,701,329    $6,295     $58,650     $251,313
      Seizable)home)equity)(75.2%)homeownership)     $53,158      $99,610        $0         $0         $67,202
      Other)seizable)assets                          $2,248         $162       $2,123     $2,206       $2,396
    Dischargeable)debt                               $9,347       $22,903        $0       $2,171       $9,336
Uninsured (n = 262,146)
  Seizable)assets                                     $102,419 $2,491,763      $2,000      $3,594     $32,134
     Gross)seizable)assets                            $106,329 $2,491,788        $0        $3,739     $35,168
       Seizable)home)equity)(44.1%)homeownership)      $19,090     $61,662       $0          $0         $0
       Other)seizable)assets                           $2,256       $161       $2,123      $2,206     $2,396
     Dischargeable)debt                                $6,166      $17,219       $0         $359      $5,307
                                            Panel)B:)Medical)Costs
All)(n=61,405)
  Charges                                              $7,113     $17,781      $691       $2,339       $7,103
  Total)payments                                       $4,539      $9,761      $530       $1,778       $4,986
     OutQofQpocket)payments                             $839       $1,687      $127        $405         $976
Privately)Insured)(n=52,933)
  Charges                                              $7,501     $18,117      $839       $2,598       $7,611
  Total)payments                                       $4,819     $10,037      $655       $1,996       $5,358
     OutQofQpocket)payments                             $849       $1,662      $143        $427         $995
Uninsured)(n=8,472)
  Charges                                              $2,876      $12,843      $13        $419        $1,752
  Total)payments                                       $1,475      $5,046        $0        $257        $1,125
     OutQofQpocket)payments                             $739       $1,935        $0        $181         $696
                                          Panel)C:)Insurance)Coverage
Privately)insured                                       76.1%
  EmployerQsponsored)or)union)provided                  71.3%
  Individually)purchased                                 4.8%
Uninsured                                               23.9%


 Notes: Household-level statistics. Seizable assets and insurance coverage are calculated using the
 1996-2005 SIPP. See text for details. Medical costs are annual statistics from the 1996-2005 MEPS. Charges
 are the list price of medical care received, total payments are the sum of payments made for this care, and
 out-of-pocket payments are the payments made by households. Both samples exclude households with
 public insurance or a member age 65 or older. Values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 dollars using the
 CPI-U.




                                                     39
   Table 3: Summary Statistics: Survey on Perceptions of Financial Risk from Forgoing
   Health Insurance

                                      N       Percent                                               N         Percent
Age*group                                                    Income*group
  26229                               175      21.9%           <$10,000                            195         24.4%
  30234                               252      31.5%           $10,000225,000                      232         29.0%
  35239                               164      20.5%           $25,000250,000                      252         31.5%
  40245                               103      12.9%           $50,0002100,000                      99         12.4%
  45249                               106      13.3%           >$100,000                            22          2.8%
Gender                                                       Wealth*group
  Female                              521      65.1%           <$0                                 286         35.8%
  Male                                279      34.9%           $0210,000                           211         26.4%
Race                                                           $10,000250,000                      134         16.8%
  American*Indian,*Eskimo,*or*Aleut    5        0.6%           >$50,000                            169         21.1%
  Asian*or*Pacific*Islander            23       2.9%         Health*insurance*status
  Black                               107      13.4%           Yes                                 453         56.6%
  White                               640      80.0%           No                                  347         43.4%
  Other                                25       3.1%         Health*insurance*type
Education                                                      CHAMPUS,*TRICARE,*VA,
  College                             510      63.8%             *or*other*military                 4           0.5%
  High*school                         166      20.8%           Employer                            233         29.1%
  Post2graduate                       124      15.5%           Individually*purchased               90         11.3%
Occupation                                                     Other,*please*specify                21          2.6%
  Administrative                       76       9.5%           Public                              127         15.9%
  Agricultural                         6        0.8%           n/a                                 325         40.6%
  Clerical                             34       4.3%         Do*you*know*someone*who*has*declared*bankruptcy?
  Construction                         21       2.6%           Yes                                      420    52.5%
  Education*related                    57       7.1%           No                                       380    47.5%
  Electrician                          2        0.3%         What*would*uninsured*owe*for*$12K*medical*bill?*
  Health*care/Medical*related          77       9.6%           <$4K                                297         37.1%
  Homebased*business                   13       1.6%           $4K2$8K                             222         27.8%
  Hospitality                          12       1.5%           >$8K                                281         35.1%
  Human*resources                      7        0.9%         What*would*happened*if*uninsured*ignore*bills?*
  Real*estate                          5        0.6%           Nothing                              36          4.5%
  Restaurant                           34       4.3%           Bother                              218         27.3%
  Retail                               46       5.8%           Seize*assets                        546         68.3%
  Sale*manager                         11       1.4%         What*is*seized*in*bankruptcy*filing?*
  Sales/Marketing                      46       5.8%           Nothing                             390         48.8%
  Self2employed                       100      12.5%           Financial*assets                    215         26.9%
  Unemployed/Not*in*labor*force       253      31.6%           Property*and*financial*             195         24.4%


   Notes: Respondents are single, childless adults age 27 to 49, screening out occupations with less than 10
   percent uninsured. Survey was conducted online on a commercial survey panel in September 2011. N =
   800.
   *Paraphrased survey questions and responses. See text and Online Appendix Section D for full questions
   and answers.




                                                        40
Table 4: First Stage: Regressions of Log Seizable Assets on Simulated Instruments and
Controls

                                                           Dep&Var:&Log&Seizable&Assets
                                          Pooled&IV              Within.State&IV          Cross.State&IV
                                             (1)                       (2)                     (3)
  Pooled&Simulated&Instrument             1.109***                  1.076***
                                           (0.064)                   (0.079)
  Cross.State&Simulated&Instrument                                                          1.121***
                                                                                             (0.060)
  Controls
    Demographic&Controls                      X                         X                       X
    State&FE                                                            X
  R.squared                                 0.332                     0.293                  0.341
  N                                       1,907,703                 1,907,703              1,907,703
  F.statistic&on&Instrument                300.264                   185.511                349.067


Notes: Table shows the coefficient on the instrument from OLS regressions of log seizable assets on the
instrument and controls. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets for a constant,
nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in each state. The pooled simulated
instrument is similarly constructed by plausibly exogenous demographic group, where groups are defined
by the full interaction of age group, race, education group, and family structure. Demographic controls are
demographic-group dummies and a fourth-order polynomial in annual income. Pooled 1996-2005 SIPP,
excluding households with public insurance or a member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using
the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the level of the instrument in parentheses. *p<0.10, **p<
0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                      41
                        Table 5: Effect on Costs: Regressions of Out-of-Pocket Costs on Seizable Assets and Controls

                                                           OLS                       Pooled2IV                WithinGState2IV          CrossGState2IV
                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)       (7)            (8)
                                                            Panel2A:2Dep2Var:2Log2OutGofGPocket2Payments
         Charges2≥2$5,000
           Log2Seizable2Assets                  0.211***      0.211***         0.339**       0.335*      0.400***       0.405**     0.316         0.319
                                                 (0.065)       (0.064)         (0.166)       (0.180)      (0.153)       (0.165)    (0.217)       (0.238)
           Mean2OutGofGPocket2Payments           $1,268        $1,268          $1,268       $1,268        $1,268        $1,268     $1,268        $1,268
                                                            Panel2B:2Dep2Var:2Log2OutGofGPocket2Payments
         02<2Charges2<2$5,000
           Log2Seizable2Assets                  0.150***      0.087***          G0.047       G0.14          0.041        G0.125    G0.0961       G0.168
                                                 (0.037)       (0.027)         (0.143)      (0.116)        (0.218)       (0.183)   (0.147)       (0.128)
           Mean2OutGofGPocket2Payments            $149          $149            $149         $149           $149          $149      $149          $149
                                                             Panel2C:2Dep.2Var:2Nonzero2Charge2Indicator
         All2charges
           Log2Seizable2Assets                    0.002                       G0.003                       G0.006                  G0.002
                                                 (0.002)                      (0.006)                      (0.011)                 (0.008)
           Probability2of2Nonzero2Charge          0.761                        0.761                        0.761                   0.761
                                                                 Instruments2and2Controls:2All2Panels




42
         Instrument
           Pooled2Simualted2Instrument                                           X             X             X             X
           CrossGState2Simulated2Instrument                                                                                          X              X
         Controls
           Charges2                                               X                            X                           X                        X
           Demographic2Controls                                                  X             X             X             X         X              X
           State2FE                                                                                          X             X


     Notes: Panel A shows estimates from regressions of log out-of-pocket payments on log seizable assets in the sample of households with at least
     $5,000 in annual charges. Panel B shows estimates of the same regression in the sample of households with charges between $0 and $5,000
     non-inclusive. Panel C shows estimates from regressions of an indicator for nonzero charges on log seizable assets in the sample of uninsured
     households. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as
     though they lived in each state. The within-state simulated instrument is similarly constructed by plausibly exogenous demographic group, where
     groups are defined by the full interaction of age group, race, education group, and family structure. Demographic controls are demographic-group
     dummies and a fourth-order polynomial in annual income. Charge polynomial is fourth order as well. All specifications include an indicator for
     the bottom-coding of seizable assets. Samples sizes are 431, 2002, and 3201 across the three panels. Pooled 1996-2005 MEPS, excluding households
     with insurance or a member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses.
     *p<0.10, **p< 0.05, ***p<0.01
                 Table 6: Effect on Coverage: Probit Regressions of Insurance Coverage on Seizable Assets and Controls

                                                                                    Dep&Var:&Insurance&Coverage
                                                                    Non.IV                     Pooled&IV   Within.State&IV     Cross.State&IV
                                                              (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)
                                                                        Panel&A:&SIPP&
                 Log&Seizable&Assets                       0.018***        0.018***            0.025***        0.017**            0.027**
                                                            (0.002)         (0.002)             (0.006)        (0.009)            (0.013)
                                                                        Panel&B:&PSID
                 Log&Seizable&Assets                       0.024***        0.023***            0.036***         0.0230            0.046**
                                                            (0.002)         (0.002)             (0.015)        (0.034)            (0.022)
                                                              Instrument&and&Controls:&All&Panels
                 Controls
                   Demographic&Controls                        X                X                  X                X                X
                   State&Controls                              X                X                  X                X                X




43
                   State&FE                                                     X                                   X
                 Instrument
                   Pooled&Simulated&Instrument                                                     X                X
                   Cross.State&Simulated&Instrument                                                                                  X


     Notes: Table shows marginal effects calculated at the mean of a log point increase in seizable assets on insurance coverage from non-IV and IV
     probit regressions. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of households
     as though they lived in each state. The within-state simulated instrument is similarly constructed by plausibly exogenous demographic group,
     where groups are defined by the full interaction of age group, race, education group, and family structure. Demographic controls are
     demographic-group dummies and a fourth-order polynomial in annual income. State controls are for individual market insurance regulations (see
     text for details), hospital ownership structure, DSH payments and FQHC per capita, and the presence of a charity care pool or fund. All
     specifications include an indicator for the bottom-coding of seizable assets. Pooled 1996-2005 SIPP and 1999-2005 PSID, excluding households with
     public insurance or a member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U. Sample size is 1,907,703; and mean insurance coverage is
     77.0 percent in SIPP. Sample size is 20,265; and mean insurance coverage is 77.3 percent in the PSID. Block bootstrap standard errors clustered at the
     level of the instrument in parentheses. *p<0.10, **p< 0.05, ***p<0.01
                     Table 7: Perceptions of Financial Risk: Regressions of Survey Responses on Simulated Instrument

                                              What4Would4Uninsured4Owe4   What4Would4Happened4if4    What4is4Seized4in4Bankruptcy4
                                                for4$12K4Medical4Bill?     Uninsured4Ignore4Bills?              Filing?            Standardized4Summary4Index
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)            (7)          (8)
         Cross/State4Simulated4Instrument        0.037         0.041       0.056**       0.054**        0.038            0.036        0.090**      0.089**
                                                (0.034)       (0.031)      (0.026)       (0.023)       (0.025)          (0.027)       (0.043)      (0.040)

         Demographic4and4Financial4Controls                     X                           X                           X                            X

         R/squared                               0.002        0.069         0.006         0.073         0.003         0.076          0.008         0.104




44
         N                                        800          800           800           800           800           800            800           800


     Notes: Table shows the coefficient on the cross-state simulated instrument from OLS regressions of measures of increased financial risk on the
     cross-state simulated instrument. The dependent variables in columns 1 to 6 are indicators for increased perceptions of financial risk (e.g., higher
     amounts owed for $12K medical bill). See Figure 3 or Section 3 for the full questions and responses. The dependent variable in columns 7 and 8 is a
     standardized summary index, constructed by taking the weighted-mean of the outcomes where the weights are given by the inverse of covariance
     matrix (Anderson, 2008). The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of
     households as though they lived in each state. The survey was conducted in September 2011 on a commercial sample of single, childless adults age
     27 to 49, screening out occupations with less than 10 percent uninsured in the March Supplement to the 2010 Current Population Survey. N = 800.
     Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. *p<0.10, **p< 0.05 ***p<0.01
 Table 8: Microsimulation Estimates of the Welfare Effects of Health Insurance Mandates

                              Penalty          Take-up          Δ(WTP(           Δ(Cost         Δ(Surplus
                                      Panel(A:(Pigovian(Penalty
Low(Risk(Aversion             $343.44         96.8%          $318.59            $231.71          $86.88
Moderate(Risk(Aversion        $343.44         96.2%          $236.06            $105.27          $130.79
High(Risk(Aversion            $343.44         92.7%          $117.19            $51.53           $65.67
                                       Panel(B:(PPACA(Penalty
Low(Risk(Aversion             $444.97         33.9%          $131.54             $97.75          $33.79
Moderate(Risk(Aversion        $444.97         50.6%          $121.42             $52.88          $68.53
High(Risk(Aversion            $444.97         36.8%           $47.12             $20.35          $26.77


Notes: Microsimulation estimates of insurance take-up, willingness to pay (WTP), costs, and social surplus
from Pigovian and PPACA penalties relative to a baseline in which households can choose bankruptcy at
no cost. Pigovian penalty is the household-specific social cost of the implicit insurance from bankruptcy.
PPACA penalty is the inflation-adjusted, fully phased-in penalty under this legislation, defined as the
greater of $625 or 2.5 percent of income, up to a maximum of $2,085 per household. Take-up is the percent
of uninsured individuals that take up coverage. WTP is calculated using CARA utility with parameters of
2.5 × 10−5 (low risk aversion), 5.0 × 10−5 (moderate risk aversion), and 7.5 × 10−5 (high risk aversion).
Baseline insurance coverage rates with these risk aversion parameters are 64.4, 80.5, and 89.9 percent,
respectively. Household-level estimates weighted by number of individuals per household for
interpretation at the individual level.




                                                   45
APPENDIX FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

A    Seizable Assets Calculation Details
In the SIPP, home equity is defined as equity in the primary residence or mobile home; vehicle
equity is defined as the sum of equity in all vehicles; retirement assets are defined as value in IRA,
Keogh, and 401K accounts; financial assets are the sum of interest earning assets, equity in stocks
and mutual fund shares, equity in other assets, equity in other real estate, and business equity.
Dischargeable debt is defined as total unsecured debt.
     In the PSID, home and vehicle equity are defined as these variables; retirement assets are
defined as the value in private annuities or IRAs; financial assets are defined as wealth in checking
and saving accounts and in stock; other assets are defined as farm/business wealth, equity in other
real estate, and other savings or assets. Dischargeable debt is defined as other debt.
     In the MEPS, home equity and vehicle equity are defined as these variables; retirement as-
sets are defined as the value in IRA, Keogh, and 401K accounts; financial assets are defined as
the equity in farms or businesses, equity in other real estate, equity in a second home, equity in
recreational vehicles, the value of CDs, stocks, government or corporate bonds or mutual funds,
the value in checking or savings accounts, and other assets. Dischargeable debt is defined as other
debt.


B    Sensitivity of the Effect on Coverage
Table A1 shows alternative specifications of the effect on coverage. Panel A shows estimates from
the SIPP; Panel B shows estimates from the PSID. As a point of reference, column 1 displays the
pooled IV marginal effects from Table 6. Column 2 shows linear probability model estimates
of the same specification. The estimates are very similar. Column 3 examines the exclusion of
households with public insurance from the sample. Recall that these households were excluded
because households with public insurance typically face nominal premiums and are less likely
to make active decisions about coverage. When these households are included, the estimates are
barely changed.
     Columns 4 and 5 examine two intervening channels through which bankruptcy law could
impact health insurance coverage. Asset exemptions affect the incentive to accumulate wealth be-
cause households with more seizable assets have less generous implicit insurance from bankruptcy.
If wealth impacts insurance coverage, then part of the effect of asset exemptions on insurance
could be mediated through a wealth response. Similarly, there is a literature that argues that
bankruptcy law affects the incentives to start a small business due to the fact that debts of non-
corporate firms can be discharged in personal bankruptcy (Fan and White, 2003). If small business
ownership affects the probability of obtaining health insurance coverage, then part of the effect
could work through this channel. Columns 4 and 5 show that the estimates are very similar when
I add controls for wealth and business ownership, suggesting that these potential channels are not
particularly important.
     The scatter plots in Figure 2 show that the effect on coverage is not overly influenced by a
small number of states. Figure A3 provides additional evidence on this matter, plotting marginal
effects from 51 separate regressions of the preferred specification (Table 6, column 3) in samples
that exclude each state. All of the estimates are statistically distinguishable from 0, and I cannot
reject the null of a constant effect across specifications.


                                                 46
C     Microsimulation Details
I construct the household-level medical cost distributions using individual-level medical cost data
from the 2005 MEPS for age-by-sex by insurance status cells.62 For insured individuals, costs are
defined as total payments. For uninsured individuals, my measure of costs is constructed in the
following way: I start with medical charges as this variable accounts for medical services written
off as charity care or bad debt. I then scale down charges by the cost-charge ratio (CCR) for the
privately insured population to account for the discount typically extended to the uninsured.63
Finally, I subtract out payments made by workers’ compensation, the Veterans Administration,
and other such sources, as the uninsured are not exposed to these costs.
     Household-specific medical cost distributions are constructed numerically by summing over
10,000 independent draws from the appropriate individual-level distributions. As discussed in the
main text, I then adjust these costs for moral hazard to generate counterfactual cost distributions
for the insured and uninsured. Premiums are calculated as costs above the deductible scaled up
to account for administrative loading.
     Appendix Table A2 compares premiums from the microsimulation model to quoted premi-
ums in the individual market.64 The calibrated and market premiums are quite similar. The cali-
brated premiums are slightly less expensive for low deductible levels and somewhat more expen-
sive for high deductibles. This difference could be explained by selection or by heterogeneity in
the moral hazard parameter across the expenditure distribution.




  62 The age-by-sex groups are 18 years old or younger, males age 19 to 34, females age 19 to 34, males age 35 to 64, and
females age 35 to 64.
  63 Recall from Panel A of Figure 1 that privately insured and uninsured households make similar payments for low

charges.
  64 Individual market premiums are for a 30-year-old male for policies starting in May 2010 listed on www.

eHealthInsurance.com. These policies include 20 coinsurance and are adjusted to 2005 values using the Medi-
cal Care component of the CPI-U.


                                                           47
                       Figure A1: First Stage: Plots of Seizable Assets vs. Simulated Instrument
                              11.5




                                                                                                                11.5
        Log Seizable Assets




                                                                                          Log Seizable Assets
                              10.5




                                                                                                                10.5
                              9.5




                                                                                                                9.5
                              8.5




                                                                                                                8.5




                                     8.5       9.5                 10.5       11.5                                     8.5       9.5                 10.5       11.5
                                           Cross-State Simulated Instrument                                                  Cross-State Simulated Instrument


                               (a) SIPP: Seizable Assets vs. Cross-State IV                                     (b) PSID: Seizable Assets vs. Cross-State IV

Notes: Panel A plots log seizable assets against the cross-state simulated instrument averaged by state
using data from the SIPP. Panel B shows the same plot using data from the PSID. The circles in each plot
are proportional to the number of observations in each state. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean
log seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in
each state. Pooled 1996-2005 SIPP and 1999-2005 PSID, excluding households with public insurance or a
member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.




                                                                                     48
                                                       Figure A2: Legislative Origins of Asset Exemption Laws
                                           11.5




                                                                                                                                              1
        Cross-State Simulated Instrument
                                           11




                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                                                                         Kerry Vote
                                           10.5




                                                                                                                                             .6
                                                                                                                        ME
                                           10




                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                          CT            VT

                                                                                                                              RI
                                           9.5




                                                                                                           MA          NH




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                  9   9.2          9.4             9.6                     9.8          10                            9       9.5          10            10.5          11   11.5
                                                            Historical Homestead Exemptions                                                                         Cross-State Simulated Instrument



                                     (a) Cross-State IV vs. Historical Exemptions                                                                         (b) Kerry Vote vs. Cross-State IV
                                                                                        .08     .07
                                                                               Unemployment Rate
                                                                             .05      .06
                                                                                        .04




                                                                                                      9          9.5          10            10.5             11         11.5
                                                                                                                       Cross-State Simulated Instrument



                                                                                               (c) Unemployment Rate vs. Cross-State IV

Notes: Panel A plots the cross-state simulated instrument against historical homestead exemptions by
state. Panel B plots the share of the electorate that voted for the Democratic candidate John Kerry in the
2004 presidential elections against the cross-state simulated instrument by state. Panel C plots the
unemployment rate against the cross-state simulated instrument by states. The circles in each plot are
proportional to the number of observations in each state. The cross-state simulated instrument is mean log
seizable assets for a constant, nationally representative sample of households as though they lived in each
state. The historical homestead exemptions variable is analogously constructed using variation in
inflation-adjusted 1920 homestead exemption levels. Votes shares from Federal Election Commission
(2005). Unemployment rate from the pooled 1996 to 2005 March Supplements to the Current Population
Survey.




                                                                                                                                   49
                                           Figure A3: Effect on Coverage in Samples Excluding Each State

                      0.0500#



                      0.0450#



                      0.0400#



                      0.0350#



                      0.0300#
 Eﬀect&on&Coverage&




                      0.0250#



                      0.0200#



                      0.0150#



                      0.0100#



                      0.0050#



                      0.0000#
                                AK######AL# AR# AZ# CA# CO# CT# DC# DE# FL# GA# HI# IA# ID# IL# IN# KS# KY# LA# MA#MD#ME# MI# MN#MO# MS#MT# NC# ND# NE# NH# NJ# NM#NV# NY# OH# OK# OR# PA# RI# SC# SD# TN# TX# UT# VA# VT# WA# WI# WV#WY#




Notes: Figure shows marginal effects calculated at the mean of a log point increase in seizable assets on
insurance coverage from the preferred IV probit specification (Table 6, column 3) in samples that exclude
each state. The lines indicate 95-percent confidence intervals. Pooled 1996-2005 SIPP, excluding
households with public insurance or a member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.
See Table 6 note for more details.




                                                                                                                         50
     Table A1: Alternative Specifications of Effect on Coverage: Probit Regressions of Insurance Coverage on Seizable Assets
     and Controls

                                                                                         Dep(Var:(Insurance(Coverage
                                                                         Linear(Probability(
                                                        Baseline(             Model            Publicly(Insured Wealth(Polynomial   Business(Owner
                                                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)               (4)               (5)
                                                                           Panel(A:(SIPP
         Log(Seizable(Assets                            0.025***             0.020***               0.0170            0.0260             0.0230
                                                         (0.006)              (0.005)
                                                                           Panel(B:(PSID
         Log(Seizable(Assets                            0.036**               0.016*               0.028***          0.028***           0.023***
                                                         (0.015)              (0.010)               (0.014)           (0.008)            (0.009)
                                                               Controls(and(Instrument:(All(Panels
         Controls




51
           Demographic(Controls                            X                    X                   X                   X                   X
           Wealth(Polynomial                                                                                            X
           Business(Owner(Indicator                                                                                                         X
         Instrument
           Pooled(Simulated(Instrument                     X                    X                   X                   X                   X


     Notes: Columns 1, 3, 4, and 5 shows marginal effects calculated at the mean of a log point increase in seizable assets on insurance coverage from IV
     probit regressions. Column 2 shows coefficient from linear probability model. The pooled simulated instrument is mean log seizable assets by
     constant, nationally representative demographic groups as though they lived in each state. Groups are defined by the full interaction of age group,
     race, education group, and family structure. Demographic controls are demographic-group dummies and a fourth-order polynomial in annual
     income. State controls are for individual market insurance regulations (see text for details), hospital ownership structure, DSH payments and
     FQHC per capita, and the presence of a charity care pool or fund. All specifications include an indicator for the bottom-coding of seizable assets.
     Pooled 1996-2005 SIPP and 1999-2005 PSID, excluding households with a member age 65 or older, inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U. Mean
     insurance coverage is 77.0 percent in SIPP and 77.3 percent in the PSID in the baseline sample. Block bootstrap standard errors clustered at the level
     of the instrument in parentheses. *p<0.10, **p< 0.05, ***p<0.01
                Table A2: Microsimulation and Individual Market Premiums

                             SimulatedCPremiums                          IndividualCMarketCPremiums
Deductible         Uninsured       Insured       Both                       Aetna          United
$0                  $1,126          $3,023      $2,514                      $2,140           n/a
$1,000               $919           $2,531      $2,099                      $2,061         $1,498
$2,500                                                                      $1,021         $1,001
$5,000                $668             $1,627            $1,370              $874           $526
$7,500                                                                       $736           $455
$10,000               $521             $1,150             $981                n/a           $405

Notes: Table shows simulated premiums from the microsimulation model and individual market
premiums by deductible level. Simulated premiums are for a 25- to 34-year-old single, male, calculated as
medical costs above the deductible scaled up by 10 percent to account for administrative loading. Insured
households have their medical costs scaled up by a further 25 percent to account for moral hazard.
Individual market premiums are for a 30-year-old male for policies starting in May 2010 listed on
eHealthInsurance.com. These policies include 20 percent coinsurance and are adjusted to 2005 values
using the Medical Care component of the CPI-U. See Appendix Section C for additional details.




                                                   52
Health Insurance Survey v4
Created: July 08 2011, 2:18 PM
Last Modified: September 12 2012, 1:36 PM
Design Theme: Blue Horizon
Language: English
Button Options: Custom: Start Survey: "Start Survey!" Submit: "Submit"
Disable Browser “Back” Button: True


Health Insurance Survey

Page 1 - Heading
Purpose of the research: To better understand health insurance coverage decisions. What you will do in this research: If
you decide to participate, you will complete a survey. Some of the questions will be about the financial risk from being
uninsured. Others will be about your demographics and financial resources. Time required: The survey will take
approximately 8 minutes to complete. Compensation: Your compensation will be determined following the standard
procedures of the firm that administers your panel. Confidentiality: Your responses will be kept entirely anonymous. To
preserve your anonymity the data will be transmitted using encrypted Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) technology.
Researchers working with the data will be completely unaware of your identity and will be unable to link the data to any
other information about you. The data you provide may be made available to the research community for related research
projects. Participation and withdrawal: Your participation is completely voluntary. You may quit at any time without
penalty. To Contact the Researcher: If you have questions or concerns about this research, please contact: Neale
Mahoney, PhD. Phone: (413) 575-6931. Address: 1730 Cambridge Street, S410, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.
Email: nmahoney@rwj.harvard.edu. Whom to contact about your rights in this research, for questions, concerns,
suggestions, or complaints that are not being addressed by the researcher, or research-related harm: Jane Calhoun,
Harvard University Committee on the Use of Human Subjects in Research, 1414 Massachusetts Avenue, Second Floor,
Cambridge, MA 02138. Phone: 617-495-5459. E-mail: jcalhoun@fas.harvard.edu. Please print or save a copy of this
page for your records.
Description


Page 1 - Question 1 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
Do you wish to participate in this survey?

     Yes, I would like to continue
     No, I would like to exit [Screen Out]

Page 2 - Question 2 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                                                          [Mandatory]
What is your age?

        <18 [Screen Out]
        18 [Screen Out]
        19 [Screen Out]
        20 [Screen Out]
        21 [Screen Out]
        22 [Screen Out]
        23 [Screen Out]
        24 [Screen Out]
        25 [Screen Out]
        26 [Screen Out]
        27
        28
        29
        30
        31
        32
        33
        34
        35
        36
        37
        38
        39
        40
        41
        42
        43
        44
        45
        46
        47
        48
        49
        49
        50 [Screen Out]
        51 [Screen Out]
        52 [Screen Out]
        53 [Screen Out]
        54 [Screen Out]
        55 [Screen Out]
        56 [Screen Out]
        57 [Screen Out]
        58 [Screen Out]
        59 [Screen Out]
        60 [Screen Out]
        61 [Screen Out]
        62 [Screen Out]
        63 [Screen Out]
        64 [Screen Out]
        >64 [Screen Out]

Page 2 - Question 3 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)   [Mandatory]
What is your gender?

     Male
     Female

Page 2 - Question 4 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)   [Mandatory]
What is your race/ethnicity?

        White
        Black
        American Indian/Eskimo/Aleut
        Asian or Pacific Islander
        Other
Page 2 - Question 5 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                     [Mandatory]
What is your education level?

     High school or less
     Some college or a college degree (e.g., associates, bachelors)
     Some post-graduate or a post-graduate degree (e.g., masters, PhD)

Page 2 - Question 6 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                     [Mandatory]
What is your marital status?

        Married [Screen Out]
        Separated [Screen Out]
        Divorced
        Widowed
        Never married/single

Page 2 - Question 7 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                     [Mandatory]
How many children do you have?

        None
        1 [Screen Out]
        2 [Screen Out]
        3 [Screen Out]
        4 or more [Screen Out]

Page 2 - Question 8 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                     [Mandatory]
What is your occupation?

        Administrative (e.g., secretary)
        Agricultural (e.g., farm worker, gardener, groundskeeper)
        Construction (e.g., laborer, carpenter, electrician)
        Clerical (e.g., office clerk)
        Education related (e.g., teacher, child care worker)
        Electrician
        Health care/Medical related (e.g., health aide, attendant)
        Homebased business
        Hospitality (e.g., maid, lodging quarters cleaner)
        Human resources
        Real estate
        Restaurant (e.g., waiter, cook)
        Retail (e.g., sales clerk, cashier)
        Sale manager
        Sales/Marketing
        Self-employed
        Unemployed
        Other [Screen Out]

Page 2 - Question 9 - Choice - One Answer (Drop Down)                     [Mandatory]
What is your state of residence?

     Alabama
   Alaska
   Arizona
   Arkansas
   California
   Colorado
   Connecticut
   Delaware
   District of Columbia
   Florida
   Georgia
   Hawaii
   Idaho
   Illinois
   Indiana
   Iowa
   Kansas
   Kentucky
   Louisiana
   Maine
   Maryland
   Massachusetts
   Michigan
   Minnesota
   Mississippi
   Missouri
   Montana
   Nebraska
   Nevada
   New Hampshire
   New Jersey
   New Mexico
   New York
   North Carolina
   North Dakota
   Ohio
   Oklahoma
   Oregon
   Pennsylvania
   Rhode Island
   South Carolina
   South Dakota
   Tennessee
   Texas
   Utah
   Vermont
   Virginia
   Washington
   West Virginia
   Wisconsin
   Wyoming
Page 3 - Question 10 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
Are you currently employed?

     No
     Yes, full time (> 30 hours per week)
     Yes, part time (<= 30 hours per week)

Page 3 - Question 11 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
What was your total income last year?

        < $10,000
        $10,000-25,000
        $25,000-50,000
        $50,000-100,000
        > $100,000

Page 3 - Question 12 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
Do you own a car(s)?

     No
     Yes

Page 3 - Question 13 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
What is the total value of your car(s)?

        n/a
        < $5,000
        $5,000-10,000
        $10,000-15,000
        > $15,000

Page 3 - Question 14 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
How much do you owe in loan payments on your car(s)

        n/a
        < $2,000
        $2,000-5,000
        $5,000-10,000
        > $10,000

Page 3 - Question 15 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
Do you own a home?

     No
     Yes

Page 3 - Question 16 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)   [Mandatory]
What is the value of your home?

     n/a
        < $50,000
        $50,000-100,000
        $100,000-200,000
        > $200,000

Page 3 - Question 17 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                           [Mandatory]
How much do you owe in mortgage payments on your home?

        n/a
        < $25,000
        $25,000-50,000
        $50,000-100,000
        > $100,000

Page 3 - Question 18 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                           [Mandatory]
How much money in total do you have in your checking/savings accounts?

        < $2,000
        $2,000-5,000
        $5,000-10,000
        $10,000-25,000
        > $25,000

Page 3 - Question 19 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                           [Mandatory]
How much do you owe in credit card, department store, and bank loans (other than car and home equity loans)?

        < $2,000
        $2,000-5,000
        $5,000-10,000
        > $10,000

Page 4 - Question 20 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                           [Mandatory]
Average medical costs for a broken leg are $12,000. Suppose you are uninsured, break your leg, and receive medical
treatment at the nearest hospital. If you negotiate with the hospital, how much do you think you would end up owing?

        < $2,000
        $2,000-4,000
        $4,000-6,000
        $6,000-8,000
        $8,000-10,000
        > $10,000

Page 4 - Question 21 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                           [Mandatory]
Suppose you ignore the medical bills. Which of these outcomes do you think is most likely?

     The hospital will send a debt collector to come after your paycheck and/or property (e.g., car, home).
     The debt collector will bother you for a while but then eventually give up.
     You probably won't hear from the hospital or debt collector at all.
Page 4 - Question 22 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
Do you know someone who has declared bankruptcy?

     Yes
     No

Page 4 - Question 23 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
Suppose you declare bankruptcy to get rid of the medical bills. Which one of these outcomes do you think is most likely?

     You will have to give up any money in your checking or savings account and your property (e.g., car, home)
     You will have to give up any money in your checking or savings account but can keep your property.
     You will have to fill out a bunch of paperwork and pay a filing fee but you can keep your money and your property.

Page 5 - Question 24 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
How would you describe your health status?

        Excellent
        Very good
        Good
        Fair
        Poor

Page 5 - Question 25 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
Do you currently have health insurance coverage?

     Yes
     No

Page 5 - Question 26 - Choice - One Answer (Bullets)                                                            [Mandatory]
What is your source of health insurance coverage?

        n/a
        Employer or union
        Medicare, Medicaid, or other public insurance program
        CHAMPUS, TRICARE, VA, or other military insurance program
        Individually purchased
        Other, please specify




Thank You Page
Redirect: <http://www.testspin.com/endpages/success.php>


Screen Out Page
Redirect: <http://www.testspin.com/endpages/disqualify.php>


Over Quota Page
Redirect: <http://www.testspin.com/endpages/quotafull.php>
Survey Closed Page
Thank you, but this survey is now closed.
