                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MACROECONOMICS WITH FINANCIAL FRICTIONS:
                                  A SURVEY

                                       Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                        Thomas M. Eisenbach
                                          Yuliy Sannikov

                                         Working Paper 18102
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18102


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012




For helpful comments and discussion we would like to thank Dong Beom Choi, Wei Cui, Peter DeMarzo,
Delwin Olivan, Ricardo Reis, the participants of the 2010 Econometric Society World Congress in
Shanghai and the participants of the 2010 macro-finance reading group at Princeton University. Brunnermeier
acknowledges generous support through a Guggenheim Fellowship. The views expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and are not necessarily reflective of views at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18102.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov
NBER Working Paper No. 18102
May 2012
JEL No. A23,E1,E3,E4,E5,G01,G1,G2

                                               ABSTRACT

This article surveys the macroeconomic implications of financial frictions. Financial frictions lead
to persistence and when combined with illiquidity to non-linear amplification effects. Risk is endogenous
and liquidity spirals cause financial instability. Increasing margins further restrict leverage and exacerbate
downturns. A demand for liquid assets and a role for money emerges. The market outcome is generically
not even constrained efficient and the issuance of government debt can lead to a Pareto improvement.
While financial institutions can mitigate frictions, they introduce additional fragility and through their
erratic money creation harm price stability.


Markus K. Brunnermeier                                Yuliy Sannikov
Princeton University                                  Department of Economics
Department of Economics                               208 Fisher Hall
Bendheim Center for Finance                           Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540                                   Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                              sannikov@gmail.com
markus@princeton.edu

Thomas M. Eisenbach
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
thomas.eisenbach@ny.frb.org
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                             1

2 Persistence, Amplification and Instability                                                                8
  2.1 Persistence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       8
  2.2 Dynamic Amplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          12
  2.3 Instability, Asymmetry, Non-linear Effects and Volatility Dynamics . .                               19

3 Volatility and Equilibrium Margins                                                                       26
  3.1 Credit Rationing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         26
  3.2 Delevering due to Margin/Haircut Spiral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            28
  3.3 Equilibrium Margins and Endogenous Incompleteness . . . . . . . . . .                                30

4 Demand for Liquid Assets                                                                                 36
  4.1 Smoothing Deterministic Fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   37
  4.2 Precautionary Savings and Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Risk                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42
      4.2.1 Precautionary Savings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42
      4.2.2 Constrained Inefficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47
      4.2.3 Adding Aggregate Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   50
      4.2.4 Amplification Revisited and Adding Multiple Assets                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   51

5 Financial Intermediation                                                                                 61
  5.1 Liquidity Insurance and Transformation . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   62
  5.2 Design of Informationally Insensitive Securities . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   66
  5.3 Intermediaries as Monitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   67
  5.4 Intermediaries’ Fragility: Incentives versus Efficiency      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   70
  5.5 Intermediaries and the Theory of Money . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   74




                                            ii
1     Introduction
The ongoing great recession is a stark reminder that financial frictions are a key driver
of business cycle fluctuations. Imbalances can build up during seemingly tranquil times
until a trigger leads to large and persistent wealth destructions potentially spilling over
to the real economy. While in normal times the financial sector can mitigate financial
frictions, in crisis times the financial sector’s fragility adds to instability. Adverse feed-
back loops and liquidity spirals lead to non-linear effects with the potential of causing
a credit crunch. Classic economic writers who experienced the great depression first-
hand like Fisher (1933), Keynes (1936), Gurley and Shaw (1955), Minsky (1957) and
Kindleberger (1978) emphasized the importance of financing frictions and inherent in-
stability of the financial system. Patinkin (1956) and Tobin (1969) also emphasized the
important implication of financial stability for monetary economics.
    This article surveys the growing literature that studies the macroeconomic impli-
cations of financial frictions straddling three branches of economics: macroeconomics,
finance and general equilibrium theory. All of them share common themes and similar
insights, but they are disconnected in the profession partly because they differ in their
modeling approaches and in their identification of the root of the instability. The objec-
tive of this survey is to lay bare important theoretical macro mechanisms and highlight
the connections and differences across these approaches.
    In a frictionless economy, funds are liquid and can flow to the most profitable project
or to the person who values the funds most. Differences in productivity, patience, risk
aversion or optimism determine fund flows, but for the aggregate output only the total
capital and labor matter. Productive agents hold most of the productive capital and
issue claims to less productive individuals. In other words, in a setting without finan-
cial frictions it is not important whether funds are in the hands of productive or less
productive agents and the economy can be studied with a single representative agent
in mind. In contrast, with financial frictions, liquidity considerations become important
and the wealth distribution matters. External funding is typically more expensive than
internal funding through retained earnings. Incentives problems dictate that produc-
tive agents issue to a large extent claims in the form of debt since they ensure that the
agent exerts sufficient effort. However, debt claims come with some severe drawbacks:
an adverse shock wipes out large fraction of the levered borrowers net worth, limiting
his risk bearing capacity in the future.
    Hence, a temporary adverse shock is very persistent since it can take a long time


                                              1
until productive agents can rebuild their net worth through retained earnings. Besides
persistence, amplification is the second macroeconomic implication we cover in this sur-
vey. An initial shock is amplified if productive agents are forced to fire-sell their capital.
Since fire-sales depress the price of capital, the net worth of productive agents suffers
even further (loss spiral). In addition, margins and haircuts might rise (loan-to-value
ratios might fall) forcing productive agents to lower their leverage ratio (margin spiral).
Moreover, a dynamic amplification effect can kick in. The persistence of a temporary
shock lowers future asset prices, which in turn feed back to lower contemporaneous asset
prices, eroding productive agents’ net worth even further and leading to more fire-sales.
    The amplification effects can lead to rich volatility dynamics and explain the inher-
ent instability of the financial system. Even when the exogenous risk is small, endoge-
nous risk resulting from interactions in the system can be sizable. Credit risk can be
dwarfed by liquidity risk. Liquidity is fragile as an infinitesimally small shock can lead
to a large discontinuous drop in the price level and a dry-up of funding. Similar sys-
temic risk effects can arise in a setting with multiple equilibria where simply a sunspot
can lead to these large shifts. Secured funding markets are subject to “collateral runs”
when collateral values drop and margins rise. Unsecured funding markets are subject
to traditional bank runs or “counterparty runs”, when they are unable to roll over their
debt.
    To understand these destabilizing effects it is useful to distinguish between three
liquidity concepts: technological, market and funding liquidity. Physical capital can be
liquid either because the investment is reversible (technological liquidity) or because the
capital can be sold off easily with limited price impact (market liquidity). The latter is
the case if the asset has low specificity and hence, has a high value in its second best use.
The market liquidity of claims on the payoffs generated by capital goods depends on
the liquidity of the underlying physical asset, especially for aggregate shocks, but also
on the funding structure of the holder of these claims. Assets with high technological or
market liquidity lead to a small fire-sale discount and hence the amplification effects are
contained. Instead of getting rid of the asset either by reverting physical capital or fire-
selling it, it can also be used as collateral. Funding liquidity is primarily determined by
the maturity structure of debt and the sensitivity of margins/haircuts. If the margin can
move from 10% to 50% overnight, then 40% of the loan has essentially a maturity of one
day. Since margins depend on the volatility of the collateral assets, all three concepts
of liquidity interact. The determining factor for the above destabilizing effects is the
liquidity mismatch – not necessarily the leverage and maturity mismatch – between

                                              2
the technological and market liquidity on the asset side of the balance sheet and the
funding liquidity on the liability side of the balance sheet.
    The ex-post macroeconomic implications of an adverse shock amplified through
liquidity spirals also affect the ex-ante demand for liquid assets. In anticipation of
potential adverse shocks, market participants have the desire to hold claims with high
market liquidity or to preserve high funding liquidity. When individuals face funding
constraints, simply the desire to smooth consumption makes it optimal for them to hold
a “liquidity buffer.” This is the case even in a setting without aggregate risk, for example
when individuals only face (uninsurable) idiosyncratic shocks. Holding liquid assets,
which can be sold with limited price impact, allows individuals to self-insure against
their idiosyncratic shock when they hit their borrowing constraint. As a consequence,
assets that pay off in all states, like a risk-free bond, are very desirable and trade at a
(liquidity) premium. In other words, the risk-free rate is very low and liquid assets are
“bubbly.” Indeed, fiat money is an asset that provides such a liquidity service. It is a
store of value despite the fact that it is not a claim on any real cash flow.
    In a more general setting with aggregate shocks (on top of idiosyncratic shocks)
the desire to hold liquid assets is even stronger, especially when there is an aggregate
liquidity mismatch, e.g. the specificity of physical capital is very high (low market
liquidity) and capital investments are irreversible (low technological liquidity). At times
when exogenous risk increases, these forces strengthen and there will be a flight to quality
and liquidity. With higher volatility individuals are more likely to hit their borrowing
constraints and hence they demand more liquid assets for precautionary reasons.
    Importantly, the positive price distortions for liquid assets leads to a constrained
inefficient outcome. That is, a social planner who faces the same constraints as the
markets can implement a Pareto superior allocation. The (constrained) market inef-
ficiency is driven by pecuniary externalities and since each individual takes prices as
given. This is a strong message as it overturns the standard welfare theorems. In certain
environments the issuance of additional government bonds can even lead to a “crowding-
in effect” and be welfare enhancing. As (idiosyncratic) uncertainty increases, the welfare
improving effect of higher government debt also increases. Note that unlike the stan-
dard (New-) Keynesian argument this reasoning does not rely on price stickiness and a
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
    The role of financial institutions is to mitigate some of these financial frictions. For
example, banks can insure households or firms against sudden idiosyncratic shocks men-
tioned above by diversifying across them. However, by investing in long-term projects

                                             3
with low technological and market liquidity and by issuing short-term debt claims,
financial institutions expose themselves to a liquidity mismatch. This maturity trans-
formation – better labeled liquidity transformation – is one of the functions of financial
intermediation but results in fragility. Banks are subject to runs especially if they are
also exposed to aggregate risk. A second function of financial institutions is to over-
come financial frictions since they have a superior monitoring technology. They can
ensure that the borrower of funds exerts enough effort such that projects pay off with
a high probability and loans can be repaid. A third function of financial intermedia-
tion is the pledgeable creation of informationally insensitive – money like – securities.
Informationally insensitive claims, like debt contracts, have the advantage that their
payoff does not depend on information about some underlying cash flows. Nobody finds
it worthwhile to collect information and hence asymmetric information problems, like
the lemons problem, cannot emerge. Finally, financial institutions also play a central
role in making certain future cash flows pledgeable. Productive agents are often not
able to pledge future cash flows because of renegotiation. Banks can avoid this problem
by offering deposit contracts with a sequential-service constraint and thereby exposing
themselves to bank runs. The threat of a bank run lowers the banker’s ex-post bargain-
ing power and hence allows them to pledge a larger amount ex-ante. This literature
stresses the “virtue of fragility” as a ex-ante commitment device.
    Importantly, financial intermediaries are key in understanding the interaction be-
tween price stability and financial stability; and monetary economics more generally.
By issuing demand deposits, financial institutions create inside money. Outside money
can take the form of specific commodities or of fiat money provided by the government.
When banks are well capitalized they can overcome financial frictions and are able to
channel funds from less productive agents to more productive agents. Financial institu-
tions through their monitoring role enable productive agents to issue debt and equity
claims to less productive agents. Without a financial sector, funds can be transferred
only via outside money. Whenever an agent becomes productive he buys capital goods
from less productive agents using his outside money, and vice versa. While the fund
transfers are limited, money becomes very valuable in this case. In contrast, when the
financial sector is well capitalized, outside money is not really needed and hence has low
value. Now, a negative productivity shock lowers financial institutions’ net worth, im-
pairs their intermediation activity and importantly makes money more valuable absent
any monetary intervention. The latter effect hits banks on the liability side of their bal-
ance sheet since the value of the inside money they issued increases. In short, a negative

                                            4
productivity shock hits banks on the asset and the liability side of their balance sheets
and leads to a contraction of inside money. The money multiplier collapses and “Fisher
deflation” sets in (as the value of money rises). This effect is in sharp contrast to many
other monetary models without a financial sector, which predict inflationary pressure
after a negative productivity shock. Monetary policy can mitigate these adverse effects
by essentially redistributing wealth towards the financial sector. It is not surprising that
money is always shining through when one talks about liquidity and financial frictions.
    Models discussed in this survey assume various financing restrictions. Depending
on the underlying economic friction financing constraints can appear in different forms.
For example debt/credit constraints limit the amount of debt financing. Often the limit
is given by the value of the underlying collateral. In contrast, equity constraints limit
the extent to which one can sell off risky claims. For example, when an agent has to
have “skin in the game” he can sell off only a fraction of the risk. In incomplete-markets
settings, risk along certain dimensions cannot be sold off at all and hence certain risks
remain uninsurable. In models with limited participation certain agents in the economy
are excluded from being active in certain markets altogether. Overlapping generation
(OLG) models can be viewed in the same vein as currently living individuals cannot
write contracts with yet unborn individuals.
    The literature offers different “microfoundations” for different financing frictions.
First, there is the costly state verification framework à la Townsend (1979). The basic
friction is due to asymmetric information about the future payoff of the project. While
the debtor learns the true payoff of the project ex-post, the financier does not. Only if
he pays some monitoring cost he also learns the true payoff. In such an environment
debt is the optimal contract since it minimizes the socially wasteful monitoring costs.
As long as the debt is paid off in full, there is no need to verify the true state. Only
in case of default, the financier verifies the state. De-jure the financier has to pay the
costs, but de-facto he passes them on to the borrower by charging a higher interest
rate. This makes external funding more expensive. It drives a wedge between external
and internal funding costs and explains why large fractions of projects are funded with
retained earnings. Importantly, the interest rate increases with the borrowed amount
as default and costly monitoring becomes more likely. Increasing the borrowing amount
might become unattractive at some point, but the amount of borrowing is effectively
not limited.
    This is in contrast to quantity rationing as in Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) for non-
collateralized credit. In their setting asymmetric information arises already ex-ante,

                                             5
i.e. before contracting. Total (market wide) credit is rationed since the lenders cannot
increase the interest rate to ensure that markets clear. They face a lemons problem
as in Akerlof (1970): Increasing the interest rate would worsen the pool of creditors
who apply for a loan such that lenders would lose money. Hence, they ration overall
lending and charge a lower interest rate. More specifically, in Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)
borrowers have more information about the payoff volatility of their project. Due to
limited liability, lenders lose from lending to applicants with high volatility projects
and win from the ones with low volatility. As they increase the interest rate the low
volatility borrowers stop applying and the pool of applicants worsens.
     Hart and Moore (1994) opened the door for models with incomplete contracts. When
payments in certain states of the world are not exactly specified, debtors and financiers
will try to renegotiate their obligations in the future to their favor. Anticipating such
future behavior makes certain payoff realizations non-pledgeable. In other words, ex-
ante funding is often limited and as a consequence a “skin the game constraint” has to be
imposed. The limited pledgability goes beyond the market-wide phenomenon in Stiglitz
and Weiss (1981) as it also restricts one-on-one contract arrangements. One way out of
limited pledgability is to change the ex-post bargaining outcome by collateralizing the
initial contract. The literature that uses collateral/margin/haircut constraints typically
relies on the incomplete contracting approach as its microfoundation. Similarly, the
literature on limited enforcement of contracts falls in this category. Papers like Bulow
and Rogoff (1989), Kehoe and Levine (1993), Alvarez and Jermann (2000), Cooley,
Marimon, and Quadrini (2004) among others come to mind.
     Empirically, there is convincing evidence on the existence and pervasiveness of finan-
cial constraints. The empirical macro literature on credit channels distinguishes between
a bank lending channel and a balance sheet channel depending on whether the finan-
cial friction is primarily on the side of the financial intermediary or on the side of the
borrowing firm or household. Bernanke (1983) studied the lending channel using data
from the great depression. Slovin, Sushka, and Polonchek (1993) find that borrowers
whose main banking relationship was with infamous Continental Illinois that failed in
1984 earned negative abnormal returns before the (unexpected) government bailout and
turned positive on the day before and on the announcement date of the bailout. Peek
and Rosengren (1997) document that declines in the Japanese stock market lead to re-
ductions in the US-lending-market share of US branches of Japanese banks, with these
reductions being larger for banks with weaker balance sheets. Similarly, Gan (2007)
finds that following the burst of the real estate bubble, Japanese banks with greater

                                            6
real estate exposure had to reduce lending. Gan also documents the real effects of this
credit restriction: in her sample, firms’ investment and market valuation are negatively
associated with their top lender’s real estate exposure. This can lead to effects that are
quite large economically: in the context of the Japanese depression, the lending channel
accounts for one fifth of the decline in investment.
    The corporate finance literature has mostly tried to reject the neoclassical theory of
investment, by showing that financing factors affect investment decisions. A first devia-
tion comes from the fact that capital expenditures react positively to exogenous shocks
to cash flows. Most notably, Lamont (1997) shows that following a sharp decrease in oil
prices, the non-oil division of oil conglomerates cut their investment. Bakke and Whited
(2011) use a regression discontinuity design that exploits the mandatory contributions
to defined benefit plans and find that firms with large cash outflows cut down R&D,
working capital and employment. In a small sample, Blanchard, de Silanes, and Shleifer
(1994) report that firms’ acquisition activity responds to large cash windfalls coming
from legal settlements unrelated to their ongoing lines of business. Another strand of the
empirical literature focuses on the collateral value. For example, Benmelech, Garmaise,
and Moskowitz (2005) show that commercial property loans have lower interest rates,
larger loan-to-value ratios and longer maturities and durations if the underlying prop-
erties have fewer zoning restrictions. That is, the properties that are more redeployable
and hence have higher market liquidity are superior collateral assets.
    Any good survey must have a clear focus. This survey’s focus is on the macroeco-
nomic implications of financial frictions. This also explains its structure: Persistence,
amplification, instability in Section 2 is followed by credit quantity constraints through
margins in Section 3. The demand for liquid assets is analyzed in Section 4 and the
role of financial intermediation is studied in Section 5. Due to its emphasis on liquidity,
the role of money as store of value shines through the whole survey. Given the survey’s
focus, we do not cover many important papers that microfound various financial con-
straints mentioned above. This survey does also not cover the vast corporate finance
literature on how financial frictions shape the capital structure and maturity structure
of firms and financial institutions. Moreover, this survey excludes behavioral models.
We do so despite the fact that we think the departure from the rational expectations
paradigm is important. An exception are models with unanticipated zero probability
shocks, in which – strictly speaking – agents hold non-rational beliefs. The survey also
touches upon bubbles, but the focus on rational models limits us and we omit important
models on bubbles and limits to arbitrage. For a more comprehensive literature survey

                                            7
on bubbles we refer to Brunnermeier (2001, 2008). Other books and surveys like Freixas
and Rochet (1997), Bhattacharya, Boot, and Thakor (2004), Heathcote, Storesletten,
and Violante (2009), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Shin (2010), Veldkamp (2011) and
Quadrini (2011) have a related focus and substitute in for the missing parts in our
survey.


2     Persistence, Amplification and Instability
2.1    Persistence
The initial macroeconomics literature with financial frictions represented by Bernanke
and Gertler (1989) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) focused on the fact that a shock
though temporary can have long-lasting persistent effects. While even in a standard
real-business-cycle model temporary shocks can have some persistence, in the models
discussed here temporary shocks have much stronger persistence through feedback ef-
fects of tightened financial frictions. In these models negative shocks to entrepreneurial
net worth increase the financial frictions and force the entrepreneurs to invest less. This
results in a lower level of capital and lower entrepreneur net worth in the following pe-
riod. This decrease again leads to lower investment and lower net worth in the following
periods.
    The models are set in the framework of a standard neoclassical growth model where
output is produced via a single aggregate production function Yt = f (Kt , Lt ). However,
agents are not homogeneous but instead a fraction η of the population are entrepreneurs
and a fraction 1 − η are households. The difference between the two is that only en-
trepreneurs can create new capital from the consumption good. To produce capital,
entrepreneurs will invest out of their own wealth and will borrow from households,
subject to frictions.
    The key friction in the models is the assumption of costly state verification first
introduced by Townsend (1979). Each individual entrepreneur’s technology is subject
to an idiosyncratic shock which is not observable to outsiders and verifying it comes
at a cost. The optimal contract between an entrepreneur and the households providing
outside funding ensures that the entrepreneur doesn’t take advantage of the information
asymmetry and minimizes the deadweight loss due to costly verification. This trade-off
is resolved by a contract resembling standard debt. The entrepreneur promises a fixed
repayment and is audited, i.e. the state is verified, only if he fails to repay. Let us start

                                             8
with the setting of Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) (hereafter CF) and then highlight the
differences to the original setting of Bernanke and Gertler (1989).
     While entrepreneurs as a whole can convert consumption goods into capital at a
constant one-for-one rate, each individual entrepreneur’s investment yields ωit of capital
for an input of it consumption goods. Here ω is an idiosyncratic shock, i.i.d. across time
and entrepreneurs with distribution G and E[ω] = 1. Given the assumption of costly
state verification, the realization of an individual entrepreneur’s outcome ωit is only
observable to an outsider at a verification cost µit . Stochastic auditing is not allowed
by assumption so the optimal contract becomes standard risky debt with an auditing
threshold ω̄.
     An entrepreneur with net worth nt who borrows it − nt promises to repay ω̄t it for
all realizations ω ≥ ω̄t while for realizations ω < ω̄t he will be audited and his creditors
receive the investment payoff ωit net of auditing costs µit . For a given investment size
it , the auditing threshold ω̄t (and therefore the face value ω̄t it ) is set so the lenders
break even          Z ω̄t                                  
                           (ω − µ) dG(ω) + (1 − G(ω̄t )) ω̄t it qt = it − nt             (1)
                     0

where qt is the price of capital. Note that CF assume that the creation of new capital and
therefore the necessary borrowing takes place within a period, therefore the households
require no positive interest on their loan. In addition, since there is no aggregate risk
in the investment process, households can diversify their lending across entrepreneurs
so they require no risk premium.
    An entrepreneur with net worth nt then chooses it to maximize his payoff:
                                     Z   ∞
                               max           (ω − ω̄t ) dG(ω) it qt                     (2)
                                it   ω̄t


subject to the break-even condition (1). The optimization results in a linear investment
rule
                                     it = ψ(qt ) nt ,

where the leverage ψ is increasing in the price of capital qt . The entrepreneur’s invest-
ment is increasing in both the price of capital qt and his net worth nt . Both a higher
qt and a higher nt require a lower auditing threshold ω̄ which reduces borrowing costs
and leads to an increase in investment. Dividing the entrepreneur’s payoff (2) by the
net worth nt and using the optimal investment rule we obtain the entrepreneur’s return


                                                 9
on internal funds:                    Z   ∞
                           ρ(qt ) =           (ω − ω̄t ) dG(ω) ψ(qt ) qt > 1                    (3)
                                      ω̄t

Due to the linearity, the investment rule can be aggregated easily into an aggregate
supply of capital which is increasing in both the price of capital qt and aggregate net
worth of entrepreneurs Nt .
   To close the model we need the corresponding demand for capital holdings from
households and entrepreneurs. The return to holding a unit of capital from period t to
period t + 1 is given by

                              k           At+1 f 0 (Kt+1 ) + qt+1 (1 − δ)
                             Rt+1 =                                       ,
                                                          qt

where At+1 f 0 (Kt+1 ) is the competitive rent paid to capital in the production of con-
sumption goods and δ is the depreciation rate.1 Households are risk averse and have
a discount factor β. A household’s consumption-savings decision is given by the Euler
equation
                                u0 (ct ) = βEt Rt+1
                                               k 0           
                                                    u (ct+1 )                        (4)

Entrepreneurs are risk neutral and less patient, β < β, so their consumption-savings
decision implies the Euler equation
                                              k           
                                      1 = βEt Rt+1 ρ(qt+1 ) ,                                   (5)

where the non-standard factor ρ(qt+1 ) > 1 is the return on an entrepreneur’s internal
funds defined in (3) which is greater than one due to the agency costs.2 The aggregate
demand for capital is implied by the combination of the households’ FOC (4) and the
entrepreneurs’ FOC (5) and is decreasing in the price of capital qt .
    In this model shocks to entrepreneurs’ net worth show persistence: A negative shock
in period t decreases entrepreneurial net worth Nt which increases the financing friction
and forces a smaller investment scale. Therefore the supply of capital shifts to the left,
leading to a lower level of capital Kt+1 , lower output Yt+1 and lower entrepreneur net
worth Nt+1 in period t + 1. This decrease again leads to lower investment and lower
   1
    Production of output also uses labor but this is fixed in supply.
   2
    The assumption of relative impatience implies the entrepreneurs want to consume earlier than
households, while the excess return on internal funds implies they want to postpone consumption. In
a calibration, the two have to be balanced, i.e. βρ(q) = β, to prevent entrepreneurs from postponing
consumption and becoming self-financed.


                                                    10
net worth in the following periods. Note however, that the shift in the supply of capital
caused by the lower net worth also leads to a higher price of capital. This increase in
price has a dampening effect on the propagation of the net worth shock, very different
from the amplification effect in Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) and Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997) discussed below.
    The original paper of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) (hereafter BG) uses an over-
lapping generations framework where agents live for only two periods whereas agents
in CF are infinitely lived. Entrepreneurs earn labor income in their first period and
then invest these earnings and outside funding from households to create capital for
the next period. After production, capital depreciates fully so the return to creating
capital equals only the rent it is paid in production, Rtk = At f 0 (Kt ).
    In period t the capital stock Kt is given from the previous period. Together with
the productivity shock At this determines wage income and therefore the young en-
trepreneurs’ net worth Nt . As in CF there is costly state verification of the individual
entrepreneur’s investment outcome. In BG this implies a supply curve of capital for the
next period,
                                              k       
                                 Kt+1 = S E Rt+1    , Nt ,                            (6)

which is increasing in both arguments. The demand curve for capital for the next period
only depends on its expected rent and is implicitly defined by

                             E[At+1 ] f 0 (Kt+1 ) = E Rt+1
                                                      k 
                                                           ,                         (7)
                           k 
which is decreasing in E Rt+1    for concave f .
    In the setting of BG, shocks again have persistent effects: A negative productivity
shock in period t decreases the wage wt and therefore current entrepreneurs’ net worth
Nt . This increases borrowing frictions and leads to decreased investment in capital for
period t + 1. The lower capital reduces output in period t + 1 and therefore the wage
wt+1 which implies a lower net worth Nt+1 for the next generation of entrepreneurs.
The next generation also invests less and the effect persists further.
    Both BG and CF as well as the following Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999)
do not solve for the full dynamics of their models. Instead, they log-linearize the model
around a steady state and study the impulse responses of the endogenous variables in
the linearized model.




                                           11
2.2    Dynamic Amplification
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) (hereafter BGG) make several changes to the
model of CF to put it in a complete dynamic New-Keynesian framework. In particular,
BGG introduce nonlinear costs in the adjustment of capital which lead to variations in
Tobin’s q. These are the driving force behind the additional amplification effects that
are not present in the models of BG and CF. As in the models of BG and CF, shocks
to entrepreneurs’ net worth are persistent. In addition, there is an amplification effect:
The decrease in aggregate capital implied by a negative shock to net worth reduces
the price of capital because of the convex adjustment costs. This lower price further
decreases net worth, amplifying the original shock.
    As before, households are risk-averse and entrepreneurs are risk-neutral. However, in
BGG entrepreneurs are the only ones who can hold the capital used in the production
of consumption goods. Investment, i.e. the creation of new capital is delegated to a
separate investment sector described by the law of motion for aggregate capital

                             Kt+1 − Kt = (Φ(It /Kt ) − δ) Kt .

The function Φ(·) is increasing and concave, with Φ(0) = 0 and represents convex costs
in adjustments to the capital stock. This is the key difference of this model from BG
and CF where there are no physical adjustment costs for capital. We refer to Φ(·) − δ
as technological illiquidity, since it captures the difficulty (in aggregate) to scale up or
undo investment. As a result of this illiquidity, the price of capital qt in BGG is given
by the first-order condition of the investment sector
                                                       −1
                                           0       It
                                     qt = Φ                   ,
                                                   Kt

and Tobin’s Q is different from one. BGG assume this separate investment sector to
ensure that the adjustment costs are separate from the entrepreneurs’ decision how
much capital to hold.
     At time t each entrepreneur purchases capital used for production at time t + 1. If
the entrepreneur with net worth nt buys kt+1 units of capital at price qt , he must borrow
qt kt+1 − nt . At time t + 1 the gross return to an entrepreneur’s capital is assumed to
                     k           k
be of the form ωRt+1   , where Rt+1  is the endogenous aggregate equilibrium return and
ω is an idiosyncratic shock, i.i.d. across entrepreneurs with E[ω] = 1 and c.d.f. G(ω).


                                               12
    As before, entrepreneurs borrow from households via debt in a costly state verifi-
cation framework. Verification costs are a fraction µ ∈ (0, 1) of the amount extracted
                                                       k
from entrepreneurs. For a benchmark scenario when Rt+1     is deterministic, verification
occurs when ω < ω̄ such that households break even
                 Z      ω̄                                     
                                                        k
          (1 − µ)             ω dG(ω) + (1 − G(ω̄)) ω̄ Rt+1 qt kt+1 = Rt+1 (qt kt+1 − nt ) ,      (8)
                     0

where Rt+1 is the risk-free rate.
                                    k
   If there is aggregate risk in Rt+1  , then BGG appeal to their assumption that en-
trepreneurs are risk-neutral and households are risk-averse to argue that entrepreneurs
insure risk-averse households against aggregate risk.3 If so, then equation (8) has to de-
                              k
termine ω̄ as a function of Rt+1  state by state. As in CF, since households can finance
multiple entrepreneurs, they can perfectly diversify entrepreneur idiosyncratic risk.
   BGG assume that entrepreneurs simply maximize their net worth in the next period,
putting off consumption until a later date.4 As a result, entrepreneurs simply solve
                                        Z     ∞                                   
                                                                     k
                                max E              (ω −   ω̄) dG(ω) Rt+1 qt kt+1       ,          (9)
                                 kt+1     ω̄

                                                                                  k
subject to the financing constraint (8), which determines how ω̄ depends on Rt+1    .
    In equilibrium, the optimal leverage of entrepreneurs depends on their expected
                     k 
return on capital E Rt+1   . In fact, entrepreneur optimal leverage is again given by a
linear rule                                    k !
                                            E Rt+1
                               qt kt+1 = ψ             nt .                           (10)
                                              Rt+1
                                                    k 
This conclusion follows because in equilibrium, E Rt+1      /Rt+1 determines all moments
   3
     Note that these contracts with perfect insurance are not optimal. More generally, the optimal
                            k
cutoff ω̄ as a function of Rt+1 depends on the trade-off between providing households with better in-
surance against aggregate shocks, and minimizing expected verification costs. According to the costly
state verification framework, the marginal cost of extracting an extra dollar from the entrepreneur is
                                                     k
independent of the realization of aggregate return Rt+1  . Therefore, if both entrepreneurs and house-
holds were risk-neutral, the optimal solution to the costly state verification problem would set ω̄ to
the same value across all realizations of aggregate uncertainty, i.e. aggregate risks would be shared
proportionately between the two groups of agents. See Hellwig (2001) for an example that a standard
debt contract is no longer optimal when the entrepreneur is risk averse. In addition, increasing the
state contingency of the contract makes the amplification result less clear-cut.
   4
     To prevent entrepreneurs from accumulating infinite wealth, this requires the additional assump-
tion that each entrepreneur dies with a certain probability each period in which case he is forced to
consume his wealth and is replaced by a new entrepreneur.



                                                           13
                         k
of the distribution of Rt+1 /Rt+1 .5
    Equation (10) implies that in equilibrium, each entrepreneur’s expenditure on capital
is proportional to his net worth, with the proportionality coefficient determined by the
expected discounted return on capital. Aggregating across entrepreneurs, this gives us
                                                                                    k 
a supply of capital for period t + 1 which is increasing in the expected return E Rt+1
and aggregate net worth Nt .
                             k
    The return on capital Rt+1   is determined in a general equilibrium framework. As a
result, the gross return to an entrepreneur from holding a unit of capital from t to t + 1
is given by6
                                                                                             
                                      0                                 It+1             It+1
              k               At+1 f (Kt+1 ) + qt+1 (1 − δ) + qt+1 Φ Kt+1 −            Kt+1
            E Rt+1 = E                                                                         .      (11)
                                                             qt

This corresponds to a standard demand for capital in period t + 1 which is decreasing
                            k 
in the expected return E Rt+1    .
    As before, shocks to entrepreneurs’ net worth Nt are persistent since they affect
capital holdings and therefore net worth Nt+1 , Nt+2 , . . . in following periods. Because
of the technological illiquidity of capital captured by Φ(·), there is now an additional
amplification effect: The decrease in aggregate capital implied by a negative shock to
net worth reduces the price of capital qt . This lower price further decreases net worth,
amplifying the original shock.
    Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) (hereafter KM97) depart from the costly state verifica-
tion framework used in the papers above and adopt a collateral constraint on borrowing
due to incomplete contracts. In addition, KM97 depart from a single aggregate produc-
tion function. In their economy output is produced in two sectors, where one is more
productive than the other. This allows a focus on the dual role of durable assets as (i) a
collateral for borrowing and (ii) an input for production. Another important difference
from the previous models is that in KM97 total aggregate capital in the economy is
fixed at K̄. Effectively this means that investment is completely irreversible and cap-
ital is therefore characterized by extreme technological illiquidity (using the notation
   5
     In principle, optimal entrepreneur leverage can depend on higher moments of the distribution of
returns as well. However, these effects are small in a log-linearized solution when the aggregate shocks
are small.
                                                 0
   6
     BGG express the return as Rt+1  k
                                         = At+1 f (Kt+1qt)+q̄t+1 (1−δ) , where q̄t+1 is the price at which en-
trepreneurs sell capital to the investment sector. If the investment sector breaks even, then this defi-
nition of returns is equivalent to (11).


                                                     14
of BGG, Φ(I/K) = 0 for all I). The purpose is to instead study at what price capital
can be redeployed and sold off to second best use by reallocating it from one group of
agents to another. The focus is therefore on the market liquidity of physical capital.
Amplification then arises because fire-sales of capital from the more productive sector
to the less productive sector depress asset prices and cause a feedback effect. The static
amplification was originally pointed out by Shleifer and Vishny (1992) in a corporate
finance framework with debt overhang. In Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) an additional
dynamic amplification effect is also at work, since a temporary shock translates in a
persistent decline in output and asset prices, which in turn feed back and amplify the
concurrent initial shock even further.
    More specifically, there are two types of infinitely-lived risk-neutral agents of con-
stant population sizes. The productive agents are characterized by (i) a constant-
returns-to-scale production technology which yields tradable output akt in period t + 1
for an input of kt of assets in period t, and (ii) a discount factor β < 1.7
    The unproductive agents are characterized by (i) a decreasing-returns-to-scale pro-
duction technology which yields output F (k t ) in period t + 1 for an input of k t of assets
in period t, where F 0 > 0 and F 00 < 0, and (ii) a discount factor β ∈ (β, 1).
    Due to their relative impatience, the productive agents will want to borrow from
the unproductive agents but their borrowing is subject to a friction. Agents cannot pre-
commit their human capital and each productive agent’s technology is idiosyncratic in
the sense that it requires this particular agent’s human capital as in Hart and Moore
(1994). This implies that a productive agent will never repay more than the value of
his asset holdings. Since there is no uncertainty about future asset prices, this results
in the following borrowing constraint:

                                           Rbt ≤ qt+1 kt

In comparison to the borrowing constraints derived from costly state verification, here
the cost of external financing is constant at R up to the constraint and then becomes
infinite. In the settings with costly state verification, the cost of external financing is
increasing in the borrowing for given net worth since higher leverage requires more
monitoring and therefore implies greater agency costs.8
   7
     In addition to the tradable output, the technology also produces ckt of non-tradable output. This
assumption is necessary to ensure that the productive agents don’t postpone consumption indefinitely
because of their linear preferences.
   8
     KM97 handle uncertainty about the asset price qt+1 by assuming that the farmer supplies labor


                                                 15
   In equilibrium, anticipating no shocks, a productive agent borrows to the limit and
does not consume any of the tradable output he produces. This implies a demand for
assets kt in period t given by

                                         1
                             kt =                  [(a + qt ) kt−1 − Rbt−1 ] .                       (12)
                                    qt − R1 qt+1

The term in square brackets is the agent’s net worth given by his tradable output akt−1
and the current value of his asset holdings from the previous period qt kt−1 , net of the face
value of maturing debt Rbt−1 . This net worth is levered up by the factor (qt − qt+1 /R)−1
which is the inverse margin requirement implied by the borrowing constraint. Each unit
of the asset costs qt but the agent can only borrow qt+1 /R against one unit of the asset
used as collateral.
    The unproductive agents’ technology is not idiosyncratic – it does not require the
particular agent’s human capital. Therefore, unproductive agents are not borrowing
constrained and the equilibrium interest rate is equal to their discount rate, R = 1/β.
An unproductive agent chooses asset holdings k t that yield the same return as the risk
free rate
                                         F 0 (k t ) + qt+1
                                    R=                     ,
                                                  qt
which can be rewritten as
                                       1        1
                                         qt+1 = F 0 (k t ) .
                                       qt −                                          (13)
                                       R       R
Expressed in this form, an unproductive agent demands capital k t until the discounted
marginal product F 0 (k t ) /R equals the opportunity cost given by the difference in to-
day’s price and the discounted price tomorrow, qt − qt+1 /R.
    The aggregate mass of productive agents is η while the aggregate mass of unproduc-
tive agents is 1 − η. Denoting aggregate quantities by capital letters, market clearing
in the asset market at t requires ηKt + (1 − η) K t = K̄. With the unproductive agent’s
first order condition (13) this implies
                                                 
                              1      1 0 K̄ − ηKt
                          qt − qt+1 = F             =: M (Kt ) .                                     (14)
                              R      R     1−η
before any shock is realized and therefore always repays the promised Bt+1 . Alternatively, the the
actual repayment could be min {Bt+1 , qt+1 kt }. As creditors have to receive Rbt in expectation for a
loan of bt this implies that the credit constraint with uncertainty is Rbt ≤ Et [min {Bt+1 , qt+1 kt }].
Note that this requires Bt+1 > Rbt , i.e. a nominal interest rate Bt+1 /bt greater than the risk-free rate
of R.



                                                     16
In equilibrium, the margin requirement qt − qt+1 /R faced by the productive agents is
linked to their demand for assets Kt . The relationship is positive due to the concavity
of F . A higher Kt is associated with fewer assets being used in the unproductive agents’
technology which implies a higher marginal product there. In equilibrium, this higher
marginal product has to be balanced by a higher opportunity cost of holding assets qt −
qt+1 /R. This is captured by the function M being increasing. Rewriting the equilibrium
condition (14) and iterating forward we see that with a transversality condition the
asset price qt equals the discounted sum of future marginal products
                                       ∞
                                      X   1
                                 qt =        M (Kt+s )                              (15)
                                      s=0
                                          Rs

    In the steady state, the productive agents borrow to the limit – always rolling over
their debt – and use their tradable output a to pay the interest. The steady state asset
price q ∗ therefore satisfies
                                           1
                                     q ∗ − q ∗ = a,
                                           R
which implies that the steady state level of capital K ∗ used by the productive agents
is given by
                                 1 0 K̄ − ηK ∗
                                                
                                   F                = a.
                                 R        1−η
Note that the capital allocation is inefficient in the steady state. The marginal product
of capital in the unproductive sector is a as opposed to a + c in the productive sector
where c is the untradable fraction of output.
    The main effects of KM97 are derived by introducing an unanticipated productivity
shock and studying the reaction of the model linearized around the steady state. In
particular, suppose the economy is in the steady state in period t − 1 and in period t
there is an unexpected one-time shock that reduces production of all agents by a factor
1 − ∆.
    The percentage change in the productive agents’ asset holdings K̂t for a given per-
centage change in asset price q̂t is given by
                                                       
                                     ξ            R
                            K̂t = −           ∆−     q̂t ,                          (16)
                                    1+ξ          R−1

where ξ denotes the elasticity of the unproductive agents’ residual asset supply with



                                           17
respect to the opportunity cost at the steady state.9 We see that the reduction in asset
holdings comes from two negative shocks to the agents’ net worth. First, the lost output
∆ directly reduces net worth. Second, the agents experience capital losses on their pre-
vious asset holdings because of the decrease in the asset price q̂t . Importantly, the latter
effect is scaled up by the factor R/ (R − 1) > 1 since the agents are leveraged. Finally,
the overall effect of the reduction in net worth is dampened by the factor ξ/ (1 + ξ) since
the opportunity cost decreases as assets are reallocated to the unproductive agents. In
all following periods t + 1, t + 2, . . . we have

                                                    ξ
                                         K̂t+s =       K̂t+s−1 ,                                       (17)
                                                   1+ξ

which shows that the persistence of the initial reduction in asset holdings carrying over
into reduced asset holdings in the following periods.
    Next, the percentage change in asset price q̂t for given percentage changes in asset
holdings K̂t , K̂t+1 , . . . can be derived by linearizing (15), the expression of the current
asset price as the discounted future marginal products:
                                                          ∞
                                            1R−1 X 1
                                      q̂t =            K̂t+s                                           (18)
                                            ξ R s=0 Rs

This expression shows how all future changes in asset holdings feed back into the change
of today’s asset price.
    Combining the expressions (16)–(18) we can solve for the percentage changes K̂t , q̂t
as a function of the shock size ∆:
                                                        
                                                1
                           K̂t = − 1 +                     ∆
                                         (1 + ξ) (R − 1)
                                   1
                            q̂t = − ∆
                                   ξ

We see that in terms of asset holdings, the shock ∆ is amplified by a factor greater
than one and that this amplification is especially strong for a low elasticity ξ and a low
interest rate R. In terms of the asset price, the shock ∆ implies a percentage change of
the same order of magnitude and again the effect is stronger for a low elasticity ξ.
   9
     That is 1/ξ = d log M (K) /d log K|K=K ∗ = M 0 (K ∗ ) K ∗ /M (K ∗ ). Combining the aggregate de-
mand of productive agents implied by (12) with the equilibrium condition (14) we can linearize around
the steady state. Using the definition of ξ and the fact that M (K ∗ ) = a as well as M (K ∗ ) = q ∗ − q ∗ /R
we arrive at expression (16).


                                                     18
   To distinguish between the static and dynamic multiplier effects, we can decompose
the equilibrium changes in period t into a static part and a dynamic part as follows:

                                     static            dynamic
                                                          1
                           K̂t =      −∆           − (ξ+1)(R−1) ∆
                           q̂t   = − R−1
                                      R ξ
                                         1
                                           ∆ −           1 1
                                                         Rξ
                                                             ∆

The static part corresponds to the values of K̂t and q̂t that result if dynamic feed-back
were turned off, i.e. by assuming that qt+1 = q ∗ . This decomposition makes clear that
the effect of the dynamic multiplier far outweighs the effect of the static multiplier for
both the change in asset holdings and the change in asset price.
    Note however, that the effects of shocks in KM97 are completely symmetric, i.e. the
effects of a positive shock are just the mirror image of the effects of a negative shock,
also displaying persistence and amplification. In a similar model, Kocherlakota (2000)
addresses this issue by assuming that entrepreneurs have an optimal scale of production.
In this situation, a borrowing constraint implies that shocks have asymmetric effects:
After a positive shock the entrepreneurs do not change the scale of production and
simply increase consumption; after negative shocks they have to reduce the scale of
production since borrowing is constrained.
    The main message of Kocherlakota (2000) is that financial frictions cannot generate
large enough effects, since experts self-insure and hold liquid assets to withstand small
shocks. Even if one assumes that agents are at the constraint, amplification is not large
since the capital share – which is usually estimated to be around 1/3 – is too small
to make a sizable dent in current or future output. Cordoba and Ripoll (2004) argue
that for a significant amplification effect not only does the capital share need to be
large, but also the intertemporal substitution needs to be particularly low. Arguably,
these quantitative concerns are put at ease in settings in which labor supply is elastic,
which is the case, e.g. in settings with sticky wages as in BGG or with working capital
constraints as in Mendoza (2010) or Jermann and Quadrini (2012).


2.3    Instability, Asymmetry, Non-linear Effects and Volatility
       Dynamics
So far we discussed papers that study linearized system dynamics around a steady
state after an unanticipated zero probability adverse aggregate shock. Brunnermeier


                                              19
and Sannikov (2010) (hereafter BruSan10) build a continuous time model to study full
equilibrium dynamics, not just near the steady state. This model shows that the finan-
cial system exhibits some inherent instability due to highly non-linear effects. Unlike in
log-linearized models, the effects are asymmetric and only arise in the downturns.
    Since investors anticipate possible adverse shocks, they endogenously choose a safety
cushion – a fact that will be the focus of Section 4. This behavior allows experts to easily
absorb small to moderate shocks, and hence in normal times, near the stochastic steady
state, amplification effects are mild. However, in response to rare significant losses, ex-
perts choose to reduce their positions, affecting asset prices and triggering amplification
loops. This results in high volatility due to endogenous risk, which exacerbates matters
further.
    Overall, the system is characterized by relative stability, low volatility and reason-
able growth around the steady state. However, its behavior away from the steady state
is very different and best resembles crises episodes. In short, the model exhibits an inter-
esting endogenous volatility dynamics due to systemic risk and explains the asymmetry
(negative skewness) of business cycles. Most interestingly, the stationary distribution is
double-humped shaped suggesting that (without government intervention) the dynam-
ical system spends a significant amount of time in depressed regimes that may follow
crisis episodes.
    Like KM97, BruSan10 depart from a single aggregate production function. Hence,
capital can be redeployed to a different sector and the market illiquidity of physical cap-
ital is endogenously determined. Specifically, experts are more productive and produce
output at a constant returns to scale rate, yt = a kt , while less productive households
produce at a constant returns to scale rate, y t = a k t , with a < a. In addition, capital
held by households depreciates at a faster rate δ ≥ δ. Instead of TFP shocks on a,
capital is subject to direct stochastic Brownian shocks.10 When managed by productive
experts it evolves according to

                                dkt = (Φ(ιt ) − δ) kt dt + σkt dZt                                (19)

where ιt is the investment rate per unit of capital, and the concave function Φ(ιt ) reflects
(dis)investment costs as in BGG. As before, the concavity of Φ(ιt ) affects technological
  10
    This formulation preserves scale invariance in aggregate capital Kt and can also be expressed as
TFP shocks. However, it requires capital to be measured in efficiency units rather than physical number
of machines. That is, efficiency losses are interpreted as declines in Kt .



                                                  20
illiquidity. The law of motion of capital, k t , when managed by households the same is
except that the depreciation rate is δ > δ.
     Both experts and less productive households are assumed to be risk neutral. Experts
discount future consumption at the rate ρ and their consumption has to be non-negative.
Less productive households may also consume negatively and have a discount rate of
r < ρ.11 This assumption ensures that the risk-free rate is always equal to r.
     There is a fully liquid market for physical capital, in which experts can trade capital
among each other or with households. Denote the market price of capital (per efficiency
unit) in terms of output by qt and postulate its law of motion

                                         dqt = µqt qt dt + σtq qt dZt .                       (20)

In equilibrium qt , together with its drift µqt and volatility σtq , is determined endogenously.
The total risk of the value of capital kt qt consists of the exogenous risk σ (see (19) )
and the endogenous price risk σtq . The endogenous risk is time-varying and depends on
the state of the economy.
    To solve for the equilibrium, note first that the optimal investment rate that maxi-
mizes expected return is determined by the marginal Tobin’s q,

                                               qt = 1/Φ0 (ιt ) .

   The rate of return that experts earn from holding capital is given by

                         a − ιt
               drtk =           dt + (Φ(ιt ) − δ + µqt + σσtq ) dt + (σ + σtq ) dZt .
                           qt        |                      {z                    }
                         | {z }                     capital gains rate
                        dividend yield


The capital gains rate stems from the appreciation of qt kt , from equations (19) and
(20). Households’ rate of return from holding capital is lower as a and δ replace a and
δ.
    It is instructive to first focus on the less productive households. Since they are
risk-neutral and their consumption is unrestricted, their discount rate pins down the
risk-free rate r. Less productive households only buy physical capital if their expected
return from holding capital is r.
  11
     Like in CF and KM97 the difference in the discount rates ensures that the experts do not accu-
mulate so much wealth that they do not need additional funding. Recall that in BGG this is achieved
by assuming that experts die at a certain rate and consume just prior to death.


                                                      21
    The experts’ optimization problems are more complicated. They have to decide how
much capital kt to purchase on the market at a price qt , how much debt and outside
equity to issue and when to consume dct . Unlike in KM97, in BruSan10 experts can
also issue outside equity up to a limit, as long as they retain at least a fraction ϕt ≥ ϕ̃
of capital risk. This is a “skin in the game” constraint. Total capital risk σ + σtq is
split proportionately between the expert and outside equity holders, since agents can
contract only on the market price of capital kt qt and not the fundamental shocks.12 In
equilibrium, experts always find it optimal to sell off as much risk as possible by issuing
equity up to the limit ϕ̃.
    In addition experts raise funds by issuing debt claims. In contrast to KM97, experts
in BruSan10 do not face any exogenous debt constraints. They decide endogenously
how much debt to issue. Overall, they face the following trade-off: greater leverage
leads to both higher profit and greater risk. Even though experts are risk-neutral, they
exhibit risk-averse behavior (in aggregate) because their investment opportunities are
time-varying. Taking on greater risk leads experts to suffer greater losses exactly in
the events when they value funds the most – after negative shocks when the price qt
becomes depressed and profitable opportunities arise. That is the marginal value of
an extra dollar for experts θt – the slope of their linear value function – negatively
comoves with their wealth nt . The negative comovement between θt and nt leads to
precautionary behavior by experts.
    Note that the trade-off between profit and risk is given by the aggregate leverage
ratio in equilibrium. Experts also face some (indirect) contagion risk through common
exposure to shocks even though different experts do not have any direct contractual
links with each other. These spillover effects are the source of systemic risk in BruSan10.
    Finally, experts also have to decide when to consume . This is an endogenous decision
in BruSan10 and risk-neutral experts only consume when the marginal value of an extra
dollar θt within the firm equals one.
    Put together, the law of motion of expert net worth is

                  dnt                                                        dct
                      = xt drtk − (1 − ϕ̃) (σ + σtq ) dZt + (1 − xt ) r dt −
                                                         
                                                                                 ,
                   nt                                                        nt

where xt is the ratio of the expert’s capital holdings to net worth, 1− ϕ̃ is the fraction of
capital risk the expert chooses to unload through equity issuance and dct is the experts’
consumption.
 12
      See DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) for a related continuous-time principle agent problem.

                                                 22
    The model is set up in such a way that all variables are scale-invariant with respect
to aggregate capital level Kt and dynamics are given by the single state variable

                                                  Nt
                                          ηt =          ,
                                                 q t Kt

the fraction of total wealth that belongs to experts, where Nt is the total net worth of
the expert sector. The price of capital q(η) is increasing in η, while the marginal value
of an extra dollar held by the experts θ(η) declines in η. For η at or above a critical
barrier η ∗ , θ = 1, i.e. an extra dollar of more expert net worth is just worth one dollar.
At this point the less patient experts consume some of their net worth, and their net
worth drops by the amount of consumption. While η < η ∗ experts do not consume
and ηt drifts in expectation up towards the “stochastic steady state” η ∗ , which is a
reflecting barrier of the system. At this point, subsequent positive shocks do not lead
to an increase in net worth as they are consumed away, while negative shock lead to a
reduction in the experts’ net worth.
    The model highlights the interaction between various liquidity concepts mentioned
in the introduction. Note that experts’ debt funding is instantaneous, i.e. extremely
short-term, while physical capital is long-term with a depreciation rate of δ. As argued
in Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2011), focusing on maturity mismatch
is however misleading since one also has to take into account that physical capital
can be reversed back to consumption goods or redeployed. Like in BGG, the function
Φ(ιt ) captures the “technological/physical liquidity” and describes to what extent capi-
tal goods can be reverted back to consumption goods through negative investment ιt .
Like in KM97 experts can also redeploy physical capital and “fire-sell” it to less pro-
ductive households at price q(η). The price impact, “market liquidity”, in BruSan10’s
competitive setting is only driven by shifts in the aggregate state variable. While the
liquidity on the asset side of experts’ balance sheets is driven by technological and mar-
ket liquidity, “funding liquidity” on the liability side of the balance sheet is comprised
of very short-term debt and limited equity funding.
    In equilibrium, experts fire-sell assets after a sufficiently large adverse shock.13 That
is, only a fraction ψ(η) ≤ 1 of physical capital is held by experts and this fraction is
declining as η drops. The price volatility and the volatility of η are determined by how
  13
    Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2011) also shares the feature that highly productive firms go
closer to their debt capacity and hence are harder hit in a downturns.




                                              23
feedback loops contribute to endogenous risk,
                                       ψt ϕ̃
                                        ηt
                                             −1                                 q 0 (ηt ) η
                    σtη   =         0
                                   q (ηt )
                                                              σ   and   σtq   =          σ t ηt .   (21)
                              1−            (ψt ϕ̃   − ηt )                         qt
                                      qt


The numerator of σtη , ψt ϕ̃/ηt − 1, is the experts’ debt-to-equity ratio. When q 0 (η) = 0,
the denominator is one and experts’ net worth is magnified only through leverage.
This case arises with perfect technological liquidity, i.e. when Φ(ι) is linear and ex-
perts can costlessly disinvest capital (instead of fire-selling assets). On the other hand,
when q 0 (η) > 0, then a drop in ηt by (ψt ϕ̃ − ηt ) σ dZt , causes the price qt to drop by
q 0 (ηt ) (ψt ϕ̃ − ηt ) σ dZt , leading to further deterioration of the net worth of experts, which
feeds back into prices, and so on. The amplification effect is nonlinear, which is captured
by q 0 (ηt ) in the denominator of σtη . Equation (21) also shows that the system behaves
very differently in normal times compared to crisis times. Since q 0 (η ∗ ) = 0, there is no
“price amplification” at the “stochastic steady state”. Close to η ∗ experts are relatively
unconstrained and adverse shocks are absorbed through adjustments in bonus payouts,
while in crisis times they fire-sell assets, triggering liquidity spirals.
      Most interestingly, the stationary distribution of the economy is bimodal with high
density at the extreme points. Most of the time the economy stays close to its attracting
point, the stochastic steady state. Experts have a capital cushion and volatility is con-
tained. For lower η values experts feel more constrained, the system becomes less stable
as the volatility shoots up. The excursions below the steady state are characterized by
high uncertainty, and occasionally may take the system very far below the steady state
from which it takes time to escape again. In other words, the economy is subject to
potentially long-lasting break-downs, i.e. systemic risk.
      It is worthwhile to note the difference to the traditional log-linearization approach
which determines the steady state by focusing on the limiting case in which the ag-
gregate exogenous risk σ goes to zero. A single unanticipated (zero probability) shock
upsets the log-linearized system that subsequently slowly drifts back to the steady state.
In BruSan2010, setting the exogenous risk σ to zero also alters the experts behavior.
In particular, they would not accumulate any net worth and the steady state would be
deterministic at η ∗ → 0. Also, one might argue that log-linearized solutions can capture
amplification effects of various magnitudes by placing the steady state in a particular
part of the state space. However, these experiments may be misleading as they force
the system to behave in a completely different way. The steady state can be “moved”


                                                          24
by a choice of an exogenous parameter such as exogenous drainage of expert net worth
in BGG. With endogenous payouts and a setting in which agents anticipate adverse
shocks, the steady state naturally falls in the relatively unconstrained region where
amplification is low, and amplification below the steady state is high.
    In terms of asset pricing implications, asset prices exhibit fat tails due to endoge-
nous systemic risk rather than exogenously assumed rare events. In the cross-section,
endogenous risk and excess volatility created through the amplification loop make as-
set prices significantly more correlated in crises than in normal times. Note that the
stochastic discount factor (SDF) is given by e−ρs θt+s /θt . He and Krishnamurthy (2011)
derive similar asset pricing implications. They derive the full dynamics of a continu-
ous time endowment economy with limited participation. That is, only experts can hold
capital k, while households can only buy outside equity issued by financial experts. Like
in BruSan10, financial experts face an equity constraint due to moral hazard problems.
When experts are well capitalized, risk premia are determined by aggregate risk aver-
sion since the outside equity constraint does not bind. However, after a severe adverse
shock experts become constrained and risk premia rise sharply as experts’ leverage has
to rise. He and Krishnamurthy (2010) calibrate a variant of their model and show that
equity injection is a superior policy compared to interest rate cuts or asset purchasing
programs by the central bank. Similarly, in Xiong (2001) expert arbitrageurs stabilize
asset prices in normal times, but exacerbate price movements when their net worth is
impaired.
    Paradoxically, in BruSan10 a reduction in exogenous cash flow risk σ can make the
economy less stable, a volatility paradox. That is, it can increase the maximum volatility
of experts’ net worth. The reason is that a decline in cash flow volatility encourages
experts to increase their leverage by reducing their net worth buffer. Similarly, new
financial products that allow experts to better share risk, and hedge idiosyncratic risks
can embolden experts to live with smaller net worth buffers and higher leverage, in-
creasing systemic risk. Ironically, tools intended for more efficient risk management can
lead to amplification of systemic risks, making the system less stable. 14
    Financial frictions are also prevalent in the international macro literature that fo-
cuses on emerging countries. Mendoza (2010) study a small open economy with fixed
interest rate and price for foreign input goods. The domestic representative agent is
  14
    BruSan10 also explicitly introduces a financial intermediary sector in the continuous-time model,
analogous to the one-period setting of Holmström and Tirole (1997) which this survey discusses in
Section 5 below.


                                                 25
collateral constrained and has to finance a fraction of wages and foreign inputs in ad-
vance – a feature it shares with time-to build models. Unlike in many other papers, in
Mendoza (2010) the emerging economy is only occasionally at its constraint. A numer-
ical solution for whole dynamical system is calibrated to 30 “sudden stops” emerging
countries faced in the last decades. Schneider and Tornell (2004) study the effect of
implicit bailout guarantees in the presence of borrowing constraints. While the antici-
pated bailout can relax the borrowing constraint, with foreign denomination of debts
there can be self-fulfilling crises with simultaneous crashes in output and the exchange
rate.


3      Volatility and Equilibrium Margins
The amplification effects discussed in the previous section can lead to rich volatility dy-
namics even if only the amount of equity issuance is limited through a “skin in the game
constraint” as in BruSan10. In this section borrowers also face debt/credit constraints
and the focus is on the interaction between these debt constraints and volatility of the
collateral asset. First, we first discuss how asymmetric information about volatility can
lead to credit rationing. The total quantity of (uncollateralized) lending is restricted by
an loan-to-value ratio or margin/haircut requirements. Second, we outline an interesting
feedback effect between volatility and debt/collateral constraints. Debt constraints are
more binding in volatile environments, which make the economy in turn more volatile
and vice versa. Unlike in BGG and KM97, these margin/haircut spirals force experts
to delever in times of crisis. This can lead to “collateral runs” and multiple equilibria.
We first focus on a model in which margins are an exogenous function of volatility and
then discuss a set of papers with endogenous equilibrium margins. In the latter markets
are also endogenously incomplete.


3.1     Credit Rationing
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) show how asymmetric information in credit markets can lead
to a failure of the price mechanism. Instead of the interest rate adjusting to equate
demand and supply, the market equilibrium is characterized by credit rationing: there
is excess demand for credit which does not lead to an increase in the interest rate.15
  15
    For an earlier discussion of credit rationing see Jaffee and Modigliani (1969), Jaffee and Russell
(1976). Subsequent papers include Bester (1985), Mankiw (1986) and de Meza and Webb (1987).


                                                 26
    In the model entrepreneurs borrow from lenders in a competitive credit market at an
interest rate r to finance investment projects with uncertain returns. Entrepreneurs are
heterogeneous in the riskiness of their projects: the payoff of entrepreneur i’s project is
given by R with a distribution G(R | σi ). While all entrepreneurs’ projects have the same
        R
mean, R dG(R | σi ) = µ for all i, entrepreneurs with higher σs have riskier projects,
if σi > σj then G(R | σi ) is a mean-preserving spread of G(R | σj ).
    If an entrepreneur borrows the amount B at the interest rate r, then his payoff for
a given project realization R is given by

                           πe (R, r) = max {R − (1 + r) B, 0} ,

while the payoff to the lender is given by

                              π` (R, r) = min {R, (1 + r) B} .

The key properties of these ex-post payoffs are that the entrepreneur’s payoff πe (R, r)
is convex in the realization R while the lender’s payoff π` (R, r) is concave in R. This
                                                                      R
implies that the ex-ante expected payoff of the entrepreneur, πe (R, r) dG(R | σi ),
is increasing in the riskiness σi whereas the ex-ante expected payoff of the lender,
R
  π` (R, r) dG(R | σi ), is decreasing in σi .
    At a given interest rate r only entrepreneurs with a sufficiently high riskiness σi ≥ σ ∗
will apply for loans. The cutoff σ ∗ is given by the zero-profit condition
                                Z
                                      πe (R, r) dG(R | σ ∗ ) = 0,

which implies that the cutoff σ ∗ is increasing in the market interest rate r. For high
interest rates only the riskiest entrepreneurs find it worthwhile to borrow. This leads
to a classic lemons problem as in Akerlof (1970) since the pool of market participants
changes as the price varies.
    Credit rationing can occur if the lenders cannot distinguish borrowers with different
riskiness, i.e. if an entrepreneur’s σi is private information. A lender’s ex-ante payoff is
then the expectation over borrower types present at the given interest rate
                                     Z                                      
                                                                         ∗
                       π̄` (r) = E        π` (R, r) dG(R | σi ) σi ≥ σ           .




                                                27
As usual, a higher interest rate r has a positive effect on the lender’s ex-ante payoff
π̄` (r) since the ex-post payoff π` (R, r) is increasing in r. In addition, however, a higher
interest rate r also has a negative effect on π̄` (r) since it implies a higher cutoff σ ∗ and
therefore a higher riskiness of the average borrower. The overall effect is ambiguous and
therefore the lender’s payoff π̄` (r) can be non-monotonic in the interest rate r.
     In equilibrium, each lender will only lend at the interest rate which maximizes his
payoff π̄` (r) and so it is possible that at this interest rate there is more demand for
funds from borrowers than lenders are willing to provide, given alternative investment
opportunities. In such a situation, there is credit rationing since there are entrepreneurs
who would like to borrow and would be willing to pay an interest rate higher than the
prevailing one. However, the market interest rate doesn’t increase to equate demand
and supply since lenders would then be facing a worse pool of borrowers and make
losses on their lending.


3.2    Delevering due to Margin/Haircut Spiral
For collateralized lending the quantity restriction of the amount of lending is directly
linked to volatility of the collateral asset. In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) ex-
perts face an explicit credit constraint and, as in KM97, cannot issue any equity. This
is unlike in BruSan10 where experts’ debt issuance was only limited by (endogenous)
liquidity risk. Experts have to finance the margin/haircut with their own equity. Mar-
gins/haircuts are set to guard against adverse price movements. More specifically, the
(dollar) margin mt large enough to cover the position’s π-value-at-risk (where π is a
non-negative number close to zero, e.g., 1%):

                                         j
                                             > mj+
                                                             
                               π = Pr −∆qt+1    t  Ft                                    (22)

The margin/haircut is implicitly defined by Equation (22) as the π-quantile of next
period’s collateral value. Each risk-neutral expert has to finance mj+  j+
                                                                     t xt  of the total
                              j j+
value of his (long) position qt xt on with his own equity capital. The same is true for
short positions mj−   j−
                   t xt . The margins/haircuts determine the maximum leverage (and
loan-to-value ratio.)
    Price movements in this model are typically governed by fundamental cash flow
news. The conditional expectation vtj of the final cash flow is assumed to follow an




                                             28
ARCH process. That is, volatility is governed by

                             vtj = vt−1
                                    j
                                        + ∆vtj = vt−1
                                                  j
                                                      + σtj εjt ,                       (23)

where all εjt are i.i.d. across time and assets with a standard normal distribution, and
the volatility σtj has dynamics

                                    j
                                   σt+1 = σ j + θj ∆vtj ,                               (24)

where σ j , θj ≥ 0. A positive θj implies that a large realization εjt , affects not only vtj
                                        j
but also increases future volatility σt+1 . Like in the data, volatility is persistent.
    Occasionally, temporary selling (or buying) pressure arises that is reverted in the
next period. Without credit constraints, risk-neutral experts bridge the asynchronicity
between buying and selling pressure, provide market liquidity and thereby ensure that
the price qtj of asset j follows its expected cash flow vtj . In other words, any temporary
selling or buying pressure is simply offset by risk-neutral experts. When experts face
credit constraints, their activity is limited and the price qtj can deviate from vtj . This
gap captures market illiquidity, while the Lagrange multiplier of the experts’ funding
constraint is a measure of funding illiquidity.
    Like in the papers in the previous section, the expert sector’s net worth is a key
variable. As long as expert net worth η is sufficiently large a perfect-liquidity equilib-
rium exists with qtj = vtj . For very low η, the funding constraint is always binding and
market liquidity provision is imperfect. Interestingly, for intermediate values of expert
net worth η, there are multiple equilibria and experts’ demand function is backward
bending. To see this, suppose temporary selling pressure drives down the price. Since
price movements are typically due to permanent movements in vt , uninformed house-
                                                                                  j
holds attribute most of the price movement to negative cash flow news ∆vt+1          . Due to
the ARCH dynamics, households expect a high future price volatility of the collateral
asset. As a consequence, they set a high margin, which tightens the experts’ funding
constraint exactly when it is most profitable to take on a larger position.
    For intermediate values of expert wealth, there exists one equilibrium, in which ex-
perts can absorb the selling pressure and thereby stabilize the price. Hence, households
predict low future price volatility and set low margins/haircuts which enables experts to
absorb the pressure in the first place. In contrast, in the illiquidity equilibrium, experts
do not absorb the selling pressure and the price drops. As a consequence, households


                                             29
think that future volatility will be high and charge a high margin. This in turn makes
it impossible for experts to fully absorbing the initial selling pressure.
    As expert net worth falls, possibly due to low realization of v, the price discon-
tinuously drops from the perfect liquidity price qtj = vtj to the price level of the low
liquidity equilibrium. This discontinuity feature is referred to as fragility of liquidity.
Besides this discontinuity, price is also very sensitive to further declines in expert’s net
worth due to two liquidity spirals: the (static) loss spiral and the margin/haircut spiral
that leads to delevering. The loss spiral is the same amplification mechanism that also
arises in BGG and KM97. Note that in BGG and KM97 experts mechanically lever up
after a negative shock. This is in sharp contrast to Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)
in which the volatility dynamics and the resulting margin/haircut spiral forces experts
to delever in times of crisis. To see this formally, focus on the second and third term in
the denominator of
                               ∂q1               1
                                   =                          .
                               ∂η1      2     +         ∂m+
                                           2 m1 − x0 + ∂q x1
                                                          1
                                      γ(σ )
                                        2                 1


    If experts hold a positive position of this asset, i.e. x0 > 0, then losses amplify
the price impact (loss spiral). Furthermore, if a decline in price, leads to higher mar-
                     ∂m+
gins/haircuts, i.e. ∂q11 < 0, experts are forced to delever which destabilizes the system
further (margin/haircut spiral). Fragility and margin spiral describe a “collateral run”
in the ABCP and Repo market in 2008. Adrian and Shin (2010b) provide empirical
evidence for delevering of investment banks during the financial crisis of 2007-2009 and
Gorton and Metrick (2011) document that such increases in margins occurred in parts
of the repo market. In contrast, commercial banks seem to have a countercyclical lever-
age according to He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) as they had access to Fed’s
lending facilities. Collateral runs are the modern form of bank runs and differ from the
classic “counterparty run” on a particular bank. We will study “counterparty runs” in
Section 5 when we discuss Diamond and Dybvig (1983)
    In a setting with multiple assets, asset prices might comove even though their cash
flows are independently distributed since they are exposed to the same funding liquidity
constraint. Also, assets with different margin constraints, might trade at vastly different
prices even when their payoffs are similar. See also Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011).


3.3    Equilibrium Margins and Endogenous Incompleteness
Geanakoplos (1997) and Geanakoplos and Zame (1997) introduce endogenous collat-


                                            30
eral/margin constraints into a general equilibrium framework à la Arrow-Debreu. Unlike
in an Arrow-Debreu world, in a “collateral equilibrium” no payments in future peri-
ods/states can be credibly promised unless they are to 100% collateralized with the
value of durable assets. With the effect of asset prices on borrowing, this collateral
constraint is similar to the one in KM97, but here the equilibrium margins/haircuts
of collateralized borrowing are derived endogenously in interaction with equilibrium
prices. An important consequence is that markets can be endogenously incomplete.

Collateral Equilibrium. Consider the following simplified setup. There are two pe-
riods t = 0, 1, and a finite set of states s ∈ S in t = 1. Commodities are indexed by
` ∈ L and some of these are durable between periods 0 and 1 and/or yield output in the
form of other commodities in period 1. The potential for durability and transformation
is given exogenously by a linear function f , where a vector x of goods in period 0 is
transformed into a vector fs (x) of goods in state s in period 1.
    Agents can be heterogeneous with respect to their endowments, utilities and beliefs,
generating demand for exchange between agents across different states in period 1. All
trade in commodities occurs in competitive markets at a price vector p in t = 0 and
respective price vector ps in state s in t = 1.
    In addition to physical commodities, agents trade financial contracts in t = 0 in
order to transfer consumption across states. However, unlike the standard Arrow-Debreu
model, promises of future payments are not enforceable unless they are collateralized.
A financial contract j is therefore characterized by the vector of commodities Ajs it
promises in state s and by the vector of commodities Cj that have to be held by the
seller as collateral between period 0 and 1. Given the non-enforceability, the value of
the actual delivery of contract j in state s is given by

                          Djs (ps ) = min {ps · Ajs , ps · fs (Cj )} ,

the value, at spot prices ps , of the promise Ajs or of the collateral fs (Cj ), whichever
is less. The set of available contracts J is exogenous but potentially very large and all
contracts are in zero net supply. All financial contracts j ∈ J are traded competitively in
t = 0 at prices {qj } but due to the collateral requirement it is important to distinguish
between an agent’s contract purchases ϕ and his contract sales ψ.
    The effect of the collateral requirement can most clearly be seen in an agent’s budget
constraints. Given prices (p, q) an agent chooses a vector of goods x and a portfolio of


                                              31
financial contracts (ϕ, ψ) subject to a budget and collateral constraint in t = 0 and a
budget constraint for each state s in t = 1. The constraints in period 0 are
                                                                       X
                p0 · x0 + q · ϕ ≤ p0 · e0 + q · ψ and x0 ≥                       Cj ψj .
                |               {z              }                          j∈J
                         Budget constraint
                                                      |                   {z         }
                                                                 Collateral constraint


The expenditure on goods x0 and contract purchases ϕ cannot exceed the income from
the endowment e0 and contract sales ψ. In addition, the vector of goods x0 has to cover
the collateral requirements of the contract sales ψ. The budget constraint for state s in
period 1 is

                                  Delivery on contract sales
                         zX                }|                    {
               p s · xs +        min {ps · Ajs , ps · fs (Cj )} ψj
                            j∈J
                                         X
                ≤ ps · (es + fs (x0 )) +         min {ps · Ajs , ps · fs (Cj )} ϕj .
                                            j∈J
                                         |                   {z                  }
                                                 Collection on contract purchases


The expenditure on goods xs and delivery on contract sales ψ cannot exceed the income
from the endowment es and the left-over durable goods fs (x0 ), and the collection on
contract purchases.
    A key implication of the collateral equilibrium is that the market will be endoge-
nously incomplete. Even if the set of possible contracts J is large, if collateral is scarce,
only a small subset of contracts will be traded in equilibrium. The key factor is the need
for the seller of a contract to hold collateral. This is included in the marginal utility
of selling a contract while it doesn’t affect the marginal utility of buying a contract,
creating a wedge between the marginal utility of the buyer and the seller. Therefore
all contracts where, across agents, the highest marginal utility of buying the contract
is less than the lowest marginal utility of selling the contract will not be traded. In
addition, due to the fact that the delivery on a contract is the minimum of the amount
promised and the value of the collateral, it is better to have a high correlation between
the promised payment and the value of the collateral.

Basic Example. To illustrate some of the implications of the endogenous collateral
requirement we now present an example from Geanakoplos (2003). The example re-
stricts the set J of available financial contracts and only allows standard borrowing
contracts, highlighting the effects of equilibrium leverage on asset prices in a static and


                                                 32
dynamic setting.16
     First consider a static setting with two periods t = 0, 1, two states in period 1
s = U, D, and two goods ` = C, Y . While C is a storable consumption good, Y is an
investment good (asset) paying 1 and 0.2 units of the consumption good in states U
and D respectively. Agents are risk neutral, derive utility only from the consumption
good and have non-common priors: Agent h has belief Pr [s = U ] = h and agents are
uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. This implies that there will be trade since optimistic
agents with high h are natural buyers of the asset while pessimists with low h are
natural sellers.
     Every agent has an endowment of one unit of the consumption good and one unit
of the asset in period 0 and no endowments in period 1. The consumption good is the
numeraire and the asset’s price in period 0 is p. Given the heterogeneous beliefs, the
population is endogenously divided into buyers and sellers of the asset. For an asset
price p, the marginal buyer is given by the agent h who values the asset exactly at p,
i.e.
                                  h · 1 + (1 − h) · 0.2 = p.                       (25)

   In the baseline case without any financial contracts, market clearing requires that
the buyers – the top 1 − h agents – spend their entire endowment of the consumption
good on the assets purchased from the bottom h agents:

                                             1 − h = ph

Combining the two equations we get h = 0.60 and p = 0.68. So the 40% most optimistic
agents buy the assets of the 60% more pessimistic agents at a price of 0.68. If the
optimistic agents could borrow in period 0 by promising some consumption good in
period 1 they could afford to buy more of the asset.
    Now consider the case with a financial contract. The only type of contract allowed
is a standard borrowing contract promising the same amount of the consumption good
in both states in period 1. There are still many different borrowing contracts possible,
varying in their promised interest rates and levels of collateralization. In the equilibrium
of this simple example, only fully collateralized debt will be traded. The intuition is
as follows: Overcollateralization is wasteful and will therefore not happen. Undercol-
lateralized debt leads to default in state D so the borrower pays the lender back more
  16
    It should be pointed out though that this somewhat departs from the spirit of the general collateral
equilibrium concept since it exogenously imposes market incompleteness.


                                                  33
in state U than in state D. But the borrower is more optimistic than the lender so
he thinks state U is relatively more likely while the lender thinks state D is relatively
more likely. Therefore gains from trade are maximized with default-free debt - optimists
would like to promise pessimists relatively more in the bad state D but given the payoff
of the only available collateral, the closest they can get is promising equal amounts in
both states. Since this debt is default-free it carries a zero interest rate. This means
that against each unit of the asset an agent can borrow 0.2 units of the consumption
good. The marginal buyer is again given by (25) but with collateralized borrowing the
market clearing condition becomes

                                         (1 − h) + 0.2 = ph.

Now, in addition to their endowment of the consumption good, the buyers can raise
an additional 0.2 by borrowing against the assets they are buying. Combining the two
equations we get h = 0.69 and p = 0.75. Compared to the case without borrowing, the
smaller group of the 31% most optimistic agents can buy the assets and the marginal
buyer has a higher valuation, driving the price up to 0.75.

Dynamic Margins. Now consider a dynamic setting with three periods t = 0, 1, 2.
Uncertainty resolves following a binomial tree: Two states in period 1, U and D, and
four states in period 2, U U , U D, DU and DD. The physical asset pays off 1 in all final
states except in state DD, where it only pays 0.2. Similar to before, agent h thinks the
probability of an up move in the tree is h. Only one-period borrowing is allowed which
will be fully collateralized by same intuition as before.17
    We conjecture an equilibrium with prices p0 and pD with the following features. In
period 0 the most optimistic agents borrow and buy all the assets at price p0 with a
marginal buyer h0 . If the first move is to U , all uncertainty is fully resolved and nothing
interesting happens. If instead D realizes, the initial buyers are completely wiped out
and the remaining agents each receive an equal payment 1/h0 from them. Among the
now remaining agents the most optimistic buy the assets at price pD with a marginal
buyer hD . We derive the equilibrium by backwards induction. Analogous to the static
case, the marginal buyer in state D satisfies

                                    hD · 1 + (1 − hD ) · 0.2 = pD .
 17
      See Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008) for an application of this model in a fully dynamic setting.


                                                   34
The buyers h ∈ [h0 , hD ] spend their endowment and what they can borrow to buy all
the assets so market clearing requires

                              1
                                 (h0 − hD ) + 0.2 = pD hD .
                              h0

In period 0 the marginal buyer’s situation is a bit more complicated. He will not be
indifferent between spending his endowment buying the asset or consuming it since he
anticipates that storing his endowment may allow him to buy the asset in state D at a
price he considers a bargain. To make him indifferent, the return on each dollar of his
endowment must be the same wether he buys the asset now (in period 0) or whether
he waits and buys the asset in state D tomorrow, which requires

                      h0 (1 − pD )                      h0 (1 − 0.2)
                                   = h0 · 1 + (1 − h0 )              .
                        p0 − pD                          pD − 0.2

Note that this implies that there are speculators in equilibrium: agents who consider
the asset undervalued in period 0 but nevertheless prefer to hold on to their cash for the
possibility of an even better opportunity in period 1. Market clearing requires, similar
to before
                                 (1 − h0 ) + pD = p0 h0

The four equilibrium equations can be solved by an iterative algorithm to yield the
following equilibrium variables

                                 h0 = 0.87,        p0 = 0.95,
                                hD = 0.61,         pD = 0.69.

If state D is realized, the equilibrium asset price drops from p0 = 0.95 to pD = 0.69, a
drop of 0.26. The comparison of the drop in price to the drop in fundamental depends
on which agent’s beliefs to use. For the marginal buyer at t = 0, the move to state
D reduces the fundamental by only 0.09, while for the marginal buyer in state D, the
drop in fundamental is 0.19. The greatest drop in fundamental – by 0.20 – is perceived
by the agent with h = 0.5. No agent therefore considers the asset fundamental to have
dropped as much as the asset price.
    The drop in price is so severe relative to the drop in fundamental for two reasons.
First, the most optimistic agents who were buying the asset in period 0 are wiped out
by the move to D thus removing the agents with the highest valuation from the pool

                                              35
of potential buyers. Second, borrowing margins increase significantly: In period 0 each
agent could borrow 0.69 against the purchase of the asset at price 0.95 which implies a
percentage margin of (0.95 − 0.69) /0.95 = 27%. In state D only 0.2 can be borrowed
against the asset price 0.69, implying a much higher margin of (0.69 − 0.2) /0.69 =
71%. The main contributor to the increase in the margin is the increase in one-period
uncertainty. For agent h, the variance of the asset between period 0 and period 1 is
given by
                         h (1 − h) (1 − 0.69)2 = 0.096 h (1 − h)

Once state D is reached, however, the variance between period 1 and period 2 is given
by
                         h (1 − h) (1 − 0.2)2 = 0.69 h (1 − h)

so the one-period variance increases seven-fold for all agents h ∈ (0, 1), regardless of
their belief.
    Simsek (2010) stresses that the distortions are limited in a setting in which the payoff
of the collateral asset can take on many values, since each optimist has to borrow from
a pessimist who values the collateral asset less. This restrains optimist’s credit and risk
taking capacity. Only if the asset payoff is very (positively) skewed is the downward
risk limited such that pessimists are willing to lend more to optimists.
    Models with heterogeneous beliefs (non-common priors) have the drawback that it
is more difficult to conduct a thorough welfare analysis. It is not clear which beliefs
should one should assign to the social planner. Recently, Brunnermeier, Simsek, and
Xiong (2011) developed a welfare criterion that can be applied to all models with
heterogeneous beliefs. That is, it applies to the models discussed here in which solvency
constraints force optimists to sell their assets as well as to speculative bubble models à
la Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) in which the prospect
of being easily able to the asset to a newly optimistic trader lead to “excessively” high
valuation and trading volumes.


4     Demand for Liquid Assets
The driving forces of amplification and instability so far were technological illiquidity Φ
and market illiquidity as productive experts have to sell off their assets to agents who
can only use them less efficiently. These liquidity characteristics led to a time-variation
in the price of capital q, and equivalently in Tobin’s Q. Moreover, when price volatility

                                            36
interacts with debt constraints, liquidity spirals emerge that force experts to delever
which amplifies the effects further.
     In this section we focus primarily on the demand for liquid instruments. We start
with settings in which these amplification effects are switched off. That is, there is no
technological illiquidity – all capital investments are reversible – and hence the price
of capital goods in terms of consumption goods, q, is constant. Hence, without loss of
generality we can focus on borrowing constraints which, unlike collateral constraints,
do not depend on the price of the collateral asset.
     The demand for liquid assets results from a desire to either (i) smooth consumption
or (ii) self-insure against uninsurable risk. Bubbles emerge and fiat money takes on a role
as store of value. Interestingly, most of the macroeconomic implications arise in both the
simple OLG settings as well as in incomplete markets settings with borrowing limits. In
OLG models households try to smooth their consumption, while in incomplete markets
settings they save for precautionary reasons. Within the incomplete markets setting, the
basic economic insights are first derived in the more tractable setting without aggregate
risk. Without aggregate risk all macro and price variables are not time-varying. We then
introduce aggregate risk. Finally we switch on the amplifying effects and make capital
illiquid. This allows one to study the interaction between amplification and the demand
for liquid assets.


4.1    Smoothing Deterministic Fluctuations
Basic OLG. Models of overlapping generations (OLG) are used to analyze the role
of liquid assets to improve allocations. Many of the economic insights also arise in an
incomplete markets setting discussed below. While the initial OLG models took the
interpretation of generations literally, more recent papers use it as a tractable short-cut
formulation for other financial frictions. Of course, the latter “renders” a quantitative
evaluation and calibration.
    The concept of finitely-lived but overlapping generations is first introduced in Samuel-
son (1958). The paper models an infinite-horizon economy where in each period t, a
new generation of agents is born who live for two periods. An agent in generation t
therefore only derives utility from consumption in periods t and t + 1, i.e. his utility is
                      
given by u ctt , ctt+1 . The size of each new generation and therefore the entire population
grows at a rate n.
    In this setting, a Pareto optimal allocation requires that the marginal rates of in-


                                            37
tertemporal substitution are equalized across all agents and that they are equal to the
population growth rate,
                              ∂u/∂ctt
                                       = 1 + n for all t.
                             ∂u/∂ctt+1
    The peculiar feature of the OLG structure as opposed to a standard Arrow-Debreu
setting is that even with complete markets – that is, even if all generations could meet
at time t = 0 and write contingent contracts – OLG economies can have multiple
competitive equilibria that can be Pareto ranked.
    Consider the following simple example. Let the utility function be given by

                                u ctt , ctt+1 = ln ctt + β ln ctt+1
                                                                  


and let each generation have an endowment e when young and 1 − e when old. In
addition, assume that markets are complete, i.e. agents can borrow and lend freely at
an interest rate r. The first order conditions of an agent in generation t imply

                                           ctt+1
                                                 =1+r
                                           βctt

and there is a competitive equilibrium with 1 + r = 1 + n that implements the Pareto
optimum.
    However, note that for 1 + r = (1 − e) / (βe) each agent simply consumes his
endowment which obviously clears markets so there is a second competitive equilib-
rium which implements an autarky allocation. This autarkic competitive equilibrium
is clearly Pareto inefficient, even though markets are complete.18 The underlying cause
is of this potential for inefficiency which doesn’t exist in an Arrow-Debreu setting can
be thought of as a “lack of market clearing at infinity.” See Geanakoplos (2008) for a
detailed discussion of the technical details.
    In the original paper, Samuelson (1958) focuses on equilibria that can be imple-
mented in a sequential exchange economy. Therefore, in the basic version of the model
with only the perishable consumption good, the only achievable competitive equilibrium
is the autarky equilibrium. However, things change substantially with the introduction
of a durable asset that provides a store of value. Even though this asset cannot be
used for consumption, now the Pareto optimal allocation is attainable as a competitive
  18
    In addition, there is an infinite number of non-stationary competitive equilibria, i.e. with time-
changing interest rate rt that are also Pareto inefficient.



                                                 38
equilibrium. In this equilibrium the asset, e.g. fiat money, trades at a price bt which
grows at the same rate as the population:

                                         bt+1 = (1 + n) bt

By transferring wealth within a period from the young generation to the old generation,
the asset allows the transfer of wealth across periods from the youth of a generation to
their own old age.

Production. Diamond (1965) uses the same setup as Samuelson (1958) but adds
a capital good which, together with labor, is used to produce the consumption good
with a constant-returns-to-scale aggregate production function Yt = F (Kt , Lt ). The
consumption good can be converted into new capital one-for-one and capital doesn’t
depreciate.
      The welfare-optimal steady state requires, as before, that the marginal rates of
substitution are equalized across all agents in all periods and that they are equal to
the growth rate 1 + n. In addition, the steady state capital stock has to maximize
production subject to the aggregate budget constraint. Denoting per-capita values by
lowercase letters, this implies that the optimal level of the capital stock to satisfies
f 0 (k ∗ ) = n, which is commonly known as the “golden rule.”
      In the competitive equilibrium, capital is paid a rental rate r = f 0 (k) and individual
optimization equalizes marginal rates of substitution across agents:

                                    ∂u/∂ctt
                                             =1+r         for all t
                                   ∂u/∂ctt+1

However, because of the OLG setup, nothing guarantees that the competitive equilib-
rium achieves the welfare optimum, i.e. that r = n and therefore k = k ∗ . In particular,
it is possible that r < n, in which case the competitive equilibrium is dynamically inef-
ficient. Since the capital stock is above the golden-rule level, a Pareto improvement is
possible in the following way: The currently old generation consumes the excess capital
stock, making them better off; all future generations have to save less and can consume
more, making them better off as well.19
  19
    Blanchard (1985) studies a “perpetual-youth model” where agents have a constant probability of
dying in each period and therefore a constant finite expected horizon. Compared to an infinite-horizon
model, the finite horizon reduces the incentive to save, decreasing capital accumulation. Adding labor
income that decreases with age increases the incentive to save and the steady state can be inefficient


                                                 39
   As a solution to this potential inefficiency, Diamond (1965) proposes the use of
government debt with a constant per capita level d, issued at the market interest rate
r. The effect of this intervention is that it crowds out investment – since part of the
young generation’s saving now goes into purchasing bonds instead of capital – and raises
the interest rate r, thus shrinking the inefficiency gap n − r.

Bubbles. Tirole (1985) uses the same framework as Diamond (1965) with capital and
production but instead of government debt, he studies the effect of rational bubbles.
As in the original paper by Samuelson, he introduces an asset that cannot be used
for consumption or production but trades at price bt . With rational investors the asset
price has to satisfy bt ≥ 0 and

                                                    1 + rt+1
                                           bt+1 =            bt .
                                                     1+n

   Just like the government bonds in Diamond (1965), the bubble asset uses up a
part of savings, crowding out productive investment and increasing the interest rate.
Therefore, if the baseline economy is dynamically inefficient, there is a steady state
with a bubble b > 0 that achieves the welfare optimum r = n.20 In addition, a bubble
can only exist in a dynamically inefficient economy since otherwise any positive bubble
would eventually outgrow the economy.

Crowding out or Crowding in? Woodford (1990) shows that instead of the stan-
dard crowding-out effect, government debt can also have a crowding-in effect, which
increases investment. He studies the effect of borrowing constraints in an economy of
two types of agents with either time-varying endowments or time-varying investment
opportunities. There are no aggregate fluctuations since the two agents’ individual
fluctuations are perfectly negatively correlated and deterministic. Nevertheless, in the
presence of borrowing constraints the agents can only transfer wealth forward in time
which creates a demand for a store of value. Woodford assumes that agent’s cannot
borrow at all and can save by holding capital and government debt which both pay
interest r.
    The paper studies two setups, each with two types of infinitely-lived agents in an
as in the present OLG setting.
  20
     However, the equilibrium path leading to the steady state is only saddle-path stable. This means
that only one initial bubble size results in the efficient steady state while the paths for all other initial
bubbles have bt → 0, resulting in the baseline steady state.


                                                     40
economy with per-capita production function f (k). In the first setup, the two types of
agents have alternating endowments e > e ≥ 0. This mechanism is the same as the
classic crowding-out effect of government debt in the OLG models discussed above.
    The second setup highlights the possibility of crowding-in. Here the two types of
agents have alternating opportunities to invest in capital. The unproductive agents
can only hold government debt while the productive agents can hold capital and gov-
ernment debt with potentially different returns f 0 (k) and 1 + r, respectively. Woodford
then studies a stationary equilibrium where the unproductive agents are unconstrained,
consume c and save part of their endowment in government debt while the productive
agents are constrained, invest their savings and part of their endowment in capital and
consume c ≤ c. In this equilibrium the Euler equations for the unconstrained and the
constrained agent, respectively are

                       u0 (c) = β (1 + r) u0 (c)   and u0 (c) = βf 0 (k) u0 (c) ,

while the interest rate satisfies 1 + r ≤ f 0 (k).
    Combining the two Euler equations we now have β (1 + r) = [βf 0 (k)]−1 . While an
increase in government debt still increases the interest rate r, this now leads to an
increase in the level of capital k. The additional liquidity allows the agents to transfer
more wealth from unproductive periods to productive periods and therefore increases
the investment in capital. To achieve efficiency, the government should again increase
its debt until the borrowing constraint doesn’t bind anymore.
    A similar crowding-in effect of bubbles is illustrated in Martin and Ventura (2011)
where entrepreneurs are constrained to borrowing a fraction of their future firm value.
While efficiency requires that all investment should be undertaken by firms with high
investment productivity, the borrowing constraint restricts the flow of funds to these
firms. The paper then analyses the effect of rational bubbles on firm values. As in Tirole
(1985) discussed above, the bubbles crowd out total investment since they use up part
of savings. In their setting, however, a bubble also relaxes the borrowing constraint
of firms with investment opportunities which improves the allocation of funds to the
productive firms and crowds in their investment. This increase in allocation efficiency
outweighs the effect of lower aggregate investment and the bubbles are possible even if
the economy is dynamically efficient, as long as there is a borrowing friction.21
 21
      See also Farhi and Tirole (2011).




                                                   41
4.2       Precautionary Savings and Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Risk
Agents with a dislike for fluctuations in consumption over time face a problem if their
income stream is not steady. Anticipated fluctuations in income create a demand for
consumption smoothing, which requires saving in periods with high income and bor-
rowing in periods with low income. If markets are incomplete so agents cannot insure
against uncertain fluctuations in income then an additional precautionary motive for
saving can arise.22

4.2.1      Precautionary Savings

There are two ways to model a precautionary motive for saving, either through special
assumptions on the shape of the utility function or through a borrowing constraint.
   Consider an agent who maximizes
                                               "   ∞
                                                                      #
                                                   X
                                          E0             β t u(ct )
                                                   t=0


subject to the budget constraint

                               ct + at+1 = et + (1 + r) at                for all t,                (26)

where et is the potentially random endowment in period t and at+1 are the assets held
from period t to period t + 1. The standard Euler equation for this problem is given by

                                  u0 (ct ) = β (1 + r) Et [u0 (ct+1 )] .                            (27)

If we assume that the marginal utility u0 is convex, i.e. u000 > 0, then Jensen’s inequality
implies
                             Et [u0 (ct+1 )]   u0 (Et [ct+1 ])
                                             >
                                 u0 (ct )          u0 (ct )
so the marginal value of transferring one unit of consumption from period t to period
t + 1 is greater if consumption in period t + 1 is variable. Therefore the optimal level
of consumption in period t will be lower with uncertainty than without, the difference
being precautionary saving. This notion of precautionary saving is typically referred to
as “prudence” and can be measured similar to risk aversion by a prudence coefficient
 22
      For a detailed survey on the effects of heterogeneity in macroeconomics see Guvenen (2012).



                                                     42
−u000 /u00 > 0, see Kimball (1990).23
    Instead of assuming convexity of u0 we can impose a borrowing constraint at ≥ −b
for some exogenous borrowing limit b > 0. With the borrowing constraint, the Euler
equation (27) changes to

                                  u0 (ct ) ≥ β (1 + r) Et [u0 (ct+1 )] ,                           (28)

with equality if at+1 > −b. With a borrowing constraint, marginal utility can only be
equalized as long as the constraint is not binding. When the constraint is binding, the
marginal value of transferring one unit of consumption from period t + 1 to period t is
positive but cannot be accomplished.
   If we define a new variable Mt = β t (1 + r)t u0 (ct ) then we have Mt ≥ 0 and we can
rewrite the Euler equation (28) as

                                          Mt ≥ Et [Mt+1 ] .

This implies that Mt is a bounded supermartingale so we can make use of Doob’s
convergence theorem. From the definition of Mt we see that the crucial role for the
convergence is played by β (1 + r) Q 1. If the agent is relatively patient given the interest
rate, i.e. β (1 + r) > 1, then convergence of Mt requires u0 (ct ) to go to zero. This means
that the agent’s consumption ct goes to infinity and this can only be achieved if the
asset holdings at also go to infinity. The same can be shown to hold for the borderline
case of β (1 + r) = 1, see Chamberlain and Wilson (2000) for details. Only in the case
β (1 + r) < 1, where the agent is relatively impatient, will consumption ct and therefore
asset holdings at not diverge.
    To illustrate the precautionary saving in this setting it is important to highlight the
difference to the case without uncertainty, where the Euler equation given by

                                     u0 (ct ) ≥ β (1 + r) u0 (ct+1 )

with equality if at+1 > −b. For β (1 + r) > 1 the agent would also accumulate an
infinite amount of assets as in the case with uncertainty in (28) while for the borderline
case β (1 + r) = 1 the agent would maintain any initial asset holdings. For β (1 + r) <
  23
    While the initial work emphasized consumption smoothing, e.g. Hall (1978), there is a large litera-
ture on precautionary saving of individual agents in this tradition, see Zeldes (1989), Caballero (1990,
1991), Deaton (1991), Carroll (1992, 1997), and Carroll and Kimball (1996).


                                                   43
1 however, the agent’s impatience and the absence of uncertainty would imply that
he depletes any initial asset holdings and eventually ends up stuck at the borrowing
constraint.24

Exchange Equilibrium. A literature originating with Bewley (1977) studies economies
where agents engage in precautionary saving because they are subject to two basic fric-
tions: First, agents face some idiosyncratic income risk but markets are incomplete so
that the agents cannot insure against negative income shocks. Second, agents cannot
borrow freely but are subject to some exogenous borrowing constraint. This implies
that the individual agent is solving a problem as in the previous section and has a
precautionary motive to hold assets.25
    Using the techniques of dynamic programming, an optimal asset demand function
can be derived that depends on the agent’s current asset holdings at in addition to the
characteristics of the endowment shocks et and the borrowing limit b. We will focus
on the mean asset holdings E[a] resulting from an individual agent’s optimization. As
discussed in the previous section, the key feature of E[a] is that it diverges to infinity
as the interest rate r approaches the agent’s discount rate ρ = β −1 − 1 from below and
therefore E[a] can only be finite in an equilibrium with r < ρ.
    If we assume that there is a continuum of agents with i.i.d. endowment shocks and
no aggregate risk, the per-capita asset holdings of the economy is the same as the
mean asset holdings of an individual agent so E[a] represents the demand for assets
or the supply of savings in the economy. Combining this aggregate asset supply from
individual optimization with different specifications of aggregate asset demand yields a
range of interesting implications.
    In an exchange-economy setting, Huggett (1993) assumes that agents can only bor-
row and save amongst each other on a credit market so the aggregate net supply of assets
is zero. This implies that in the steady state the equilibrium interest rate r is given by
the market clearing condition E[a] = 0. The equilibrium interest rate is increasing if the
borrowing limit b is increased but due to the features of E[a], the equilibrium interest
rate always satisfies r < ρ.26
    Bewley (1980, 1983) studies the role of a government providing fiat money which
  24
     For an excellent textbook discussion of this and some of the following material see Ljungqvist and
Sargent (2004).
  25
     For previous work using a more stylized framework see Foley and Hellwig (1975).
  26
     See Levine and Zame (2002) for an analysis of the impact of borrowing constraints in an exchange
economy with convex marginal utility.


                                                  44
can be illustrated in the present framework. Let the government maintain a fixed money
supply of M and a price level p. Agents now do all their saving by holding non-negative
money balances mt ≥ 0 on which the government pays interest r, financed by lump-sum
taxes τ = rM/p. Agents then maximize utility subject to the budget constraint

                                      mt+1                mt   M
                               ct +        ≤ et + (1 + r)    −r .
                                       p                  p    p

Comparing this constraint to the original budget constraint (26) with the borrowing
constraint at ≥ −b we see that the optimization problem with interest on money is
equivalent to the original optimization problem with a borrowing constraint b = M/p.
The equilibrium condition E[m] = M is equivalent to the condition E[a] = 0 so the
equilibrium interest rate will be the same as in the economy of Huggett (1993) for
b = M/p. This implies that the government cannot achieve the optimum of r = ρ set
out by Friedman (1969) who argued that it is inefficient for agents to economize on
their money holdings for transactional purposes and therefore required a real interest
rate equal to the time preference rate.
    Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) study the reaction of a Bewley-Huggett economy to
an unexpected tightening of the borrowing constraint. This lowers the long-run interest
rate as the precautionary motive is more pronounced. In the transition period the
interest rate falls even further and overshoots as households try to build up the new
larger precautionary safety buffer. Alternatively, cyclical changes in volatility can lead
to cyclical behavior of precautionary savings (Carroll, 1992).

Production. Aiyagari (1994) combines the precautionary saving setup with a stan-
dard growth model with production and capital. All saving is done by holding physical
capital which, together with labor produces output via an aggregate production func-
tion F (K, L). An agent’s labor endowment in period t is given by `t ∈ [`min , `max ]
which is drawn i.i.d. across time and across agents. This labor endowment is supplied
inelastically and implies the random endowment et = w`t for an individual agent and
a constant aggregate labor supply L. In the competitive equilibrium the demand for
per-capita capital is given by27
                                     f 0 (k) − δ = r,

where δ is the depreciation rate.
 27
      Unlike in the OLG literature, there is no population growth in this model.


                                                  45
    The equilibrium interest rate in a steady state of the economy is given by the
intersection of the supply of capital from the agents’ precautionary saving and the
demand for capital by the economy’s firms implied by the marginal product.28 Crucially,
due to the properties of the precautionary savings E[a], the intersection will result in
an equilibrium interest rate r < ρ which means that the steady state level of capital
violates the modified golden rule level given by

                                          f 0 (k ∗ ) − δ = ρ.                                     (29)

    This rule requires that the rate at which consumption today can be exchanged
against consumption tomorrow given the economy’s technology should equal the rate
at which agents trade off consumption today against consumption tomorrow. Given the
technology in the present economy, one unit of consumption today can instead be used
as capital which yields f 0 (k) in extra output tomorrow and leaves 1 − δ units of capital
that can be consumed. Therefore one unit of consumption today can be exchanged for
1+f 0 (k)−δ units of consumption tomorrow. Given the agents’ preferences in the present
economy, they are willing to exchange one unit of consumption today for 1 + ρ units
of consumption tomorrow. For the two rates to be the same, capital has to be at the
level k ∗ given by equation (29). The individual agent’s precautionary saving motivated
by the uninsured risk and constrained borrowing however leads to an excessively high
level of aggregate savings k > k ∗ that is socially wasteful.
    In a slightly modified framework, Aiyagari (1995) shows how a tax on capital earn-
ings can address the violation of the modified golden rule. Such a tax works by driving a
wedge between the gross interest rate r that capital earns based on its marginal product
and the net interest rate r̄ agents receive and adjust their asset holdings to. As pointed
out by Aiyagari, simply crowding out the excessive investment by issuing government
debt paying the same return as capital does not work. Since the precautionary saving
diverges as the interest rate approaches the discount rate no finite amount of govern-
ment debt can achieve r = ρ. This is a significant difference to the OLG literature
and the model by Woodford (1990) discussed above. However, this argument relies on
transfers in the form of government spending on public goods and it does not address
the potential of improving risk sharing among agents.
    Angeletos (2007) studies a model analogous to Aiyagari’s but assumes that the
  28
     Note that the supply of capital E[a] also depends on the wage which can be expressed as a function
of r since w = f (k) − kf 0 (k).


                                                  46
idiosyncratic shocks are to capital income instead of labor income. In this case the
interest rate will also be lower than first-best but the effect on the capital stock is
ambiguous: while the precautionary motive has the usual positive effect, the capital-
income risk has a negative effect since the risk-averse agents require a risk premium
for holding capital. The paper argues that the empirically relevant case has the latter
effect dominating and therefore an inefficiently low capital stock. Mendoza, Quadrini,
and Rı́os-Rull (2009) study a two-country version of Aiyagari’s model where individuals
face idiosyncratic production uncertainty in addition to endowment risk. In the country
in which future cash flows are less pledgeable the equilibrium interest rate is lower and
capital flows to the country with higher financial development. See also Caballero, Farhi,
and Gourinchas (2008).

4.2.2      Constrained Inefficiency

The Bewley-Aiyagari economy is an important illustration that competitive economies
with incomplete markets are not only Pareto inefficient compared to complete markets,
but – with exception of some knife edge cases – even constrained Pareto inefficient. That
is, a social planner can generally achieve a Pareto improvement over the competitive
outcome even if he faces the same incomplete asset span and hence the same restrictions
as markets when making transfers across states of the world. Within general equilib-
rium theory, while Diamond (1967) initially showed constrained Pareto efficiency in a
special case, Hart (1975) provided the first example of constrained Pareto inefficiency.
Stiglitz (1982) and Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986) proved generally that the
constrained inefficiency arises generically as long as there are at least two goods.29
    This striking result is due to pecuniary externalities – externalities that work through
prices. The first welfare theorem only applies in a setting with complete markets and
some knife-edge cases with incomplete markets. Generically, pecuniary externalities –
like any other externalities – lead to welfare losses except for the very special case when
markets are complete. The main intuition for this insight is that by changing agents’
asset holdings, a social planner can affect relative prices and thereby induce wealth
transfers across states and between agents that are outside the asset span. In a com-
plete markets setting where agents are able to trade consumption across all states, the
pecuniary externality is not welfare reducing since all marginal rates of substitution are
equalized and hence the marginal welfare implications of a shift in wealth across agents
 29
      For a discussion in a finance setting see Gromb and Vayanos (2002).


                                                  47
is zero.
    Davila, Hong, Krusell, and Rios-Rull (2005) address this question of constrained
efficiency in the setting of Aiyagari (1994), i.e. whether welfare can be increased within
the incomplete market structure by forcing agents to save more or less than they would
in the competitive equilibrium.30 Forcing agents to hold more or less capital has two
key effects in terms of changing the relative prices of labor and capital to insure agents
against their labor endowment risk even though the market incompleteness doesn’t allow
for direct insurance. With a neoclassical aggregate production function, a higher level of
capital leads to a higher wage and a lower interest rate. As a first effect, this amplifies the
impact of an agent’s labor endowment shock in a given period since it increases the share
of labor income, so reducing the level of capital can improve insurance. To illustrate
this first effect, consider a simple two-period setting where each agent has wealth y in
period 0 and an i.i.d. labor endowment e ∈ {e1 , e2 } in period 1 where 0 < e1 < e2 and
the probability of the low endowment is π. Aggregate labor is deterministically given
by L = πe1 + (1 − π) e2 and, together with capital K, produces output f (K, L). To see
if the social planner can improve welfare by changing the savings held by each agent,
we differentiate an agent’s utility at the competitive equilibrium

                    dU
                       = {−u0 (c0 ) + β (1 + r) [πu0 (c1 ) + (1 − π) u0 (c2 )]}
                    dK
                                                                  dr
                       + β [πu0 (c1 ) K + (1 − π) u0 (c2 ) K]
                                                                 dK
                                                                 dw
                       + β [πu0 (c1 ) e1 + (1 − π) u0 (c2 ) e2 ]
                                                                 dK

The expression in curly brackets is zero by the agent’s first order condition. The other
two terms are the effects of changing the interest rate and the wage, which agents take
as constant. That is, their price taking behavior ignores that as a group they move
prices – the pecuniary externality mentioned earlier. In the competitive equilibrium we
have dr/dK = fKK (K, L) and dw/dK = fKL (K, L) so we get

                     dU
                        = β [πu0 (c1 ) K + (1 − π) u0 (c2 ) K] fKK (K, L)
                     dK
                          + β [πu0 (c1 ) e1 + (1 − π) u0 (c2 ) e2 ] fKL (K, L)
  30
     Note that in the tax solution to golden rule problem presented in Aiyagari (1995) the social planner
uses transfers that are not available to agents and is therefore not bound by the same constraints as
is required here.



                                                   48
A neoclassical production function f is homogeneous of degree one, so we have KfKK +
LfKL = 0 and we can rewrite the expression for dU/dK as

          dU    h               e1                         e2 i
             = β πu0 (c1 ) 1 −        + (1 − π) u0 (c2 ) 1 −        KfKK (K, L)
          dK                      L                           L
                                                e2 − e1
             = βπ (1 − π) [u0 (c1 ) − u0 (c2 )]         KfKK (K, L)                   (30)
                                                   L

Since e1 < e2 , c1 < c2 , u is strictly concave and fKK < 0, this implies that dU/dK < 0 so
the competitive equilibrium can be improved upon by reducing the level of capital. Note
that in the complete market setting with perfect insurance across all states, c1 = c2 .
Hence, in this special case the pecuniary externalities are zero, i.e. dU/dK = 0.
    The second effect of changing agents’ capital holdings is that the lower interest rate
dampens the impact of an agent’s labor endowment shock for the following periods
through his savings. This effect becomes clear when extending the previous setting by a
third period with the same random labor endowment. If the social planner influences the
level of aggregate savings between the intermediate and the last period this will have
different effects for the agents who had a high labor endowment in the intermediate
period and the agents who had a low labor endowment in the intermediate period. The
effect on the utility of agent i who had labor endowment ei in the interim period and
plans to save Ki can be derived similar to before as

            dUi
                = β [∆ + β (πu0 (ci1 ) + (1 − π) u0 (ci2 )) (Ki − K) fKK (K, L)] ,
            dK

where ∆ < 0 is the RHS of the previous expression (30). We still have the effect of a
higher level of capital amplifying the labor endowment shock in the following period,
given by ∆, but now there is a second term which is positive if and only if Ki < K. This
second effect is the dampening of the endowment shock in the current period which is
good for the agents with a low current endowment e1 and therefore low planned savings
K1 < K but bad for the agents with high current endowment e2 and therefore high
planned savings K2 > K.
    Davila, Hong, Krusell, and Rios-Rull (2005) show that if poor agents derive most of
their income from labor then the second effect dominates and the constrained efficient
allocation requires a higher level of capital than in the competitive equilibrium. In
their quantitative calibration to US data this implies a significantly higher level of
capital to achieve a constrained efficient allocation. The competitive equilibrium of the


                                             49
incomplete-market economy already has 2.33 times the capital stock of the complete-
market economy. However, the constrained efficient level of capital is 3.65 times higher
than the competitive equilibrium, making it 8.5 times higher than the complete-market
benchmark.31

4.2.3    Adding Aggregate Risk

A key limitation of the Bewley-Aiyagari setting is the absence of aggregate risk which
is partly due to technical complications. Krusell and Smith (1998) introduce aggregate
risk into the framework of Aiyagari (1994) by way of an aggregate productivity shock
which follows a Markov process. Depending on the shock, aggregate savings of the
agents in the economy will vary, leading to fluctuations in the aggregate capital stock.
Since the aggregate capital stock determines the equilibrium prices rt and wt , agents
have to forecast its evolution when making their consumption-savings decision. The
key question is, how much information about the distribution of wealth in the economy
agents have to keep track of. If every agent’s policy function is linear in current wealth,
i.e. everyone saves the same fraction of any extra income, then the distribution of wealth
doesn’t matter for how aggregate shocks affect aggregate savings – a simple application
of Gorman aggregation. In this case, it is sufficient for agents to keep track of the
mean of the wealth distribution to accurately forecast the aggregate capital stock. If,
however, poor agents and rich agents have very different propensities to save then two
different distributions starting out with the same mean can have very different means
after a shock. In this case, agents have to keep track of the whole distribution – an
infinite-dimensional object – to accurately forecast the aggregate capital stock which
makes the problem extremely intractable.
     Krusell and Smith (1998) simplify this problem by assuming that agents are bound-
edly rational about the evolution of the wealth distribution (and hence the distribution
of capital holdings) in that they approximate it by a finite set of moments. Krusell and
Smith then show that the precision of agents’ forecasts, measured by the regression
  31
    A similar effect arises in Lorenzoni (2008), who studies the effect of pecuniary externalities on
borrowing. In this case the competitive equilibrium has too little borrowing compared to the first-
best allocation but too much borrowing compared to the second-best allocation. In Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2004) firms in emerging market countries face a country wide international collateral
constraint in addition to the firm specific domestic collateral constraint. Firms borrow excessively since
they take next periods’ interest rate (price) as given and hence cause a pecuniary externality on each
other. Three implementations for a Pareto improving outcome are provided. In Jeanne and Korinek
(2011) a tax leads to a welfare improvement.



                                                   50
R2 , is relatively high even if they only pay attention to the first moment, the average
capital holding E[k]. The main reason why the heterogeneity of agents’ capital holdings
doesn’t seem to matter is that the policy function for agents’ savings is almost linear
in wealth which implies that the aggregate demand for capital is very close to that
of a representative agent. Only the poorest agents behave differently but they have a
negligible effect on aggregate quantities. Note also the assumption of a single aggregate
production function AF (K, L) is also key for this approximate aggregation result. As
soon as it matters who owns the control rights over capital like in the multi-sector
models of KM and BruSan10, the Krusell and Smith aggregation result does not apply
anymore.
    Constantinides and Duffie (1996) highlight the importance of allowing for persistence
in agents’ income shocks. When relaxing the assumption that an agent’s income in the
future follows a stationary distribution, they show that the potential for self-insurance
through precautionary saving is greatly reduced. The paper studies an exchange econ-
omy setting with individual income process that are nonstationary and heteroscedastic.
Even in the absence of a borrowing constraint this implies strong limitations on self-
insurance. Any shock to an agent’s income permanently affects his expected share of
future aggregate income so shocks cannot be “balanced out” over time – the agents’
wealth heterogeneity truly matters. The model can therefore replicate the empirically
documented low risk-free rate and high equity premium. In fact, given an aggregate
income process, there exist consistent individual income processes that generate any
potentially observed asset prices.32

4.2.4    Amplification Revisited and Adding Multiple Assets

So far we focused on the demand for liquid assets to either smooth consumption or self-
insure against uninsurable shocks. We deliberately switched off amplification effects
by assuming perfect technological illiquidity, i.e. investment was perfectly reversible.
Next, we consider models that combine both effects. In short, we combine the insights
of the amplification section 2 with the desire to hold liquid assets as a safety buffer
discussed in Section 4 so far. In the models discussed below agents also have a choice
  32
    Note also that the aggregate consumption and price data that are generated from a generalized
Bewley-Aiyagari type economy are not easily calibrated to a representative agent economy. It might
require “non-standard” preference specifications for the representative agent. In particular, a high
discount rate and an Epstein-Zin preference structure might be needed to capture effects which are
essentially due to financial frictions.



                                                51
between multiple assets with different (market) liquidity characteristics. Assets with a
higher market liquidity trade at a premium. Third, we broaden the interpretation of our
economic agents. So far – especially when calibrated – we focused on households who
face uninsurable labor income risk. Now, we consider also models in which entrepreneurs
face productivity or investment shocks, corporate firms face cash shortfalls in interim
periods, fund managers and banks suffer fund outflows.

Stochastic Production Possibilities. Scheinkman and Weiss (1986) study bor-
rowing constraints with two types of agents whose idiosyncratic shocks are perfectly
negatively correlated. However, their model generates aggregate fluctuations and illus-
trates different effects of changes in government liquidity provision. The key difference
to the previous models is that the agents’ labor supply is now elastic and therefore ad-
justs to changes in the wage. This leads to dynamic fluctuations through a price impact
in a similar way to the variable technological or market liquidity in Section 2.
    At each moment in time only one of two types of agents is productive and the pro-
ductivity switches randomly according to a Poisson process. A productive agent can
produce consumption goods with his labor while an unproductive agent can’t. This
generates idiosyncratic risk similar to the labor endowment shocks in Aiyagari (1994)
but here the labor is supplied elastically. There is no capital in the economy and agents
can only save by holding non-negative balances of money which is in fixed supply. In
equilibrium, productive agents exchange consumption goods for money with the unpro-
ductive agents so holding money allows the agents to transfer wealth from productive
states with high endowment to unproductive states with low endowment as in Wood-
ford (1990). However, since productive agents supply labor elastically and the price
level, i.e. the exchange rate between consumption goods and money, is determined in
equilibrium, there will be aggregate fluctuations. Productive agents accumulate money
as long as they are productive. As they accumulate more money and become richer,
they work less and less so aggregate output declines and the price level increases.
    Due to the aggregate dynamics, changes in the supply of money have subtle effects
depending on the share of money held by the productive and the unproductive agents.
An increase in the money supply that is distributed equally to the two types of agents
brings the distribution of total money holdings closer to equality. If productive agents
were holding less than half of the money supply before the increase then they will
become richer and reduce their labor supply, therefore aggregate output goes down. If
productive agents were holding more than half of the money supply then the increase

                                           52
makes them poorer so they increase their labor supply and aggregate output goes
up. This implies that increasing the money supply has a dampening effect, reducing
aggregate output when it is high and increasing it when it is low.
    In Moll (2010) there is a continuum of agents with different time-varying stochastic
productivity levels. As BruSan10, Moll’s dynamic model is set in continuous time. In
world without financial frictions, all funds are always channeled to the most produc-
tive households. In contrast, when financial frictions hinder fund flows, less productive
households above a certain cut-off threshold are also funded. This misallocation of cap-
ital can be mitigated as long as they can use self-financing as an effective substitute
for credit access. Moll (2010) shows that this is only true if the household specific pro-
ductivity shocks are sufficiently autocorrelated over time. Another important message
of the paper is that financial frictions in this setting show up in aggregate data as low
total factor productivity (TFP). This result shows that it is difficult to economically
attribute frictions towards a capital wedge or TFP wedge as proposed by Chari, Kehoe,
and McGrattan (2007). See also Buera and Moll (2011).

Stochastic Investment Opportunities. Kiyotaki and Moore (2008) study an econ-
omy with entrepreneurs who face idiosyncratic investment opportunity shocks. The
model has two types of agents, entrepreneurs and households. A non-durable consump-
tion good is produced with labor supplied by the workers and capital supplied by the
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are the only ones who can invest, i.e. convert consumption
good into new capital one-to-one, but they can only do so when they have an invest-
ment opportunity. These investment opportunities arrive i.i.d. across entrepreneurs and
time and cannot be insured against; in each period, each entrepreneur can invest with
probability π. The uninsurable investment opportunities mean entrepreneurs want to
transfer wealth from periods where they are unproductive to periods where they are
productive, as in Woodford (1990). Two elements of this model are that the investment
possibilities are not deterministic and there are two types of assets that have differ-
ent properties as stores of value. Agents can either hold equity, which is a claim to
the return of capital, or they can hold fiat money which is intrinsically worthless and
available in fixed supply.
    An entrepreneur with an investment opportunity will try to raise as much money as
possible via one of three sources, two of which are subject to frictions. First, he can sell
new equity claims to the return of the capital created by the investment. However, only
a fraction θ of these new equity claims can be sold right away, the remaining fraction

                                            53
1−θ have to remain with the entrepreneur for at least one period. This can be viewed as
a “skin in the game constraint” and can be motivated by a moral hazard problem at the
time of the investment. Second, he can sell his holdings of existing equity claims which
consist of retained claims from his investment opportunities in previous periods and
of claims purchased from other entrepreneurs when they had investment opportunities.
However, only a fraction φt of these equity claims can be sold right away. This constraint
is a “resalability constraint” or a limit on market liquidity and can be motivated by
transactions costs or adverse selection problems when equity claims are traded in the
secondary market. Finally, he can sell his money holdings where the crucial difference
to the first two sources of financing is that money can be sold without any frictions, i.e.
money is the only fully liquid asset.
    If the liquidity constraints are severe enough, i.e. for low enough θ and φt , there is an
equilibrium where the constraints are binding and money has value. In the neighborhood
of the steady state the price of money is positive, pt > 0, and the price of capital/equity
is greater than one, qt > 1. In this equilibrium, an entrepreneur with an investment
opportunity (denoted by superscript i) will exhaust his liquidity constraint and spend
all his money holdings. His budget constraint therefore becomes

                     cit + (1 − qt θ) it = rt nt + qt φt (1 − δ) nt + pt mt .

The entrepreneur spends his entire liquid wealth from holding equity nt and money mt
on consumption cit and the fraction 1 − qt θ of investment it he has to finance himself.
We can rewrite this constraint using the next period equity holdings nit+1 as

               cit + qtR nit+1 = rt nt + φt qt + (1 − φt ) qtR (1 − δ) nt + pt mt
                                                              


where qtR = (1 − θqt ) / (1 − θ) is the effective replacement cost of capital for an en-
trepreneur with an investment opportunity. Due to the investment opportunity, the
entrepreneur can create new equity at cost qtR more cheaply than the market price qt
but this also reduces the value of the illiquid 1 − φt share of existing equity holdings he
cannot sell.
    An entrepreneur without an investment opportunity has to decide how to allocate
                                                                                     m
his savings between equity and money. The return on holding money is always Rt+1         :=
pt+1 /pt but the return on holding equity depends on whether the entrepreneur has
an investment opportunity in t + 1 or not. Without an investment opportunity the


                                               54
illiquidity doesn’t matter and the return is

                              s        1
                             Rt+1 :=      [rt+1 + qt+1 (1 − δ)] .
                                       qt

With an investment opportunity, however, equity has a lower return since it is then
                                                R
partially valued at the cheap replacement cost qt+1 :

                 i        1                                 R
                                                                         
                Rt+1 :=      rt+1 + φt+1 qt+1 + (1 − φt+1 ) qt+1   (1 − δ) .
                          qt

    Kiyotaki and Moore (2008) assume that the entrepreneurs have logarithmic utility so
they will always consume a fraction 1 − β of their wealth where β is the discount factor.
This makes aggregation very simple since the distribution of wealth across entrepreneurs
is irrelevant. Around the steady state the aggregate level of capital is less than in the
first-best economy without the liquidity constraints, Kt+1 < K ∗ . Therefore the expected
return on capital is greater than the discount rate,
                                    0              
                                 Et ft+1 (Kt+1 ) − δ > ρ.

The expected (gross) return on money and the conditional expected returns on equity
can then be ranked as follows
                          i       m       s 
                       Et Rt+1 < Et Rt+1 < Et Rt+1 < 1 + ρ.

There is a liquidity premium since the return on equity is higher than the return on
money. Note however that this is a statement about the conditional return on equity
  s
Rt+1  which is also the return on equity an agent who never has an investment op-
portunity receives (an “outsider” like a household). While the unconditional return on
equity for an entrepreneur may also be greater than the return on money, i.e. a liquid-
ity premium even for “insiders”, this premium will be smaller than the one using the
conditional return.
    Negative shocks to the market liquidity φt of equity have aggregate effects. A drop
in φt causes entrepreneurs to shift away from equity and into money as a store of value
(“flight to liquidity”). This leads to a drop in the price of equity qt and an increase in
the price of money pt . Finally, the drop in qt in turn makes investment less attractive
causing it to decline and leading to a drop in output. Through this channel the initial


                                             55
shock to financing conditions in the form of lower market liquidity feeds back to the
real economy in the form of a reduction in output. This negative correlation between
financing frictions and the business cycle fits well the empirical evidence documented
by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) who find that actual capital reallocation is procyclical
although the benefits to capital reallocation appear countercyclical. In the model of
Kiyotaki and Moore (2008) the government can counteract the effect of shocks to fi-
nancing conditions by buying up equity and issuing new money, thereby putting upward
pressure on qt and downward pressure on pt .

Uncertain Interim Cash-Flow Needs. Holmström and Tirole (1998) study en-
trepreneurs’ demand for a store of value in a corporate finance framework. The paper
uses a three-period model, t = 0, 1, 2, of entrepreneurs who invest in the initial period,
face an uncertain need for extra funds in the interim period and are subject to a moral
hazard problem before the outcome realization in the final period. The moral hazard
problem limits the amount of extra funds an entrepreneur can raise in the interim
period.
    Each entrepreneur has initial wealth A and an investment project with constant
returns to scale: invest I in period 0 to receive a payoff RI with probability p in period
2. In period 1 there is a random need for extra funding ρI to continue the project where ρ
is distributed with c.d.f. G. Efficiency requires the project to be continued if the funding
shock satisfies ρ ≤ ρ1 := pR, i.e. ρ1 is the expected continuation return and therefore the
first-best funding cutoff. However, the entrepreneur is constrained when raising funds
in period 1 by a moral hazard problem. Only ρ0 I in new funding can be raised where
ρ0 < ρ1 .33 Therefore if the entrepreneur receives a funding shock ρ ∈ (ρ0 , ρ1 ), efficiency
requires continuing the project but the constraint prevents raising the required extra
funds. To allow continuation for these intermediate values, liquidity has to be provided
through other means. Note that the paper implicitly assumes that the initial investment
becomes worthless if the extra funds are not obtained. This corresponds to a case of
extreme technological illiquidity of assets and puts the focus on the market liquidity of
claims on the assets that is influenced by the aggregate condition of the economy.
    An individual entrepreneur chooses the optimal investment size I trading off ex-ante
return and interim continuation probability. The optimal policy can be implemented
by households guaranteeing a credit line or enforcing that the entrepreneur holds a
  33
    For a detailed microfoundation see the discussion of Holmström and Tirole (1997) in Section 5.3
below.


                                                56
minimum amount of funds in cash (liquidity ratio). However, this assumes the existence
of a storage technology such as cash. The hypothetical ex-ante optimal contract between
entrepreneur and households chooses an investment size I and specifies a cutoff ρ̂ and
a division of returns contingent on realized ρ. The contract maximizes the expected
surplus from the investment opportunity
                                   Z                  ρ̂                    
                               max I                        (ρ1 − ρ) dG(ρ) − I ,
                                 I,ρ̂              0


subject to the constraint that households break even given that in the interim period
they can only be promised ρ0 and not the full expected return ρ1 :
                                        Z   ρ̂
                                  I              (ρ0 − ρ) dG(ρ) = I − A.
                                        0


The solution trades off a higher cutoff ρ̂, which allows more continuation, with a lower
investment scale I, required by the break-even constraint. This results in a second-best
cutoff ρ∗ ∈ [ρ0 , ρ1 ]. Note that after the realization of the funding shock, the households
would not want to honor the contract to provide the funds if ρ > ρ0 . To implement
the second-best cutoff ρ∗ , the funding has to be committed ex ante. For example, the
entrepreneur could be guaranteed a line of credit for period 1 of up to ρ∗ I. Alternatively,
if there is a storage technology, the consumers could provide the entrepreneur with ρ∗ I
additional funds in period 0 and require that these be held in storage and not invested.
    In a general equilibrium framework of many entrepreneurs and without storage
technology, liquidity has to come from financial claims on real assets in the interim
period. How well this works depends crucially on the market liquidity of these claims.
With funding shocks independent across entrepreneurs (no aggregate uncertainty), the
second-best contract can be implemented by entrepreneurs selling equity and then hold-
ing a part of the market portfolio to cover the funding needs in period 1.34 Each en-
trepreneur issues equity worth Vα in period 0 and since all entrepreneurs have unit
measure the value of the market portfolio will also be Vα . From the proceeds, the en-
trepreneur invests αVα in the market portfolio and uses the rest to invest in his project.
In period 1 the entrepreneur sells his holdings αVα , raises an additional ρ0 I and pays
the funding shock ρI. Any surplus αVα + ρ0 I − ρI will be paid out to his shareholders
as dividends. Averaging across entrepreneurs, the value of total dividend payouts and
  34
    Note that Holmström and Tirole (1998) mistakenly states that this market solution is not feasible.
See Holmström and Tirole (2011) for the corrected argument which is presented here.


                                                               57
therefore the value of the market portfolio is
                                                Z     ρ∗
                               Vα = αVα + I                (ρ0 − ρ) dG(ρ)
                                                  0

                                   = αVα + I − A,

where the second equality is given by the consumers’ break-even condition. Therefore
by choosing α such that αVα ≥ ρ∗ I, entrepreneurs are able to issue enough equity
in period 0 to cover the investment shortfall I − A and their holdings of the market
portfolio αVα which allow them to continue up to the second-best cutoff ρ∗ .35
    Importantly, since the entrepreneurs’ shocks are i.i.d., there is no aggregate risk and
no impact on the market liquidity of the equity claims used as a store of value. This
changes dramatically once aggregate risk is introduced. In the extreme case where the
entrepreneurs’ funding shocks in period 1 are perfectly correlated (purely aggregate
risk) the market itself can no longer implement the second best. In this case market
liquidity is high when entrepreneurs are doing well and it is not needed and market
liquidity evaporates when entrepreneurs are doing badly and extra funds are needed.
This creates a role for the government to provide a store of wealth. Holmström and
Tirole (1998) assume that the government, through its power to tax, can issue bonds
backed by the households’ future endowments. Then a total of (ρ∗ − ρ0 ) I in bonds will
be issued and held by entrepreneurs to cover the extra funding that can’t be raised in
period 1.36
    In an application of this model structure to asset pricing, Holmström and Tirole
(2001) show that differences in the ability of assets to act as stores of value due to
their differences in conditional market liquidity have strong pricing effects. Similar to
the results of Kiyotaki and Moore (2008) above (and the depressed interest rate in the
Bewley-Aiyagari setting), assets which offer better insurance have a lower return. In
addition, the paper shows how prices respond to changes in the demand for and supply
of liquidity and how liquidity aspects influence the shape of the yield curve.
  35
     Another way of implementing the second-best contract is through an intermediary who holds
the entire market portfolio, thus pooling the individual entrepreneurs’ funding shocks, and who then
cross-subsidizes the entrepreneurs in period 1.
  36
     The paper studies the case where the costs of taxation are non-zero, and the government has to
sell bonds at a liquidity premium above par. However, in this case there is a free-riding problem since
the liquidity provided through bonds is a public good. The optimal policy has a tradeoff between
investing in bonds and partial liquidation (at the industry or firm level). It can be implemented by
some entrepreneurs investing in bonds and selling short term debt to the remaining entrepreneurs.



                                                  58
Limits to Arbitrage. The limits to arbitrage argument of Shleifer and Vishny (1997)
can be seen in the same vein. They assume a setting where fund managers decide
how aggressively to exploit an arbitrage opportunity (instead of investing in a real
project). The fund managers are concerned that the mispricing could widen in the
interim period before the arbitrage finally pays off. If this happens, investors question
the fund manager’s investment and withdraw funds. This forces the fund manager to
unwind their position exactly when mispricing is largest and the arbitrage opportunity
most profitable. Note that, while in Holmström and Tirole (1998) the additional cash
flow needs in the interim period are exogenously specified, in Shleifer and Vishny (1997)
they arise due to fund outflows which occur exactly when the arbitrage opportunity
becomes most profitable. Fund managers knowing that they might suffer fund outflows
in this case limit their ex-ante arbitrage activity and keep a sufficient amount of liquid
assets on the side-line.37

Preference Shocks. In the Bewley-Aiyagari economy risk averse households face
uninsurable endowment shocks and in Holmström-Tirole corporate firms face some
random additional cash need in the interim period. In this subsection we focus on models
in which banks face potential “liquidity shocks.”All these models have in common that
households/firms/financial institutions have a desire to hold liquid asset in order to
take precaution against adverse events. As a consequence, illiquid assets pay a higher
return in equilibrium.
    The work of Allen and Gale (1994) builds on Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Agents
with uncertain future consumption needs who allocate their savings among assets face
a trade-off between return and short-term availability. The model has three periods,
t = 0, 1, 2, and a continuum of ex-ante identical agents that all have an endowment of
one in t = 0 and no endowment in t = 1, 2. Each agent faces an idiosyncratic preference
shock : with probability λ the agent wants to consume in t = 1, while with probability
1 − λ he wants to consume in t = 2. However, an individual agent’s idiosyncratic
preference shock is uninsurable since it is not observable to outsiders.38
    When allocating the endowment in t = 0, the agents face a trade-off: The consump-
tion good can either be stored without cost, i.e. at a per-period return of 1, or it can
be invested in a long-term investment project which pays a return R > 1 in t = 2
  37
    See Gromb and Vayanos (2010) for a survey on this literature.
  38
    Preference shocks are equivalent to endowment shocks if utility function is CARA, as mentioned
in Atkeson and Lucas (1992).



                                               59
but only has a salvage value of r ≤ 1 if liquidated early in t = 1. The parameter r is
therefore a measure of the long-term asset’s technological liquidity.39 In addition, the
market liquidity of the assets will play a role below, when the asset is sold among agents
without the project being physically liquidated.
    As a baseline, consider the case of autarky where each agent individually invests x in
the long-term investment and stores the remaining 1−x. Early consumers (those with a
preference shock in t = 1) liquidate their investments resulting in c1 = xr+(1 − x), while
late consumers end up with c2 = xR + (1 − x). This allocation can be improved with
financial markets where agents can sell their claims in the long-term project in t = 1 at
a price p instead of liquidating it. In this case, the consumption levels c1 = px + (1 − x)
and c2 = Rx + R (1 − x) /p can be achieved. An equilibrium requires that p = 1 to
ensure that agents are indifferent between storage and investing in t = 0. This leads to
equilibrium consumption c1 = 1 and c2 = R which are higher than under autarky even
if r < 1 as long as a fraction 1 − λ of aggregate wealth is invested in the investment
project. Since in this equilibrium we have p > r the asset’s market liquidity is greater
than its technological liquidity which explains why allowing for trade improves the
allocation.
    Allen and Gale (1994) extend this framework by introducing aggregate risk about
the preference shock. Here we present a simplified version of their model as in Allen and
Gale (2007). The probability of being an early consumer and therefore the fraction of
early consumers in the economy is either high or low, λ ∈ {λH , λL }, with probabilities
π and 1 − π, respectively. Each agent observes the realization of the aggregate state and
his idiosyncratic preference shock at the beginning of t = 1. Again, agents individually
invest x and put 1−x in storage in t = 0. In t = 1, after the resolution of all uncertainty,
agents can trade claims to the long-term project among each other. Depending on the
aggregate state there will be a market clearing price ps ∈ {pH , pL } so the asset’s market
liquidity and therefore its usefulness as a store of value will vary across states. To
focus on the effects of market liquidity we let the long-term project be completely
technologically illiquid, i.e. set r = 0.
    For late consumers to be willing to buy all assets at t = 1 in exchange for their
stored goods we need ps ≤ R. The total amount of stored good late consumers have
is given by (1 − λs ) (1 − x) and it is used to buy the total number of long-term claims
  39
     Diamond and Dybvig (1983) restrict their analysis to r = 1. To illustrate the utility improving
role of asset markets, we consider the more general case of r ≤ 1.




                                                60
sold by early consumers, λs x. As a result, the price ps has to satisfy
                                                           
                                          (1 − λs ) (1 − x)
                              ps = min R,
                                                λs x

which is termed cash-in-the-market pricing, the key to variations in market liquidity
in this setting. With λL < λH this implies that pH ≤ pL : if many consumers are hit
with early consumption needs, assets are very illiquid and are sold at fire-sale prices.
Because of the variation in market liquidity, there is volatility in prices even though
there is no uncertainty about the payoff of the investment project itself.


5      Financial Intermediation
So far we have analyzed the macroeconomic implications of financial frictions without
asking whether one can design financial institutions that mitigate or even overcome
these frictions. Arguably, this is exactly the role of financial institutions. More specifi-
cally, their roles are: (i) diversification of risks and economies of scale through pooling,
(ii) maturity/liquidity transformation, (iii) creation of informationally insensitive secu-
rities, (iv) reduction of asymmetric information through monitoring, and (v) alleviation
of pledgability problems.
     Once we introduce financial intermediaries we can split up the credit channel into
two: (i) the balance sheet channel which was the focus of the previous chapters – lenders
might be reluctant to extend credit to more risky and less well capitalized borrowers
– and (ii) the bank lending channel. Banks might cut back on their lending purely
because they are less well capitalized. The distinction between the borrower’s balance
sheet channel and the lending channel is important for policy purposes since it deter-
mines whether policy intervention should target the banking sector or the corporate
sector.40 Both the balance sheet channel and the lending channel stress the importance
of credit flow, i.e. the asset side of banks’ and shadow banks’ balance sheets. Since
financial institutions also create money by accepting deposits, they are key players in
understanding the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The interaction between
monetary policy and macroprudential policy is another focus of this section. Most of
the papers in this literature are written in a “corporate finance style.” In the spirit of
this survey we will cover models with macro focus and ignore models that emphasize
  40
    Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993) suggest a way to distinguish between the two channels by
exploiting the fact that large firms have alternative funding sources smaller firms don’t have.


                                              61
the capital structure implications of financial frictions.


5.1      Liquidity Insurance and Transformation
In the setting of agents facing preference shocks (as discussed in the previous sec-
tion), intermediaries can improve on the allocation available to competitive markets.
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) (hereafter DD) building on Bryant (1980) presents the
seminal model explaining financial intermediaries as providing liquidity insurance by
offering maturity transformation. It turns out, however, that the institutional structure
of maturity transformation makes the intermediary fragile since it creates the possibility
of inefficient runs.41
    We continue the discussion from the previous section of the DD model of agents
facing preference shocks and a trade-off between liquidity and return in their savings.
Denoting by x the per-capita investment in the long-term project and by 1 − x the
amount put in storage, the Pareto optimal allocation solves

                                    max {λu(c1 ) + (1 − λ) u(c2 )}
                                      x


subject to λc1 = 1 − x and (1 − λ) c2 = Rx. The result is perfect insurance,

                                           u0 (c∗1 ) = Ru0 (c∗2 ) .                                    (31)

However, the consumption pattern of c1 = 1 and c2 = R achieved with financial markets
(see the discussion in the previous section) is typically not ex-ante optimal, i.e. it doesn’t
satisfy equation (31), except for special utility functions.42 The key insight of DD is to
study the role financial intermediaries can play in pooling individual agents’ risk and
thereby offer them insurance. Since an agent’s type is not observable, the intermediaries
cannot offer contracts contingent on an agent’s preference shock. Instead they offer
what resembles standard bank deposit contracts: In t = 0 agents deposit their entire
endowment into the bank which then chooses a portfolio (x, 1 − x). In t = 1 every agent
  41
      There was an active literature on DD models in the late 1980s, see e.g. Jacklin (1987), Bhattacharya
and Gale (1987), Postlewaite and Vives (1987), Chari and Jagannathan (1988), and references in
Bhattacharya, Boot, and Thakor (2004).
   42
      Within the class of HARA utility functions, this allocation is only ex-ante optimal for the log-
utility function. For utility functions with a relative risk aversion coefficient, γ, larger than unity,
u0 (1) > Ru0 (R) and, thus, a contract which offers c1 = 1, and c2 = R is not ex-ante optimal. In other
words, given γ > 1, a feasible contract c∗1 > 1 and c∗2 < R which satisfies u0 (c∗1 ) = Ru0 (c∗2 ) is ex-ante
preferred to c1 = 1 and c2 = R.


                                                     62
has the right to withdraw a fixed amount d and agents who don’t withdraw split the
bank’s remaining funds in t = 2.
    DD show that the Pareto optimal allocation (c∗1 , c∗2 ) characterized by condition (31)
can be achieved with intermediaries. Note that the optimal allocation is a Nash equilib-
rium since c∗1 < c∗2 and it is therefore optimal for a late consumer not to withdraw early
given that all other late consumers don’t withdraw early. However, there is a second
Nash equilibrium corresponding to a bank run where all agents withdraw early. In this
case the bank is forced to liquidate its long-term investment so it will not have anything
left to pay a late consumer who does not withdraw. That makes it optimal for a late
consumer to withdraw early given that the others do so. 43
    Building on the original DD model, Allen and Gale (1998, 2004) (hereafter AG)
study macroeconomic implications of intermediation as maturity transformation. In
two key extensions of the original model, AG add aggregate uncertainty about (i) the
LT investment return R, and (ii) the size of the aggregate preference shock λ. Adding
aggregate risk has several implications. First, it introduces the possibility of bank runs
that are not panic-based as in DD but based on bad fundamentals. Also, since banks are
restricted to offering standard deposit contracts, allowing for default in bad aggregate
states can improve welfare by introducing some implicit state-contingency into the
deposit contract. In addition, as in the previous section, aggregate uncertainty can lead
to significant volatility in asset prices that would be absent in complete markets. In
the case of intermediaries this implies that there can be asset-price volatility or default
or both. Finally, the incompleteness of deposit contracts and the incompleteness of
markets for aggregate risk are two possible sources of inefficiency. AG find that market
incompleteness is more important for inefficiency. While a social planner subject to the
same constraints cannot improve the equilibrium allocation for the case of incomplete
contracts, he can do so for the case of incomplete markets just like in Geanakoplos and
Polemarchakis (1986) as discussed in Section 4.2.2.
    Our discussion is based on simplified versions of the papers as presented in Allen and
Gale (2007). First consider the case where R is uncertain as in Allen and Gale (1998).
With probability π the investment project has a return RH while with probability 1 − π
the return is only RL , where RH > RL > r. The realization of R is observed at the
  43
    A key assumption in this work is that consumers cannot directly participate in asset markets but
have to deposit their savings with intermediaries who invest on their behalf. This assumption is neces-
sary since with full participation of consumers in asset markets the benefits of financial intermediation
are weakened. See Jacklin (1987), Diamond (1997), Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009).



                                                   63
beginning of t = 1, before consumers make their decision whether to withdraw from
the bank or not. As in DD, banks are competitive and therefore maximize consumers’
expected utility by choosing (d, x), where d is the amount consumers can withdraw in
t = 1 and x ∈ [0, 1] is the amount the bank invests in the long-term project. Note that
the deposit contract is not contingent on the aggregate state, i.e. a consumer is allowed
to withdraw the fixed amount d regardless of the realization of R.
    In addition to the panic-based run that is a second equilibrium in the DD framework,
the aggregate uncertainty combined with the non-contingent deposit contract gives rise
to a new type of bank run that is based on fundamentals. This type of bank run can
occur when late consumers realize that the return R is too low to guarantee them at
least as high a payoff in t = 2 as if they withdraw in t = 1. To rule out fundamental
bank runs, i.e. to ensure that late consumers don’t withdraw in t = 1, the deposit
contract has to satisfy d ≤ c2s for s = H, L. The late consumers’ consumption is then
given by
                                       xRs + 1 − x − λd
                                c2s =                    ,
                                             1−λ
and there will be no run as long as d ≤ xRs + 1 − x. Note that RL < RH implies that
c2L < c2H so the no-run constraint is automatically satisfied in state H if it is satisfied
in state L. If the bank wants to avoid a run in state L, it chooses (d, x) to maximize
the consumers’ ex-ante utility
                                                               
                                      xRH + 1 − x − λd
                λu(d) + (1 − λ) πH u                     + πL u(d) ,                  (32)
                                           1−λ

subject to the no-run constraint binding in state L

                                       d = xRL + 1 − x.

    However, it may be welfare enhancing to allow for financial crises in the form of
fundamentals-based bank runs. If we allow a run to happen in state L, all consumers
will withdraw, forcing the bank to liquidate its investment project early which results
in a payoff of xr + 1 − x for all consumers. Under this scenario the bank chooses (d, x)
to maximize the consumers’ ex-ante utility
                                                      
                                       xRH + 1 − x − λd
           πH       λu(d) + (1 − λ) u                      + πL u(xr + 1 − x)         (33)
                                            1−λ



                                             64
without having to satisfy the no-run constraint. Depending on the exogenous parame-
ters, it may well be the case that the solution to the unconstrained maximization of (33)
leads to higher ex-ante utility than the constrained maximization of (32) subject to the
no-run constraint. This shows that under certain conditions, e.g. for a low probability
πL of the bad state or for a low return RL in the bad state, it may be optimal to allow
for bank runs. The possibility of crises in the intermediation sector in certain states of
the world is welfare improving ex ante since it increases the degree of state contingency
that is not explicitly allowed by the deposit contract.
    We now go back to the case where the investment return R is deterministic and
assume that there is aggregate risk about the size of the preference shock. The proba-
bility of being an early consumer and therefore the fraction of early consumers in the
economy is λ ∈ {λH , λL }, with probabilities π and 1 − π, respectively. The difference
to the discussion in the previous section is that now agents cannot invest directly since
they don’t have access to asset markets and therefore deposit their endowments with
the intermediaries. The realization of the aggregate state is observed at the beginning
of t = 1, then banks trade claims on the investment projects at price ps in state s.
    Suppose all banks choose the same capital structure (d, x). Then the aggregate
supply of liquidity is x in both states H and L while the aggregate demand for liquidity
is λs d which varies across states. In an equilibrium without default, banks will choose
(d, x) such that x = λH d which implies that x > λL d so banks end up with excess
liquidity in state L. For the market to clear in state L, i.e. for banks to be willing to
hold the excess liquidity from t = 1 to t = 2, the price of the long-term asset has to be
pL = R. For banks to be willing to hold any liquidity from t = 0 to t = 1 the expected
return on the long-term asset has to be equal to one. Since pL = R, this implies

                                       1 − (1 − π) R
                                pH =                 < 1,
                                             π

i.e. the asset price has to be significantly lower in state H than in state L. Note in
particular that the price volatility only depends on π and R and not on the values of
λH and λL . There can be substantial price volatility even if the amount of aggregate
risk is small.
     Instead, there may be an equilibrium with default (remember it may be optimal to
allow for default). Any equilibrium with default has to be mixed, i.e. ex ante identical
banks choose different portfolios and offer different deposit contracts. In particular,
there are safe banks who choose low values of d and x and never default and there are

                                           65
risky banks who choose high values of d and x and run the risk of default. Overall, we
see that in the presence of aggregate risk, equilibria will have asset-price volatility or
default or both.


5.2    Design of Informationally Insensitive Securities
Besides creating securities that have insurance purposes, another important role of
banks is the creation of securities with different information properties than the original
investments’ cash flows. The key focus here is on dampening the information sensitivity
of the issued securities.
    Hirshleifer (1971) was one of the first authors to arrive at the fundamental insight
that information can be harmful since it limits risk sharing. He made the point in an
exchange setting where public information prevents agents from insuring each other.
The seminal paper on issuing securities against underlying cash flows for information
reasons is Gorton and Pennacchi (1990). They study a model very similar to Allen
and Gale’s with aggregate uncertainty but assume that only some agents observe the
realization of the aggregate state. This creates the problem that the informed traders
can collude to trade at the expense of the uninformed in the interim period t = 1.
Financial intermediaries present a solution to this inefficiency since they can split the
asset cash-flows into debt claims sold to the uninformed agents and equity claims sold
to the informed agents. The debt claims are risk-free and therefore informationally
insensitive so they can easily be traded among early and late consumers at t = 1
without the informed agents having an advantage.
    DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) study in more detail the optimal security design of an
intermediary who has an asset with random cash flow and wants to sell off a security
against it. Before selling the security, the intermediary receives private information
about the distribution of cash flows which creates a problem of adverse selection (lemons
problem). The more the intermediary is willing to sell off, the worse investors infer
the expected payoff to be, resulting in a downward-sloping demand. Importantly, the
security design is chosen ex ante – before the information asymmetry arises – to solve
a basic trade-off balancing the following two effects. On the one hand, a small claim is
almost risk-free and therefore not sensitive to the intermediary’s private information.
This means it can be sold with little price impact but doesn’t raise much money because
of it’s small size. On the other hand, a large claim is very informationally sensitive and
can only be sold at a steep discount, also not raising much money. In addition, the


                                            66
paper characterizes conditions for when standard debt is the optimal security design.44
    In recent work, Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2010) also study the issue of infor-
mation insensitivity but from the perspective of the uninformed party and find strong
results. In their model an uninformed agent B initially buys a security from a poten-
tially informed agent A who has a project with uncertain cash flow x. Later agent B
sells a security based on the original security to a potentially informed agent C, making
agent B a form of intermediary. The model therefore studies security design both in
the primary market as well as in the secondary market. Agent B (the intermediary)
proposes a security to buy from agent A (the entrepreneur) and to sell to agent C
(the investor) before either of the two decides whether to acquire private information.
By making both the securities information-insensitive, the intermediary tries to avoid
information acquisition by his counterparties which would result in an asymmetry to
his disadvantage. Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2010) show generally that standard
debt, s(x) = min {x, D}, is a least information-sensitive security in the class of feasible
securities with s(x) ≤ x. The key intuition is that by setting s(x) = x for low x, debt
provides the maximum possible payment in information sensitive states, thereby mini-
mizing the value of information.45 Next, the authors show that when selling a security
to a potentially informed investor, debt is optimal for two reasons: either it prevents
information acquisition by being information insensitive or if the counterparty will ac-
quire information, it maximizes the probability of trade while preventing exploitation.
Here the flat part of debt for high x is important since it implies that the intermediary
doesn’t give away too much in good states.


5.3     Intermediaries as Monitors
The idea that an important role of financial intermediaries is to monitor borrowers
on behalf of many dispersed lenders goes back to Schumpeter (1939). Diamond (1984)
develops a first theory of intermediation based on the need to monitor a borrower, ex-
plicitly taking into account the advantages and disadvantages of delegated monitoring.
Entrepreneurs with zero initial wealth have investment projects of size 1 that produce
a random output ω with distribution G. Only the entrepreneur observes the realization
of ω. In the baseline version without intermediation, the optimal contract between the
  44
    DeMarzo (2002) extends these results to the case of ex-post security design.
  45
    Note however, that standard debt is not not uniquely least information sensitive. Only the part
s(x) = x for x < D is pinned down but not the flat part s(x) = D for x > D.



                                                67
borrowing entrepreneur and the lending households specifies a face value ω̄ such that
households break even,
                           Z     ω̄
                                      ω dG(ω) + (1 − G(ω̄)) ω̄ = R.
                             0


In addition, the contract specifies a non-pecuniary punishment φ contingent on the en-
trepreneur’s repayment z equal to the shortfall, φ(z) = max {ω̄ − z, 0}, so the contract
results in expected costs E[φ(ω)].
    However, a lender can spend K to be able to observe the realization of ω. In contrast
to the costly-state-verification approach discussed earlier, each individual lender has to
pay K and he has to do so ex ante, not conditional on the entrepreneur’s report. This
creates a reason for households to delegate monitoring to a single intermediary who
finances many entrepreneurs with their deposits. But then the intermediary has to
be incentivized to report correctly to the depositors. The intermediary monitors all
entrepreneurs and collects a total of Ω from them which is a random variable. The
optimal contract between the intermediary and the households is as above, with a
face value Ω̄ such that households break even and non-pecuniary punishment φ(Z) =
      
max Ω̄ − Z, 0 . The more diversified the intermediary’s lending to entrepreneurs is, the
less variable is his collection Ω and therefore the lower are the incentive costs E[φ(Ω)].
    Holmström and Tirole (1997) provide a model of intermediary monitoring of en-
trepreneurs with a moral hazard problem. Since the entrepreneurs are borrowing con-
strained, their net worth matters. If an intermediary monitors the entrepreneur the
borrowing constraint is relaxed but the arrangement requires intermediary net worth.
    The model has three types of agents: entrepreneurs, intermediaries and households.
Each entrepreneur has a technology with constant returns to scale where an investment
I pays off RI with probability p ∈ {pH , pL }, where pL < pH , and zero otherwise. There
is moral hazard since the entrepreneur can choose one of three unobserved actions
resulting in combinations of the success probability and a private benefit given by
(pH , 0), (pL , bI) and (pL , BI) with b < B. Intermediaries can monitor entrepreneurs
at cost cI which prevents them from taking the B action. If an intermediary finances
multiple entrepreneurs all projects are perfectly correlated. This contrasts the model
with Diamond (1984) where diversification plays an important role.
    If households directly finance entrepreneurs, to ensure that the entrepreneur doesn’t




                                                 68
choose the B action, his payoff Re has to satisfy

                                                            BI
                        pH Re ≥ pL Re + BI       ⇒   Re ≥      ,
                                                            ∆p

where ∆p = pH −pL . The pledgeable income, i.e. the most households can be promised is
then given by RI −BI/∆p. Since households have to earn a return γ on their investment
of I − A, this requires                 
                                      BI
                           pH RI −          ≥ γ (I − A) ,
                                      ∆p
which implies a maximum investment scale with direct financing which is linear in net
worth,                                                      −1
                                                pH         B
               I = ψd (γ) A with ψd (γ) := 1 −        R−           .
                                                 γ         ∆p
   With an intermediary who monitors and prevents the B action, the payoff Re to the
entrepreneur has to only satisfy Re ≥ bI/∆p. However, to ensure that the intermediary
monitors, his payoff Rm has to satisfy Rm ≥ cI/∆p. The intermediary receives a positive
                     cI
expected payoff pH ∆p   − cI so he will be willing to contribute to the investment. With
an equilibrium return on intermediary capital of β, the entrepreneur can ask him to
contribute up to
                                              1    cI
                                    Im (β) = pH       .
                                             β ∆p
For households to break even on their investment of I − A − Im (β), it is necessary that

                      pH (RI − Re − Rm ) ≥ γ (I − A − Im (β)) .

Substituting in the above conditions this results in a maximum investment scale with
intermediated financing which is again linear in net worth:
                                                                         −1
                                             pH c    pH                b+c
       I ≤ ψm (γ, β) A with ψm (γ, β) := 1 −       −                R−
                                              β ∆p    γ                 ∆p

     The paper focuses on the case where the monitoring by intermediaries is useful,
i.e. ψm (γ, β) > ψd (γ) so intermediated financing allows higher leverage and therefore
more investment than direct financing. Note that ψm (γ, β) and ψd (γ) are decreasing in
the returns γ and β as would be expected. The equilibrium returns on intermediary
capital β and on household capital γ are determined by clearing the capital markets.
Entrepreneurs have aggregate net worth Ke and intermediaries have aggregate net worth

                                          69
Km . Households supply capital Kh elastically with an inverse supply function γ(Kh ).
Market clearing for household capital then requires
                                 
                              b+c
                       pH R −       (Ke + Km + Kh ) = γ(Kh ) Kh ,                                 (34)
                               ∆p

which pins down Kh and therefore aggregate investment I = Ke + Km + Kh . Finally,
the equilibrium returns γ and β are given by
                                            
                                      b+c        I                     c I
                      γ = pH       R−                  and β = pH           .
                                       ∆p        Kh                   ∆p Km

    A reduction in entrepreneur net worth Ke reduces aggregate investment I and does
so by more than the initial reduction in Ke since entrepreneurs are leveraged. Note
however, that in equilibrium the lower investment level leads to a lower return β and
– through a decrease in households’ supply of capital – a lower return γ.46 The lower
returns γ and β imply a higher equilibrium leverage ψm (γ, β), which dampens the effect
the reduction of entrepreneur net worth has on investment. Since Ke and Km enter the
equilibrium condition (34) in the same way, a reduction in intermediary net worth Km
has the same effect on investment I as a reduction in Ke . While a decrease in households’
supply of capital again leads to a lower return γ, the reduction in intermediary capital
now leads to a higher return β. The net effect on equilibrium leverage ψm (γ, β) is
negative, i.e. the reduction in intermediary capital leads to lower investment since it
forces entrepreneurs to delever.


5.4     Intermediaries’ Fragility: Incentives versus Efficiency
In the liquidity-insurance models at the beginning of the section, the fragility created by
the intermediaries capital structure is a reason for concern. In contrast, Diamond and
Rajan (2000, 2001, 2005, 2006) (hereafter DR) present models where the fragility is an
intended consequence and serves an important purpose.47 The theory of DR has two key
elements. First, they assume that the intermediary has an advantage over households in
dealing with the friction in lending to entrepreneurs. Second, they show how the fragility
  46
       Implicit differentiation of the market clearing condition (34) yields dK                 h
                                                                                              dKe    =
                   b+c
           pH (R− ∆p )
                                                                            
γ 0 (Kh )Kh +γ(Kh )−pH (R− b+c
                                which is positive since γ(Kh ) − pH R − b+c
                                                                          ∆p   > 0.
                           ∆p )
    47
       The basic idea of the disciplining role of the fragility created by demand deposits goes back to
Calomiris and Kahn (1991). For a critical perspective on this approach see Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig,
and Pfleiderer (2010).

                                                  70
created by the deposit contract helps reduce the friction between the households and
the intermediary. In this sense the approach is very similar to the double-decker models
of incentive problems of Diamond (1984) and Holmström and Tirole (1997) in that the
use of an intermediary reduces certain frictions but creates others.
    The basic model is developed in Diamond and Rajan (2001); we present a simpli-
fied version. Entrepreneurs have investment projects that require an investment of one
and pay off a deterministic cash flow C. The entrepreneurs have no funds of their own
and need to borrow from households. However, the investment project requires the en-
trepreneur’s human capital which is not contractible in advance, as in Hart and Moore
(1994). Therefore the entrepreneur’s borrowing is constrained by the value lenders can
realize without the entrepreneur, just as in the model of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). In-
termediaries have an advantage compared to households when lending to entrepreneurs.
The intermediary can liquidate the project for X while households can liquidate the
project only for βX with β < 1. Therefore the entrepreneur can potentially raise more
funding ex ante if it comes via an intermediary than if it comes from households di-
rectly.48 However, realizing the higher liquidation value X requires the intermediary’s
human capital which is also not contractible. Therefore the intermediary is constrained
in borrowing from households in the same way the entrepreneur is and can only raise
βX in funds through standard debt.
    DR show that the intermediary can raise the full X if he offers households de-
posit contracts with a sequential service constraint. With a unit measure of households,
the intermediary sets the allowed withdrawal at d = X. If he tries to renegotiate by
threatening to withhold his human capital, each depositor has a unilateral incentive to
withdraw his full deposit instead of accepting a lower renegotiated offer. The fragility
created by the deposit contract therefore disciplines the intermediary and enables him
to raise up to X to fund the entrepreneur. Note that in this baseline version of the
model, bank runs play an important role but are never observed since they are a threat
off the equilibrium path.
    Next we will add uncertainty to the model as in Diamond and Rajan (2000). In this
case, the disciplining benefits of fragility have to be traded off against the inefficiency
cost of runs that are observed on the equilibrium path. Now the liquidation value is
random, X ∈ {XH , XL } with probabilities π and 1 − π respectively. The realization
is observable but not contractible. If the intermediary were to issue deposits with a
  48
    This advantage may come from the soft information learned by the intermediary during the lending
relationship (Sharpe, 1990).


                                                71
face value of d = XH then he would not be able to repay in state L and suffer a
fundamentals-based run as in Allen and Gale (1998) discussed above. After the run,
the households are in possession of the loan to the entrepreneur and will receive only
βXL . The most the intermediary can raise in funds ex ante is therefore given by

                               Drisky = πXH + (1 − π) βXL .

Instead, the intermediary could issue deposits with a face value of d = XL , then he will
not default in state L but will be able to renegotiate households down to βXH in state
H. In this scenario the intermediary can raise ex-ante funds of

                               Dsafe = πβXH + (1 − π) XL ,

where XL is raised in deposits and the remainder is risky capital. We see that for
Drisky > Dsafe the optimal capital structure for the intermediary is all deposits with the
possibility of inefficient runs while for Drisky < Dsafe the optimal capital structure is a
mix of safe deposits and risky capital that can be renegotiated such as outside equity.
    Diamond and Rajan (2005) extend the model to a general equilibrium setting of
financial intermediaries subject to aggregate risk. There are now “three and a half”
periods, t = 0, 21 , 1, 2. In t = 0 entrepreneurs have projects with cash flow C as before but
the cash flow may arrive early at t = 1 or late at t = 2. Households are impatient, they
only value consumption at t ≤ 1. Entrepreneurs and intermediaries value consumption
at all dates equally. At the date a project matures, the intermediary can extract X from
the entrepreneur but he can also liquidate a late project at t = 1, i.e. before it matures.
Early liquidation raises x1 and x2 in payoff for t = 1, 2 respectively. By assumption we
have
                                       x1 + x2 < 1 < X < C.

Each intermediary i finances himself with a mix of deposits d and other capital and
lends to a large number of entrepreneurs at t = 0. At t = 21 everyone observes the
fraction αi of intermediary i’s projects that will mature early at t = 1. If the depositors
anticipate that the intermediary will be insolvent at t = 1, they preemptively run
already at t = 12 , forcing the intermediary to liquidate all his projects. An intermediary
who survives until t = 1 receives X from his early projects, then decides whether to
liquidate the late projects or allow them to continue until t = 2, and pays back his
depositors.

                                             72
    Early entrepreneurs receive a payoff of C − X at t = 1 and are indifferent between
consuming at t = 1 and t = 2. This means that intermediaries can raise additional funds
at t = 1 if they pay an interest rate r ≥ 0. Intermediary i takes the equilibrium market
interest rate r as given when deciding what fraction µi of late projects to liquidate at
t = 1 to maximize his remaining asset value
                                                                        
                                                      x2                X
           v(αi , µi , r) = αi X + (1 − αi ) µi x1 +       + (1 − µi )       .
                                                     1+r               1+r

This objective function is linear in µi so intermediaries either liquidate all late projects
or none (or are indifferent). The higher the interest rate r, the greater is the incentive
to liquidate all late projects.
     Given the optimal liquidation policy µ∗ , intermediaries with too few early projects
αi such that v(αi , µ∗ , r) < d would be insolvent at t = 1 so they already suffer a run at
t = 21 . The equilibrium interest rate r is pinned down by market clearing in t = 1 given
the number of intermediaries who are run at t = 12 and the optimal liquidation decision
of the surviving intermediaries at t = 1. The key insight is that there can be strong
feedback effects in equilibrium. Note that v(·) is decreasing in r so for a high interest
rate the threshold of early projects required for an intermediary to survive until t = 1 is
high and many intermediaries will be run. Since these intermediaries have to liquidate
all their projects – early and late – they reduce the supply of liquidity available at t = 1.
This reduction in the supply of liquidity can lead to an even higher interest rate r which
implies even more failures and so on. DR show that for bad aggregate shocks, i.e. low
αi s, it is possible that the intermediaries would be able to jointly repay all depositors
in t = 1 if none of them were run at t = 21 but in equilibrium all of them are run in a
systemic crisis at t = 21 .
     Diamond and Rajan (2006) introduce nominal bank deposits into the model and
contrast it with the previous setting where banks only issue real deposits – think of
deposits denominated in a foreign currency. Fiat money has positive value since (i) the
government is assumed to levy taxes that have to be paid with money, and (ii) certain
(black market) transactions can only be made with cash. As before, delays in asset cash
flows can lead to a liquidity shortage and inefficient early liquidation as banks try to
raise funds to match withdrawals of demand deposits.
     However, in the case where deposits are denominated in terms of money their real
value is state dependent. This can serve as a hedge, provided that the real value of money
is low in states with scare real aggregate liquidity. In other words, nominal deposits

                                             73
buffer the impact of aggregate risk if the price level is countercyclical. In contrast, if
the price level is procyclical (inflation in booms and deflation in recessions), nominal
deposits can amplify the problems of aggregate liquidity risk. Appropriate monetary
policy that leads to a countercyclical price level can be a stabilizing force in this model.
An increase in the price level limits depositors’ incentive to withdraw their nominal
deposits in downturns. Banks respond by continuing, rather than curtailing, credit to
long-term projects, which increases overall economic activity. This analysis provides a
natural segue to the next section which goes into more detail at the intersection of
monetary policy and financial stability more generally.


5.5     Intermediaries and the Theory of Money
Traditional economic writings and courses in “money and banking” stress the impor-
tance of financial intermediaries in monetary economics. Financial and monetary sta-
bility are closely linked since when financial institutions’ balance sheets are impaired
so is their (inside) money creation.49 In classical economics there were two opposing
schools. The “currency school” (Ricardo and others) that stressed the importance of
base money for predicting long-run inflation. In contrast, the “banking school” (John
Law, Adam Smith and others) argued that money is created by the intermediary sector
and hence issuing money for real bills in times of crisis is not necessarily inflationary
(real bill doctrine).

Keynesianism vs. Monetarism. Keynes’ writings also stress frictions and distor-
tions in financial markets. For Keynesians like Samuelson, Solow and Tobin the key
stable relationship is that current income determines consumption. This is behind the
stable IS relation and ensures that fiscal policy leads to a large multiplier effect. The
Phillips curve is the other stable relationship. It implies that aggregate demand pol-
icy can control output. Given the assumption that the demand for money as not very
stable, they are wary of targeting monetary aggregates since it can lead to volatility of
interest rates and output. Finally, Keynesians view monetary policy as ineffective, in
times when the economy is stuck in a liquidity trap – like in the Great Depression.50
  49
     Since this survey focuses primarily on financing frictions and intermediation, it complements work
that highlights the transaction role of money through a cash-in-advance constraint or through a money-
in-the-utility-function specification.
  50
     Gurley and Shaw, Tobin and Brainard studied credit, money demand based on portfolio theory
stressed the linkage between the real economy and the financial sector, focussing on interest rates



                                                  74
    In contrast, monetarists armed with the permanent income hypothesis questioned
the stable link between consumption and income and criticized the simple multiplier
mechanism. Instead, monetarists viewed money demand as relatively stable. While
Keynesians looked at financial frictions and institutions on the money demand side,
monetarists worried about their supply side effects. In particular, they studied how in-
termediation affects broader measures of money through the money multiplier. Money
supply shocks in most monetarist models are treated as exogenous. This suggests a
causal influence of monetary policy mistakes on real output in the short run (typically
due to wage stickiness). Most prominently, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) carefully
document that a change in money supply “is followed by” a change in aggregate output
during the Great Depression in the US. Importantly, money aggregates have to include
bank deposits. Simply looking at high-powered base money (or gold) is misleading since
during the Great Depression many households withdrew their demand deposits from
banks and hoarded cash. As a consequence – despite the fact that base money ex-
panded – broader measures of money, like M1 or M2, fell dramatically. In other words,
the money multiplier collapsed during the Great Depression as banks went out of busi-
ness. Brunner and Meltzer (1964) modeled the important additional feedback effects
from aggregate output to money through the banking system.
    Both schools also differed in their style of analysis. While Keynesians develop large
scale (reduced form) econometric models, monetarists preferred a simpler approach
with exogenous money supply shocks based on the “historical approach” of Friedman
and Schwartz (1963) that carefully examines specific episodes in the Great Depression.
Tobin (1970) showed that these lag structure need not imply a causal relationship and
subsequent VAR studies pioneered by Sims (1972, 1980) show that both money and
output are to a large extent simultaneously determined. See also Sims (2011).

Money vs. Credit View. Under the “money view” the financial sector matters
primarily insofar as it creates money. Banks’ liabilities that are not considered part of
monetary aggregates play a less important role. The same is true for total credit – the
asset side of banks’ balance sheets. Presumably, if a compromised banking sector fails
to create enough money (e.g. due to the decreased “moneyness” of bank liabilities),
an injection of outside money might solve the problem. In contrast, under the “credit
view,” simply injecting (outside) money might reduce deflationary pressures but might
rather than monetary aggregates, see e.g. Tobin (1969).



                                                75
not create additional credit to stimulate the economy. For example, banks might simply
hoard the funds by parking them with the central bank in the form of excess reserves.
While earlier credit and money grew hand in hand, in recent decades credit growth
has decoupled and outpaced money growth. Banks increasingly rely on non-monetary
liabilities instead of traditional funding through bank deposit liabilities (Schularick and
Taylor, 2012).

New-Keynesian Models. In the past ten years there has been a move towards
large scale Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models, that build on the
earlier New-Keynesian tradition of sticky prices and frictions in multiple adjustments.
These models are estimated allowing for a large number of “exogenous” shocks. In the
two most prominent models Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and
Wouters (2003, 2007) the financial sector plays no role.
    A notable early exception is Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2003). It adds a
banking sector with financial frictions and several shocks to evaluate the Friedman-
Schwartz hypothesis that a more accommodative monetary policy could have greatly
reduced the severity of the Great Depression. The structural DSGE model allows them
to simulate an economy with a counterfactual monetary policy – an alternative ap-
proach that nicely supplements the insightful “narrative approach” used by Friedman
and Schwartz (1963). In the model of Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2003) banks
issue time deposits to households and use the proceeds to provide debt financing to
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs own and operate the capital stock, but have only limited
net worth and an agency problem like in Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) con-
strains their capital holdings. In addition to time deposits, banks also issue demand
deposits to fund working-capital loans to goods-producing firms.
    Out of the eight types of shocks the model allows, only two turn out to be empirically
significant. “Liquidity preference shocks” – which induce households to accumulate cur-
rency instead of holding banks’ demand and time deposits – are important to capture
the contractionary phase of the Great Depression. This confirms the Friedman-Schwartz
hypothesis that the Fed mistakenly focused on narrow monetary aggregates, like base
money or gold, and failed to appreciate that broad money measures collapsed as in-
vestors withdrew demand deposits into currency which lead to the failure of a series of
banks. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue that the Fed should have prevented this by
more aggressively pursuing its lender of last resort function as envisioned by Bagehot
(1873). The second important shock, a shock to workers’ market power, is needed to

                                            76
explain why in the expansionary phase during the Great Depression (1933–1939) the
hours worked recovered only slightly.
    Goodfriend (2005) develops and Goodfriend and McCallum (2007) calibrate a model
that integrates broad money demand, loan production, asset pricing and arbitrage be-
tween banking and asset market and highlights the importance of various interest rate
spreads for monetary policy.
    Curdia and Woodford (2010) also introduce a financial intermediary sector to argue
that monetary policy should take more than the risk-free short-term interest rate and
interest rate spreads into account. This model departs from the representative consumer
of the New-Keynesian DSGE setting by introducing two types of consumers who face
random preference shocks. A fraction of households have a high marginal utility of
consumption and hence become borrowers, while the other fraction have lower marginal
utility of consumption and become savers. The main financial friction in the model is
that households can only lend to and borrow from financial intermediaries. These banks
face some intermediation costs, which determine the interest rate spread between their
borrowing (demand deposit) rate and their lending rate. Part of the spread is due to the
fact that some borrowers are fraudulent and do not plan to repay their loans. This cost
is increasing in the amount of lending. As these exogenous intermediation costs vary,
so does the spread between the lending and the borrowing interest rate. Curdia and
Woodford (2010) show that in their setting a spread-adjusted Taylor rule can improve
upon an unadjusted Taylor rule. In these models banks are in perfect competition and
are assumed to make zero profit at any point in time. This switches off any net worth
dynamics of the banking sector.

The I Theory. In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) the net worth of the financial
intermediary sector plays a key role. It stresses the fact that the distribution of wealth
is an important determinant of economic activity in a setting where financial frictions
limit the flow of funds. It makes a difference whether net worth is in the hands of more
productive agents or less productive agents or financial intermediaries who facilitate
credit flow from less productive to more productive agents. The key frictions are finan-
cial contracting frictions rather than price or wage rigidities that are the main drivers
in New-Keynesian models.
    The framework builds on the model of Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010) discussed
in Section 2.3. Instead of having only two types, productive and unproductive, in Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2011) agents come from a continuum of types ω, varying in their

                                           77
total factor productivity aω and/or the depreciation rate δ ω of their capital holdings.
Capital ktω held by agent ω is measured in efficiency units evolves according to

                               dktω
                                    = (Φ(ιωt ) − δ ω ) dt + dεωt .
                                ktω

The concave function Φ reflects technological illiquidity, as in Bernanke, Gertler, and
Gilchrist (1999).
    In an idealized world without any frictions, capital is concentrated in the hands of
the more productive agents. These agents issue debt claims and (outside) equity claims.
This allows them to scale up their productive operations, while less productive agents
also participate in their productivity.
    With financial frictions, this capital reallocation is severely limited. In the extreme
case of autarky there is no contracting at all and the distribution of capital is the same
as the distribution of wealth across agents. Introducing (outside) money, say pieces of
green paper, can improve the economic allocation if agents’ productivity is switching. As
less productive agents become more productive and vice versa, capital and claims simply
change hands to ensure that capital is always with the most productive agents. Money
allows some implicit borrowing and lending among the agents and hence improves the
capital allocation and total output. Like in Samuelson (1958) and Bewley (1980) money
has positive endogenous value Pt . Given the endogenous value of capital, qt Kt , all agents’
total wealth (i.e. net worth) in the economy is given by

                                          qt K t + P t .

    While money improves the capital allocation compared to the autarky regime, it is
far from the first-best allocation without financial frictions. Productive agents cannot
share their risk and hence their desire to lever up their operations is subdued. This
depresses the price of qt and total capital investment. Importantly, note that the value
of money Pt is the result of financial frictions. Absent financial frictions the value of
money would be close to zero.
    The role of financial intermediaries in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) is to mit-
igate these financial frictions. Intermediaries raise funds from unproductive agents by
issuing deposits, i.e. inside money and extend (risky) loans to productive agents. Inter-
mediaries take on risk from various productive agents and thereby diversify productive
agents’ risks. One can think of intermediaries as having a special monitoring technol-


                                               78
ogy but being themselves subject to moral hazard as well. That is, bankers must have
sufficient “skin in the game” to exert effort in monitoring productive agents. This is
similar to the static setting in Holmström and Tirole (1997), discussed in Section 5.3.
Because intermediaries are subject to a solvency constraint, their ability to absorb risks
depends on their aggregate net worth. So after losses they are less able to perform their
function and mitigate the financial frictions.
     Intermediaries’ net worth, more specifically their wealth share ηt is the key state
variable in this economy. The wealth distribution among other agents stays constant
since they switch types sufficiently frequently. When intermediaries are well capitalized,
i.e. when ηt is high, they are able to mitigate the financial frictions. Consequently, the
value of money Pt relative to the consumption good is very low – money is not needed
to transfer funds. Since intermediaries are exposed to the risks of productive agents, a
negative aggregate productivity shock across dεωt , hurts intermediaries’ wealth shares ηt
as well. With a reduced wealth share, intermediaries try to shrink their balance sheet,
cut back on credit to productive agents and raise fewer demand deposits (inside money)
from unproductive agents. At the same time, as the creation of inside money decreases,
unproductive agents bid up the value of outside money to satisfy their demand for
savings.
     Two adverse spirals kick in: First, a liquidity spiral. Productive agents suddenly
have trouble obtaining financing from banks and will “fire-sell” their physical capital
to unproductive agents. Since physical capital is less productive in the hands of the
latter, the price of capital qt drops. A lower value of the assets reduces the net worth of
productive agents and intermediaries even further, which leads to more “fire-sales” and
so on. The second spiral is a Fisher (1933) deflation spiral. As financial intermediaries’
net worth shrinks, the economy moves further away from the “first-best regime” closer
to the “money regime” in which implicit borrowing and lending occurs by swapping
capital for money. In the latter regime money is crucial and its value Pt is therefore
higher. A drop in intermediaries’ net worth leads to an increase in the value of money
– or in other words to deflationary pressure. As intermediaries’ liabilities consist of
demand deposits, the real value of their liabilities expands hitting their net worth even
further. This, in turn, feeds and compounds both spirals.
     In summary, intermediaries are hit on both sides of the balance sheet. A negative
productivity shock hits the value of the their assets and the subsequent reduction in
risk taking increases the real value of their liabilities. This is consistent with empirical
evidence under the (extended) Gold Standard until 1970, where a decline in GDP

                                            79
coincides with deflationary, rather than inflationary, pressure. Note that competitive
banks cause an externality on each other after an adverse shock. For each individual
bank it is optimal – “micro-prudent” – to reduce its risk exposure after a negative
shock wipes out part of its net worth. However, as all banks are behaving the same
way, this causes deflationary pressure with adverse effects on the other banks and the
whole economy. (In an economy with few large banks these externalities may be more
contained.)
     The health of the financial system determines the money multiplier and overall
economic growth. This is also consistent with the empirical facts documented in Adrian
and Shin (2010a). Importantly, the money multiplier is endogenous in Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2011). This approach is closer in spirit to the classical “banking school”
than the classical “currency school,” which essentially assumes a fixed money multiplier.
     Money is very special in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) as it is the endogenous
“safe harbor” asset. After an adverse shock, the real value of money appreciates and
households flock towards holding money. Recall that money is an (imperfect) substitute
for intermediation. Note that the “safe harbor” or “flight to safety” asset is endogenous
depending on which asset agents coordinate on. The analysis focuses on the equilibrium
in which all agents coordinate on a particular piece of paper (or gold) as money.
     Before analyzing monetary policy, let us briefly contrast Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2011) with Kiyotaki and Moore (2008), discussed previously in Section 4.2. In Kiyotaki
and Moore (2008) all agents are equally productive and some of them randomly have
an investment opportunity. There are no intermediaries and agents’ funding liquidity
is limited since they face a borrowing constraint. Due to limited commitment they can
only finance a fraction θ of their investment by issuing new debt while the remainder has
to be funded either with their money holdings or by selling other claims (or capital)
whose market liquidity is limited. Note that ceteribus paribus agents prefer to hold
liquid money compared to illiquid claims on capital. The latter exposes them to the
risk of not being able to raise enough funds to scale up the investments should an
investment opportunity arise. In other words, the resalability friction makes equity
claims (or equivalently physical assets) risky compared to money.
     In contrast, in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) no exogenous resalability con-
straint is needed. Nevertheless, holding physical capital is risky. Productive agents are
concerned that they might become less productive and have to sell their capital while at
the same time an adverse aggregate shock occurs. In this case, these agents can sell their
capital only at a depressed price. As money enjoys perfect market liquidity in Kiyotaki

                                           80
and Moore (2008) and hence is less risky, it yields a lower expected return compared to
assets with limited market liquidity. Their main finding is that an exogenous worsening
of market liquidity makes money more attractive and leads to deflationary pressure.
At the same time the price of assets (relative to money) falls – a finding that can be
thought off as “flight to quality.” An exogenous productivity shock on the other hand
leads to inflationary pressure as total output is reduced for a given amount of money.
The latter result is in sharp contrast to the deflationary pressure due to a negative pro-
ductivity shock in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011). There, an adverse productivity
shock also endogenously affects financial intermediation and hence leads to a reduction
of inside money and a collapse of the money multiplier.

Macroprudential Policy. Appropriate monetary policy in Brunnermeier and San-
nikov (2011) can mitigate the deflationary spiral and the negative externalities that
banks impose on each other. Importantly, for monetary policy to work it has to be
redistributional. The paper introduces a central bank that pays nominal interest on
short-term monetary reserves. These interest payments are fully financed by seignior-
age. With only short-term money, monetary policy is ineffective, since all prices are fully
flexible and there are no redistributional effects. Only after introducing a long-term
bond does interest rate policy have bite. Cutting the short-term interest rate increases
the value of long-term bonds and redistributes wealth towards long-term bond holders.
Note that both short-term money and long-term bonds are stores of value and hence
are part of total broad (outside) money supply.
    In sum, an accommodative interest rate policy after an adverse shock partially
offsets the negative wealth shocks suffered by financial intermediaries who hold interest-
sensitive bonds. This can be referred to as a “stealth recapitalization” as it is a sneaky
way to redistribute wealth towards financial intermediaries. (Open market operations
in which the central buys long-term bonds in exchange for short-term money have the
same redistributional effects.) This monetary transmission channel working through
capital gains in asset prices is related to earlier work by Tobin (1969) and Brunner and
Meltzer (1972). Of course, this wealth redistribution through monetary policy is not a
zero-sum game as it promotes real growth in the economy.51
  51
     The loanable funds model of Bernanke and Blinder (1992) distinguishes between bank loans and
bonds and provides empirical evidence for this distinction. Also, Kashyap and Stein (2000) document
in the cross section that the impact of monetary policy on lending behavior is stronger for banks with
less liquid balance sheets.



                                                 81
    Redistributional monetary policy comes at a great price: moral hazard. Financial
intermediaries will anticipate that any adverse shocks will be met with some accom-
modative monetary policy that recapitalizes financial intermediaries. Hence, financial
intermediaries take on excessive risk ex-ante. A monetary policy designed to overcome
externalities associated with deflationary and liquidity spirals therefore has to be com-
plemented with a macro-prudential policy that mitigates the moral hazard problem –
a message that is shared with the papers discussed next.
    Farhi and Tirole (2012) study this moral hazard problem in a three period model.
They stress that imperfectly targeting distressed institutions in times of crisis makes
private leverage choices among banks strategic complements. If the authorities are per-
ceived to be tough at crisis times, each bank has the incentive to hold sufficient short-
term liquidity or issue less short-term debt. On the other hand, if the central bank is
perceived to be lenient, banks issue more short-term debt, which in turn increases the
incentive for each individual bank to issue more short-term debt. In addition, if banks
can choose the correlation of their shocks with those of other banks, they strive to
be highly correlated (Acharya, 2009). Interestingly, these strategic complementarities
make regulation very effective even if it is confined only to a subset of large key insti-
tutions. In addition, Farhi and Tirole (2012) emphasize the time-inconsistency problem
authorities face. Ex-ante they would like to be perceived as tough to ensure that banks
act prudently, but in times of crisis they choose the ex-post optimal policy intervention.
    Farhi and Tirole’s analysis distinguishes between interest rate policies which lower
borrowing costs and transfer policies which boost the intermediaries’ net worth. This
is in contrast to the multi-period setting of Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011), where
interest rate changes lead to capital gains and hence also to wealth transfers. If the
regulator knew exactly which banks are insolvent, wealth transfers would be the more
targeted policy instrument. However, in reality policy makers are less well informed.
Interest rate policy is then always part of the optimal policy mix. Direct transfers are
only optimal in Farhi and Tirole (2012) if the crisis affects a large fraction of financial
intermediaries.
    In Stein (2012) intermediaries also issue too much short-term debt. Inside money
creation is excessive due to a negative “fire-sale externality.” Intermediaries capture the
social benefits of money creation due to agents’ special preferences for money – possibly
reflecting the transaction services of money – while not fully internalizing its costs. In
a state of crisis, intermediaries are forced to sell their assets at fire-sale prices to honor
their short-term debt causing a negative externality on other intermediaries. In this

                                             82
setting, a cap-and-trade system of money-creation permits, e.g. reserve requirements,
can implement the optimal allocation. The price of these permits – the interest rate
on reserves – reveals information about banks’ investment opportunities to the regula-
tor. This system works well even when authorities are less well informed than banks,
provided that (almost) all banks are subject to the cap-and-trade scheme. When large
parts of the banks’ liabilities are supplied by the shadow banking sector simply ad-
justing the outstanding reserves and thereby the Fed funds rate through open market
operations is not sufficient to reign in excessive money creation. With a large shadow
banking system the reach of the reserve requirements has to be extended or additional
regulatory measures have to be imposed.
    Ashcraft, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2011) study the interaction between central
banks’ collateral policy, especially margin/haircut requirements, and interest rates.
Brunnermeier (2010) shows how region specific bank regulation and margin require-
ments set by the central bank can make an otherwise sub-optimal currency area an
optimal one.
    We would like to close this survey by noting that in almost all of the “credit models”
the level of credit is below first best. These models stress that financial frictions restrict
the flow of funds. In crisis times these inefficiencies are amplified further through adverse
feedback loops. The appropriate policy response requires the central bank to step in
and to substitute the lack of private credit with public funding. This is in contrast to
Minsky’s and Kindleberger’s lines of work. They stress that the level of credit can be
excessively high, especially when imbalances and systemic risk are building up during a
credit bubble. The bursting of these bubbles can then tie the central bank’s hands and
impair not only financial but also long-run price stability.




                                             83
References
Acharya, V. V. (2009): “A Theory of Systemic Risk and Design of Prudential Bank Regulation,”
  Journal of Financial Stability, 5(3), 224–255.

Admati, A. R., P. M. DeMarzo, M. F. Hellwig, and P. Pfleiderer (2010): “Fallacies, Irrele-
  vant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not Expensive,”
  Working Paper.

Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2010a): “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics,” in Hand-
  book of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford, vol. 3, chap. 12, pp.
  601–650. Elsevier.

        (2010b): “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19(3), 418–437, Risk
  Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability.

Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 109(3), 659–684.

       (1995): “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Constraints,
  and Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1158–1175.

Akerlof, G. A. (1970): “The Market for ”Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-
  nism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488–500.

Allen, F., and D. Gale (1994): “Limited Market Participation and Volatility of Asset Prices,”
  American Economic Review, 84(4), 933–955.

           (1998): “Optimal Financial Crises,” Journal of Finance, 53(4), 1245–1284.

           (2004): “Financial Intermediaries and Markets,” Econometrica, 72(4), 1023–1061.

           (2007): Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance. Oxford University
  Press.

Alvarez, F., and U. J. Jermann (2000): “Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk of
  Default,” Econometrica, 68(4), 775–797.

Angeletos, G.-M. (2007): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 10(1), 1–30.

Ashcraft, A., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2011): “Two Monetary Tools: Interest Rates
  and Haircuts,” in NBER Macroconomics Annual 2010, ed. by D. Acemoglu, and M. Woodford,
  vol. 25, pp. 143–180. University of Chicago Press.

Atkeson, A., and R. E. Lucas (1992): “On Efficient Distribution With Private Information,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 59(3), 427–453.

Bagehot, W. (1873): Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. H. S. King.

Bakke, T.-E., and T. M. Whited (2011): “Threshold Events and Identification: A Study of Cash
  Shortfalls,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Benmelech, E., M. J. Garmaise, and T. J. Moskowitz (2005): “Do Liquidation Values Affect Fi-
  nancial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation*,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 120(3), 1121–1154.

                                                  84
Bernanke, B. S. (1983): “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
  Great Depression,” American Economic Review, 73(3), 257–276.

Bernanke, B. S., and A. S. Blinder (1992): “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
  Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review, 82(4), 901–921.

Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
  American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator in a Quan-
  titative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and
  M. Woodford. Elsevier.

Bester, H. (1985): “Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect Information,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 75(4), 850–855.

Bewley, T. F. (1977): “The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation,” Journal of
  Economic Theory, 16(2), 252–292.

       (1980): “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in Models of Monetary Economies, ed. by J. H.
  Kareken, and N. Wallace. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

        (1983): “A Difficulty with the Optimum Quantity of Money,” Econometrica, 51(5), 1485–1504.

Bhattacharya, S., A. W. A. Boot, and A. V. Thakor (2004): Credit, Intermediation, and the
  Macroeconomy: Models and Perspectives. Oxford University Press.

Bhattacharya, S., and D. Gale (1987): “Preference Shocks, Liquidity, and Central Bank Policy,”
  in New Approaches to Monetary Economics, ed. by W. A. Barnett, and K. J. Singleton, pp. 69–88.
  Cambridge University Press.

Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy, 93(2),
  223–247.

Blanchard, O. J., F. L. de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (1994): “What Do Firms Do with Cash
  Windfalls?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 36(3), 337–360.

Brunner, K., and A. H. Meltzer (1964): “Some Further Investigations of Demand and Supply
  Functions for Money,” Journal of Finance, 19(2), 240–283.

        (1972): “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy, 80(5), 951–977.

Brunnermeier, M. K. (2001): Asset Pricing Under Asymmetric Information: Bubbles, Crashes,
  Technical Analysis, and Herding. Oxford University Press.

       (2008): “Bubbles,” in New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and L. E.
  Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.

         (2010): “Optimizing the Currency Area,” in The Great Financial Crisis: Lessons for Financial
  Stability and Monetary Policy, pp. 14–22.

Brunnermeier, M. K., G. Gorton, and A. Krishnamurthy (2011): “Liquidity Mismatch,”
  Working Paper.




                                                85
Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2009): “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), 2201–2238.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2010): “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
  Sector,” Working Paper.

        (2011): “The I Theory of Money,” Working Paper.

Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Simsek, and W. Xiong (2011): “A Welfare Criterion for Models with
  Distorted Beliefs,” Working Paper.

Bryant, J. (1980): “A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance,” Journal of Banking
  and Finance, 4(4), 335–344.

Buera, F. J., and B. Moll (2011): “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,” Working Paper.

Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff (1989): “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 97(1), 155–178.

Caballero, R. J. (1990): “Consumption puzzles and precautionary savings,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 25(1), 113–136.

        (1991): “Earnings Uncertainty and Aggregate Wealth Accumulation,” American Economic
  Review, 81(4), 859–871.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008): “An Equilibrium Model of “Global
  Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 358–393.

Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy (2004): “Smoothing Sudden Stops,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 119(1), 104–127, Macroeconomics of Global Capital Market Imperfections.

Calomiris, C. W., and C. M. Kahn (1991): “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
  Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review, 81(3), 497–513.

Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctua-
  tions: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review, 87(5), 893–910.

Carroll, C. D. (1992): “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence,” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992(2), 61–156.

        (1997): “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1–55.

Carroll, C. D., and M. S. Kimball (1996): “On the Concavity of the Consumption Function,”
  Econometrica, 64(4), 981–992.

Chamberlain, G., and C. A. Wilson (2000): “Optimal Intertemporal Consumption under Uncer-
  tainty,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3(3), 365 – 395.

Chari, V. V., and R. Jagannathan (1988): “Banking Panics, Information, and Rational Expec-
  tations Equilibrium,” Journal of Finance, 43(3), 749–761.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cylce Accounting,” Econo-
  metrica, 75(3), 781–836.



                                              86
Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2003): “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
  Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35(6), 1119–1197.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dy-
  namic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1–45.

Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), 219–240.

Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini (2004): “Aggregate Consequences of Limited Contract
  Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 817–847.

Cordoba, J.-C., and M. Ripoll (2004): “Credit Cycles Redux,” International Economic Review,
  45(4), 1011–1046.

Curdia, V., and M. Woodford (2010): “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 42, 3–35.

Dang, T. V., G. B. Gorton, and B. Holmström (2010): “Financial Crises and the Optimality
  of Debt for Liquidity Provision,” Working Paper.

Davila, J., J. H. Hong, P. L. Krusell, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2005): “Constrained Efficiency
  in the Neoclassical Growth Model with Uninsurable Idiosyncractic Shocks,” Working Paper 05-023,
  Penn Institute for Economic Research.

de Meza, D., and D. C. Webb (1987): “Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric Infor-
  mation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2), 281–292.

Deaton, A. (1991): “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 59(5), 1221–1248.

DeMarzo, P. M. (2002): “Portfolio Liquidation and Security Design with Private Information,”
  Working Paper.

DeMarzo, P. M., and D. Duffie (1999): “A Liquidity-based Model of Security Design,” Econo-
  metrica, 67(1), 65–99.

DeMarzo, P. M., and Y. Sannikov (2006): “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic Capital Struc-
  ture in a Continuous-Time Agency Model,” Journal of Finance, 61(6), 2681–2724.

Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 51(3), 393–414.

        (1997): “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(5), 928–956.

Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983): “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 401–419.

Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2000): “A Theory of Bank Capital,” Journal of Finance,
  55(6), 2431–2465.

        (2001): “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 109(2), 287–327.

        (2005): “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” Journal of Finance, 60(2), 615–647.



                                               87
        (2006): “Money in a Theory of Banking,” American Economic Review, 96(1), 30–53.

Diamond, P. A. (1965): “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Re-
  view, 55(5), 1126–1150.

        (1967): “The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model with Technological
  Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 57(4), 759–776.

Eisfeldt, A. L., and A. A. Rampini (2006): “Capital reallocation and liquidity,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 53(3), 369–399.

Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski (2009): “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of
  Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 973–992.

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2011): “Bubbly Liquidity,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

       (2012): “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and Systemic Bailouts,” American
  Economic Review, 102(1), 60–93.

Fisher, I. (1933): “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, 1(4), 337–357.

Foley, D. K., and M. F. Hellwig (1975): “Asset Management with Trading Uncertainty,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 42(3), 327–346.

Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos (2008): “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,” American
  Economic Review, 98(4), 1211–1244.

Freixas, X., and J.-C. Rochet (1997): Microeconomics of Banking. MIT Press.

Friedman, M. (1969): “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in The Optimum Quantity of Money and
  Other Essays, ed. by M. Friedman. Aldine Publishing.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963): A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960.
  Princeton University Press.

Gan, J. (2007): “The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-Level Evidence of a
  Lending Channel,” Review of Financial Studies, 20(6), 1941–1973.

Geanakoplos, J. (1997): “Promises Promises,” in The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II,
  ed. by W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane. Addison-Wesley.

        (2003): “Liquidity, Defaults, and Crashes,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
  Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress, Volume 2, Econometric Society Monographs.
  Cambridge University Press.

        (2008): “Overlapping Generations Model of General Equilibrium,” in New Palgrave Dictionary
  of Economics, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and L. E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.

Geanakoplos, J., and H. M. Polemarchakis (1986): “Existence, Regularity, and Constrained
  Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations when the Asset Market is Incomplete,” in Uncertainty,
  Information and Communication: Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, ed. by W. P. Heller, R. M.
  Starr, and D. A. Starrett. Cambridge University Press.

Geanakoplos, J., and W. R. Zame (1997): “Collateral Default and Market Crashes,” Working
  Paper.


                                               88
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
  Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford,
  vol. 3, pp. 547–599. Elsevier.

Goodfriend, M. (2005): “Narrow Money, Broad Money, and the Transmission of Monetary Policy,”
  in Models of Monetary Policy: Research in the Tradition of Dale Henderson, Richard Porter, and
  Peter Tinsley, ed. by J. Faust, A. Orphanides, and D. Reifschneider. Board of Governors of the
  Federal Reserve System.

Goodfriend, M., and B. T. McCallum (2007): “Banking and Interest Rates in Monetary Pol-
  icy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(5), 1480–1507,
  ¡ce:title¿Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy: Issues in Current Monetary Policy
  Analysis November 10-11, 2006¡/ce:title¿.

Gorton, G. B., and A. Metrick (2011): “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Gorton, G. B., and G. Pennacchi (1990): “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,”
  Journal of Finance, 45(1), 49–71.

Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2002): “Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially con-
  strained arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2-3), 361–407.

         (2010): “Limits of Arbitrage,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2(1), 251–275.

Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni (2011): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings and the Liquidity
  Trap,” Working Paper.

Gurley, J. G., and E. S. Shaw (1955): “Financial Aspects of Economic Development,” American
  Economic Review, 45(4), 515–538.

Guvenen, F. (2012): “Macroeconomics with Heterogeneity: A Practical Guide,” Working Paper.

Gârleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2011): “Margin-based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the
  Law of One Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 1980–2022.

Hall, R. E. (1978): “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory
  and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6), 971–987.

Harrison, J. M., and D. M. Kreps (1978): “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
  Heterogeneous Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92(2), 323–336.

Hart, O. D. (1975): “On the optimality of equilibrium when the market structure is incomplete,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 11(3), 418–443.

Hart, O. D., and J. Moore (1994): “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
  Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 841–879.

He, Z., I. G. Khang, and A. Krishnamurthy (2010): “Balance Sheet Adjustments during the
  2008 Crisis,” IMF Economic Review, 58(1), 118–156.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2010): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” Working Paper.

         (2011): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.



                                                89
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2009): “Quantitative Macroeconomics
  with Heterogeneous Households,” Annual Review of Economics, 1(1), 319–354.

Hellwig, M. F. (2001): “Risk Aversion and Incentive Compatibility with Ex Post Information Asym-
  metry,” Economic Theory, 18(2), 415–438, 10.1007/PL00004192.

Hirshleifer, J. (1971): “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
  Activity,” American Economic Review, 61(4), 561–574.

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
  Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 663–691.

          (1998): “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(1), 1–40.

          (2001): “LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Finance, 56(5), 1837–
  1867.

          (2011): Inside and Outside Liquidity. MIT Press.

Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
  Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5–6), 953–969.

Jacklin, C. J. (1987): “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions and Risk Sharing,” in Contractual Ar-
  rangements for Intertemporal Trade, ed. by E. C. Prescott, and N. Wallace. University of Minnesota
  Press.

Jaffee, D. M., and F. Modigliani (1969): “A Theory and Test of Credit Rationing,” American
  Economic Review, 59(5), 850–872.

Jaffee, D. M., and T. Russell (1976): “Imperfect Information, Uncertainty, and Credit Ra-
  tioning,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 651–666.

Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2011): “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation
  Approach,” Working Paper.

Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 102(1), 238–271.

Kashyap, A. K., and J. C. Stein (2000): “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about
  the Transmission of Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 407–428.

Kashyap, A. K., J. C. Stein, and D. W. Wilcox (1993): “Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions:
  Evidence from the Composition of External Finance,” American Economic Review, 83(1), 78–98.

Kehoe, T. J., and D. K. Levine (1993): “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 60(4), 865–888.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan.

Kimball, M. S. (1990): “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica, 58(1),
  53–73.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1978): Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basic
  Books.



                                                  90
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211–
  248.

        (2008): “Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,” Working Paper.

Kocherlakota, N. R. (2000): “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal Re-
  serve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24(3), 2–10.

Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith, Jr. (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroecon-
  omy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.

Lamont, O. (1997): “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets,” Journal
  of Finance, 52(1), 83–109.

Levine, D. K., and W. R. Zame (2002): “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?,” Econometrica,
  70(5), 1805–1839.

Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent (2004): Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. MIT Press.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3), 809–833.

Mankiw, N. G. (1986): “The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 101(3), 455–470.

Martin, A., and J. Ventura (2011): “Theoretical Notes on Bubbles and the Current Crisis,” IMF
 Economic Review, 59(1), 6–40.

Mendoza, E. G. (2010): “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic Review,
 100(4), 1941–1966.

Mendoza, E. G., V. Quadrini, and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull (2009): “Financial Integration, Financial
 Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3), 371–416.

Minsky, H. P. (1957): “Central Banking and Money Market Changes,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 71(2), 171–187.

Moll, B. (2010): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital
 Misallocation?,” Working Paper.

Patinkin, D. (1956): Money, Interest, and Prices: An Integration of Monetary and Value Theory.
  Row, Peterson.

Peek, J., and E. S. Rosengren (1997): “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The
  Case of Japan,” American Economic Review, 87(4), 495–505.

Postlewaite, A., and X. Vives (1987): “Bank Runs as an Equilibrium Phenomenon,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 95(3), 485–491.

Quadrini, V. (2011): “Financial Frictions in Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Working Paper.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2010): “Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distribution
  of Debt Capacity,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2293–2322.

        (2011): “Collateral and Capital Structure,” Working Paper.



                                               91
Samuelson, P. A. (1958): “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social
  Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6), 467–482.

Scheinkman, J. A., and L. Weiss (1986): “Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate Economic Activ-
  ity,” Econometrica, 54(1), 23–45.

Scheinkman, J. A., and W. Xiong (2003): “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 111(6), 1183–1219.

Schneider, M., and A. Tornell (2004): “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
  Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 883–913.

Schularick, M., and A. M. Taylor (2012): “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
  Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-–2008,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Schumpeter, J. A. (1939): Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis of the
  Capitalist Process. McGraw-Hill.

Sharpe, S. A. (1990): “Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A Stylized
  Model of Customer Relationships,” Journal of Finance, 45(4), 1069–1087.

Shin, H. S. (2010): Risk and Liquidity, Clarendon Lectures in Finance. Oxford University Press.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1992): “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
  librium Approach,” The Journal of Finance, 47(4), pp. 1343–1366.

         (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage,” The Journal of Finance, 52(1), 35–55.

Sims, C. A. (1972): “Money, Income, and Causality,” American Economic Review, 62(4), 540–552.

         (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(1), 1–48.

         (2011): “Statistical Modeling of Monetary Policy and its Effects,” Nobel Lecture.

Simsek, A. (2010): “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints,” Working Paper.

Slovin, M. B., M. E. Sushka, and J. A. Polonchek (1993): “The Value of Bank Durability:
  Borrowers as Bank Stakeholders,” Journal of Finance, 48(1), 247–266.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model
  of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1123–1175.

       (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American
  Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.

Stein, J. C. (2012): “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 127(1), 57–95.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1982): “The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 49(2), 241–261.

Stiglitz, J. E., and A. Weiss (1981): “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,”
  American Economic Review, 71(3), 393–410.

Tirole, J. (1985): “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica, 53(5), 1071–1100.


                                                 92
Tobin, J. (1969): “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,” Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, 1(1), 15–29.

         (1970): “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  84(2), 301–317.

Townsend, R. M. (1979): “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verifica-
  tion,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265–293.

Veldkamp, L. L. (2011): Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance. Princeton University
  Press.

Woodford, M. (1990): “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review, 80(2), 382–
 388.

Xiong, W. (2001): “Convergence trading with wealth effects: an amplification mechanism in financial
  markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62(2), 247–292.

Zeldes, S. P. (1989): “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Certainty
  Equivalence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(2), 275–298.




                                                93
