                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MEN, WOMEN, AND MACHINES:
                       HOW TRADE IMPACTS GENDER INEQUALITY

                                           Chinhui Juhn
                                          Gergely Ujhelyi
                                     Carolina Villegas-Sanchez

                                        Working Paper 18106
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18106


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




We would like to thank Yona Rubinstein, Nathan Nunn and Peter Morrow for their thoughtful discussions
of an earlier version of the paper. We also want to thank Eric Verhoogen and seminar participants
at LSE, Dalhousie, and the LACEA-Conference of the Trade and Integration Growth Network, 18th
Annual Empirical Investigations in International Trade. We would ike to thank INEGI officials for
granting on-site access to the firm level data used in this study under the commitment of complying
with the confidentiality requirements set by the Mexican Laws and in particular, to Gerardo Leyva,
Adriana Ramirez Nava and Gabriel Romero Velasco. Carolina Villegas-Sanchez acknowledges financial
support from Banco Sabadell. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Chinhui Juhn, Gergely Ujhelyi, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Men, Women, and Machines: How Trade Impacts Gender Inequality
Chinhui Juhn, Gergely Ujhelyi, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
NBER Working Paper No. 18106
May 2012
JEL No. F1,J2,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effect of trade liberalization on an under-explored aspect of wage inequality
– gender inequality. We consider a model where firms differ in their productivity and workers are
differentiated by skill as well as gender. A reduction in tariffs induces more productive firms to modernize
their technology and enter the export market. New technologies involve computerized production processes
and lower the need for physically demanding skills. As a result, the relative wage and employment
of women improves in blue-collar tasks, but not in white-collar tasks. We test our model using a panel
of establishment level data from Mexico exploiting tariff reductions associated with the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Consistent with our theory we find that tariff reductions caused
new firms to enter the export market, update their technology and replace male blue-collar workers
with female blue-collar workers.


Chinhui Juhn                                         Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
Department of Economics                              ESADE-Universitat Ramon Llul
University of Houston                                Av.Pedralbes, 60-62
Houston, TX 77204-5882                               E-08034 Barcelona, Spain
and NBER                                             carolina.villegas@esade.edu
cjuhn@uh.edu

Gergely Ujhelyi
University of Houston
Economics Department
Houston, TX 77204
gujhelyi@uh.edu
1        Introduction

A large literature now examines the impact of trade liberalization on wage inequality in developing
economies and the findings have been surprising. Contrary to the Heckscher-Ohlin model of trade
which predicts that wage inequality should fall in developing countries which are abundant in
low-skilled labor, most researchers have found that trade liberalization actually increased wage
inequality in these countries.1 Moreover, empirical evidence suggests that trade liberalization is
not so much associated with labor reallocation across sectors, but rather with skill-upgrading within
industries and firms - a phenomenon reminiscent of the skill-biased technical change (SBTC) theory
put forward in the U.S.2

        In this paper, we build on the basic framework of the new trade models of Melitz (2003),
Bustos (2011a), Bustos (2011b) and their predecessors to consider an under-explored aspect of
wage inequality – gender inequality. Given that many developing countries have already adopted
or are now in the process of adopting trade liberalization policies, an important question is whether
this will move them closer to, or further from, the goal of gender equality, one of the eight stated
goals in the U.N. Millennium Development Goals Report (UN, 2009). Aside from equity concerns,
the effect of liberalization policies on gender outcomes may also be of interest from a long-run
growth perspective since there is now growing evidence that empowering women promotes education
and better children’s outcomes (Thomas (1990), Duflo (2003), Qian (2008)). Thus, in our view,
the impact of trade openness on gender inequality is an important question which deserves equal
attention to that given to skill premia.

        In our model, heterogenous firms choose between old and new technologies that require different
amounts of white and blue-collar tasks. White and blue collar tasks can be performed by male or
female workers. Reminiscent of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) in which computers replace the
need for routine physical tasks, the new technology in our model replaces the need for physically
    1
        Some earlier studies in the Mexican context include Cragg and Epelbaum (1996), Revenga (1997), Hanson and
Harrison (1999), Behrman, Birdsall, and Székely (2000), Feliciano (2001), Robertson (2004). See Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2007) for a review.
    2
        The substantial skill upgrading within industries, for example, is documented in Revenga (1997), Hanson and
Harrison (1999), Pavcnik (2003), Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2004), Topalova and Khandelwal (2004), among
others.



                                                          2
demanding skills, “brawn.”3 Thus, relative to the old technology, women are more productive
in blue-collar jobs in the new technology. By lowering the cost of entering foreign markets, trade
liberalization causes some firms to start exporting and adopt the modern technology. This improves
women’s labor market outcomes in the blue-collar tasks, while leaving them unchanged in the white-
collar tasks.

       We test our model using establishment level data from Mexico, exploiting tariff reductions as-
sociated with the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Consistent with the previous
literature and the predictions of our model, we find that tariff reductions increased exports through
the entry of new firms into the export sector. We find evidence that these newly exporting firms
updated their machinery and equipment, not only relative to non-exporting firms but also relative
to existing exporters. Moreover, investment was especially pronounced in the new, computerized
equipment category imported from developed countries. As predicted by our model, we find that
tariff reductions improved female labor outcomes through this channel. Trade liberalization in-
creased the ratio of female blue-collar workers to male blue-collar workers as well as the relative
wage of female blue-collar workers. By contrast, we find little evidence of increasing female shares
in white-collar occupations, where the relative importance of physically demanding skills is unlikely
to have changed.

       In terms of skill-upgrading (measured as the ratio of white-collar to blue-collar workers), we
find mixed results. We find little evidence of skill-upgrading in newly exporting firms in terms of
employment but we do find larger increase in white-collar wages, both in absolute terms and relative
to blue-collar wages. These results are consistent with the idea that labor inputs are differentiated
along multiple dimensions: gender-specific skills as well as the more traditional occupation-specific
skills. We provide evidence that other mechanisms, including import market competition or the
different attitudes towards women among foreign firms are unlikely to explain our findings.

       Our paper builds on recent work examining the link between trade liberalization and wage
   3
       Empirical evidence in Weinberg (2000) and Rendall (2010) on the process of technological change in the US also
supports this assumption. Another paper looking at trade liberalization and between sector differences in the gender
wage gap is Saure and Zoabi (2011). They study the effects for a developed economy (US) of opening up to trade
with a developing economy (Mexico) and find that more capital intensive sectors that are also more female intensive
are disproportionately affected by trade, translating into lower female labor force participation in the US.



                                                           3
inequality that is primarily concerned with skill premia. The main novelty of these models is
that they are based on firm heterogeneity. Building on the insights of endogenous technological
change in Acemoglu (2003), Bustos (2011b) builds a model where firms that differ in productivity
choose technology as well as export status. Lower trade costs encourage the most productive
firms to incur a fixed cost to upgrade technology which uses more skilled labor. Using a panel of
Argentinean manufacturing firms in the context of a regional free trade agreement, MERCOSUR,
Bustos finds that trade liberalization led to increases in spending on technology and hiring of more
skilled workers. Verhoogen (2008) uses a similar set-up but uses exchange rate shocks, rather
than tariff reductions, as source of variation. In his model, heterogeneous firms produce goods of
different quality and only the most productive firms producing the highest quality goods export to
rich Northern neighbors. An exchange rate shock lowers the cost of producing quality and lowers
the cut-off level for export status. Using a panel data set of Mexican manufacturing plants, he
finds that the 1994-1995 peso devaluation increased exports and wages particularly at those plants
with higher initial productivity. Csillag and Koren (2011) study a period of trade liberalization
in Hungary, and show that employees working with machinery imported from developed countries
earn a wage premium. They argue that such machinery represents technology upgrading, which is
consistent with the interpretation of our findings.4

       While the link between trade liberalization and demand for skilled workers has been widely and
rigorously examined with firm and industry level data, there is relatively little work exploring labor
market outcomes of men and women. Most previous papers use household surveys to examine
trends in the gender wage gap and are different from the approach taken here. In one of the
earliest studies to employ firm-level data to study gender outcomes, Ozler (2000) finds that female
employment share is positively related to export share of output among manufacturing plants in
   4
       Different approaches have been taken to model how firm-level heterogeneity translates into wage inequality
among workers. Departing from the assumption of perfect labor markets, Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010)
and Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2011) introduce search frictions where more productive firms search more
intensively for quality workers and pay higher wages. Similarly, Amiti and Davis (forthcoming) develop a model of
fair wages in which more productive firms share profits and pay higher wages to workers. Trade and the entry of these
productive firms into the export sector increases their revenue relative to non-exporting firms, thereby increasing wage
dispersion across firms. Frias, Kaplan, and Verhoogen (2009) show that labor market imperfections are empirically
important in explaining the higher wages paid by exporting firms.



                                                           4
Turkey. The study is based on a single cross section and does not discuss the possible channels
leading to this empirical finding. Ederington, Minier, and Troske (2010) use firm level data and find
that Colombian tariff reforms increased relative employment of blue-collar women, an empirical
finding they interpret as being due to reductions in discrimination. Aguayo, Airola, Juhn, and
Villegas-Sanchez (2011) use household and firm level data and find tariff changes accompanying
NAFTA increased demand for female labor within and between industries. Relative to this previous
paper, we offer a more in-depth analysis of the mechanisms underlying the within-industry increase
in female employment and wage bill share.

    More broadly, our paper contributes to the literature on the determinants of gender roles during
the process of economic development (see, e.g., Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2011) or the survey
by Duflo (forthcoming)). Our results suggest that the opening up of trade may have important
consequences for the status of women in society.

    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the tariff reductions that accompanied
signing of NAFTA in 1994 and describes the basic trends in relative wages and employment of
women in Mexico over the 1990s. Section 3 outlines the model which links trade liberalization and
the demand for female labor. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents the main empirical
results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background

2.1   Trade Liberalization under NAFTA

Mexico implemented unilateral tariff reductions in the 1980s to join the GATT in 1986. By 1987,
the highest tariff was reduced to 20% and the tariff structure was simplified to include only 5
different rates: 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%. Starting in 1990, Mexico’s opening strategy switched to
pursuing bilateral free trade agreements, with the most important being the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with U.S. and Canada which took effect in 1994. NAFTA reduced
tariff rates with the U.S. from a maximum of 20% to zero in 15 years and many of the reductions to
zero took immediate effect (Zabludovsky (2005)). Table 1 reports information on Mexican tariffs




                                                   5
imposed on imports from NAFTA countries and US NAFTA tariffs.5 . The upper panel shows US
tariff levels in 1991 before NAFTA and the change from 1991-2000. Similarly, the lower panel shows
Mexican import tariffs in 1991 as well as the change in tariffs from 1991-2000. As shown in Table 1,
on average, tariffs applied by US (export tariffs) fell approximately 5 percentage points and there
is considerable variation in the size of the declines across industries. Meanwhile, Mexican tariffs
imposed on imports from NAFTA countries (import tariffs) decreased on average by 13 percentage
points. Since more than 80% of the trade occurs with the U.S., we would expect a priori that the
decline in tariffs would lead to large increases in trade flows. Figure 1 shows the trends in exports
and imports as fractions of GDP. The figure shows that while the unilateral tariff reductions had
some impact in the 1980s, trade flows accelerated in the 1990s, after the bilateral agreement with
the major trading partner was reached. Interestingly, trade flows appear to have stagnated again
in the 2000s most likely due to a recession in the U.S. and China’s entry into the WTO.


2.2       Trends in Women’s Relative Wage and Employment Share

While the focus of this paper is to study the impact of trade on production within the firm,
it is nevertheless useful to start with an overview of the aggregate change in female wages and
employment over this period. Aguayo, Airola, Juhn, and Villegas-Sanchez (2011) use household
surveys to examine economy-wide changes. They conclude that women’s relative wage increased
slightly (see Figure 2) even as their relative employment rates increased, suggesting that demand
for female labor in the economy as a whole increased.6 They find that a significant fraction (40
percent) of the increase in total wage bill share of women can be attributed to shifts in relative size
of sectors (measured by employment or wage bill), a phenomenon which was spurred by the rapid
decline of the agricultural sector. While labor allocation across sectors played a role, even a larger
   5
       We thank Leonardo Iacovone for providing us with the tariff data. Tariff data was available originally at the 8-
digit Harmonized System (HS) classification and was matched to the Mexican CMAP class classification as explained
in Iacovone and Javorcik (2010)
   6
       The figure is reproduced from Aguayo, Airola, Juhn, and Villegas-Sanchez (2011), and is based on Household
Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) and the 1990 and 2000 Mexican Population Census. The wage sample
consists of men and women who are 15-64 years old, who reported working full-time (30 hours or more), and who
either did not have self-employment earnings or reported that they were not self-employed. We also winsorize the
top and bottom 1 percent of observations by gender.



                                                            6
fraction of the increase in female wage bill share was due to within-industry shifts towards female
labor, a phenomenon which we focus on here. Table 2 presents decompositions of the total change
in female wage bill share into “between”and “within” industry shifts in employment and wage bill
share.7 The top two panels of Table 2 are reproduced from Aguayo, Airola, Juhn, and Villegas-
Sanchez (2011) and are based on household Census data. The top panel includes all sectors while
the middle panel examines the tradeable sector (agriculture and manufacturing) which is directly
impacted by tariffs. The bottom panel shows the results for our balanced panel of 938 firms. In
all cases, the “within” industry shift towards female labor accounts for a large portion of the total
change. Below, we investigate the link between trade liberalization and this type of within-industry
and within-firm shifts towards female labor.


2.3       Trade Liberalization and Gender

Why would trade liberalization have a differential impact on female labor within industries and
firms? One possible channel is through the reduction of discrimination brought about by foreign
competition. In his seminal work, Becker (1957) hypothesized that employers who are prejudiced
against a particular group will be disadvantaged and driven out of business in the long run by forces
of competition. Testing this theory, Black and Brainerd (2004) compares across U.S. industries
which were more and less impacted by trade. They find that industries which were subject to more
competition through trade liberalization experienced greater reductions in the gender wage gap. A
recent paper by Ederington, Minier, and Troske (2010) find similar results for employment. Using
the Colombian trade liberalization episode over the period 1985-1991 as the source of variation, they
find that plants operating in industries subject to greater tariff reductions increased the hiring of
female blue-collar workers relative to male blue-collar workers. The discrimination story begins with
the assumption that men and women are equally productive in the production process. Another
possibility, which we explore here, is that men and women embody different amounts and types
of skills, and in particular, women have lower amounts of physical skill, “brawn,” relative to men.
   7                                                                                                     P
       The total change in female wage bill share is decomposed as in the following: ∆St = St − Sτ =         j   ∆sjt Ejτ +
                                                  0
Σj ∆Ejt sjτ , where Ejt is the share of industry j s wage bill in total wage bill at time t, sjt is the female wage bill
as a share of total wage bill in industry j at time t. The first expression after the equal sign refers to the “within”
component while the latter refers to the “between” component.



                                                           7
The link between trade liberalization and technology upgrading is already well established (Bustos
(2011b)). In this paper we explore the notion that the new technology complements female labor
by reducing the need for physical skills. Some of these ideas are explored in Weinberg (2000) who
uses U.S. data and shows that female employment growth is positively related to computer-use
across industries and occupations.

        To explore further how employers view female and male workers, we examined questions on
hiring preferences which were asked of employers in our balanced panel of firms.8 In the survey,
employers were asked whether they had a preference for hiring males or females or whether they
were indifferent between the two. Panel A of Table 3 summarizes the responses to this question by
occupation category. The panel shows that there are large differences for male preference across
occupation categories, with the most pronounced male preference being in blue-collar occupations
such as “specialized workers” and “general workers.” For white collar workers such as “managers”
employers exhibit no particular preference for hiring male workers. While it is possible that em-
ployers discriminate differentially across occupation categories, we find the substantial variation
in male preference across occupational categories as evidence that taste discrimination is not the
major driving force. In a follow-up question employers are asked the reasons for their preferences
and these answers are reported in Panel B of Table 3. For blue-collar occupations, “heavy work”
is overwhelmingly the most common reason given for male preference. Table 3 gives credence to
the notion that employers view men and women as distinct inputs with different amounts of skills,
particularly when it comes to physical skills in blue-collar occupations.



3        The Model

The model below follows closely the extension of the Melitz (2003) model proposed by Bustos
(2011a, 2011b). Bustos considers different production technologies and workers differentiated by
skills along one dimension (low vs. high); we allow workers to be differentiated by both gender-
specific and occupation-specific skills.
    8
        See Section 4 for a full description of the ENESTyC survey and the data.




                                                            8
3.1      Setup

An economy has consumers with CES preferences buying a continuum of differentiated products.
                             1
Consumer utility is (qω )ρ dω ρ where qω is consumption of product variety ω. Under prices pω ,
                   R

demand for variety ω is qω = EP σ−1 p−σ
                                     ω , where σ =
                                                                1
                                                               1−ρ ,   E is total spending and P is the price
index.

      Each product variety is produced by a single firm. Firms decide whether to enter the market at
some fixed cost fe . If they enter, they observe their productivity ϕ, a random draw from a Pareto
distribution G(ϕ) = 1 − ϕ−k on [1, ∞). Once productivity is realized, firms can exit. If they stay,
they can choose between two technologies, 1 and 2. Technology 1 is a “traditional” technology
involving relatively more physically demanding blue collar tasks (such as operating heavy machin-
ery). Technology 2 is a “modern” technology that involves computerized production processes,
and achieves higher total factor productivity. Labor is differentiated by both occupation (blue or
white collar) and gender. White collar workers and female blue collar workers have relatively higher
productivity under technology 2. This is based on empirical evidence in Bustos (2011b), showing
that exporting firms choose technologies that use more educated workers, and in Weinberg (2000),
showing that modern computerized production technologies favor female workers.9

      To capture these features, we assume that production involves a combination of blue collar
(Yb ) and white collar (Yw ) intermediate inputs (or tasks) according to a Cobb Douglas production
function
                                        Qt (Yb , Yw ) = At (ϕ)Ybαt Yw1−αt

for each technology t = 1, 2. For simplicity, A1 (ϕ) = ϕ and A2 (ϕ) = γϕ, where γ > 1 to capture
higher total factor productivity under the modern technology. We let α1 > α2 , capturing the
importance of white collar tasks under the modern technology. We further let intermediate inputs
be produced using female (f ) and male (m) labor with the appropriate skills (blue or white collar):

                                    Yb (Lbf , Lbm , t) = (Lbf )βt (Lbm )1−βt

                                  Yw (Lwf , Lwm , t) = (Lwf )$t (Lwm )1−$t

for t = 1, 2. We assume β1 < β2 to capture the higher productivity of female workers in the blue
  9
      See also Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) and Rendall (2010).


                                                        9
collar category with technology 2. Technology 1 has a fixed cost f1 and technology 2 a higher fixed
cost f2 > f1 . Firms take factor prices W = (Wbf , Wbm , Wwf , Wwm ) and the price index P of the
consumption goods as given.

       Firms that remain on the market also choose whether to export (x) or serve only the domestic
market (d). The export market is characterized by the same demand structure as the domestic
market.10 Exporting has a fixed cost fx and iceberg trade costs denoted τ . Given the technology
each firm maximizes its profit by choosing the price pdω of its product on the domestic market (as
well as a price pxω if exporting) subject to consumer demand and the factor prices.


3.2        Equilibrium

Let δ be an indicator variable equal to 1 if a firm exports and 0 otherwise. Given the technology
choice (t = 1, 2) and the export decision, a firm’s factor demand is Ltj (W, P, ϕ, δ) for each type j of
the labor input (j = bf, bm, wf, wm). These factor demands can be obtained using the firm’s total
cost function, which, for technology t is

                                                            q d + δτ q x αt βt αt (1−βt ) (1−αt )$t (1−αt )(1−$t )
           T Ct (q, W, P, ϕ, δ) = P ft + δP fx +                        W     Wbm        Wwf       Wwm             ,
                                                             At (ϕ)κt bf

where q d and q x denote sales on the domestic and export markets, and κt is a constant involving
the parameters αt , βt and $t .11,12 Using Shepard’s lemma, we can obtain the relative demand for
  10
       One could allow domestic and foreign consumers to have different willingness to pay, as in Verhoogen (2008).
Similarly, skill intensity in exporting firms could differ depending on the export market destination. Brambilla,
Lederman, and Porto (2010) find that firms that export to high-income destinations hire more skills and pay higher
wages than firms that export to middle-income countries or that sell domestically. We assume away such destination-
market effects to keep the model simple. In addition, our empirical investigation makes use of Mexican manufacturing
data. US is the main destination market for Mexican exporters accounting for over 80 percent of total exports.
Therefore, our dataset is ill-suited to study heterogenous effects across export market destinations.
  11
       κt = (αt βt )αt βt (αt (1 − βt ))αt (1−βt ) ((1 − αt )$t )(1−αt )$t ((1 − αt )(1 − $t ))(1−αt )(1−$t )
  12
       This expression for the total costs assumes that prices are the same in the domestic and export markets, which
will be true in equilibrium.




                                                                     10
female vs. male workers within each occupational category of a firm using technology t as

                                             Ltbf           ∂T Ct /∂Wbf     βt Wbm
                                                      =                 =                                                          (1)
                                             Ltbm           ∂T Ct /∂Wbm   1 − βt Wbf
                                             Ltwf           ∂T Ct /∂Wwf     $t Wwm
                                                      =                 =            .                                             (2)
                                             Ltwm           ∂T Ct /∂Wwm   1 − $t Wwf

      Once the technology choice and the decision on exporting have been made, let πt (W, P, ϕ, δ)
denote a firm’s maximized profit. Solving the firm’s problem, this can be obtained as

                                  πt (W, P, ϕ, δ) = (1 + δτ 1−σ )rt (W, P, ϕ)/σ − P ft − δP fx                                     (3)

                                 αt βt                      α (1−βt )     (1−αt )$t     (1−αt )(1−$t ) 1−σ
where rt (W, P, ϕ) = E(P ρ)σ−1 [Wbf    Wbmt                             Wwf           Wwm             ]    (At (ϕ)κt )σ−1   is the rev-
enue of a firm that does not export.

      Comparing these profits, a firm with productivity ϕ decides whether to stay on the market and
whether to export. Specifically, there is a productivity cutoff ϕ∗1 (W, P ) above which firms stay in
the market (i.e., serve at least the domestic market), a cutoff ϕ∗x (W, P ) above which firms start
exporting, and a cutoff ϕ∗2 (W, P ) above which they adopt technology 2. Given W and P , these
cutoffs determine total factor demand in the economy. For example, if ϕ∗1 < ϕ∗x < ϕ∗2 , then total
demand for type j labor is
                     ∗                                        ϕ2∗
                    ϕx
                    Z                                         Z                                     Z∞
L1j   +   L2j   =         L1j (W, P, ϕ, δ   = 0)dG(ϕ) +             L1j (W, P, ϕ, δ   = 1)dG(ϕ) +         L2j (W, P, ϕ, δ = 1)dG(ϕ).
                    ϕ∗1                                       ϕ∗x                                   ϕ∗2

This can be easily computed using the Pareto distribution assumption and the factor demands
from the firm’s profit maximization problem. It will be convenient to work with ratios rather than
levels, and we find

                                                     L1bf            α1 β1 R1
                                                            =                                                                      (4)
                                                     L2bf            α2 β2 R2
                                                    L1bm             α1 (1 − β1 ) R1
                                                            =                                                                      (5)
                                                    L2bm             α2 (1 − β2 ) R2
                                                    L1wf             (1 − α1 )$1 R1
                                                            =                                                                      (6)
                                                    L2wf             (1 − α2 )$2 R2
                                                    L1wm             (1 − α1 )(1 − $1 ) R1
                                                            =                              ,                                       (7)
                                                    L2wm             (1 − α2 )(1 − $2 ) R2


                                                                         11
where Rt is the aggregate revenue of firms using technology t (which is a function of the wages W ,
the productivity cutoffs and the price index P ).

   Equilibrium on the labor market requires aggregate demand for each type j labor to equal its
supply, assumed constant at L̄j . This defines the wages W as a function of the productivity cutoffs
                                                    L1j +L2j           L2j        1         L1j
and the price index P . Using the decomposition     L1j 0 +L2j 0
                                                                   =    2    1      2
                                                                       Lj 0 Lj 0 /Lj 0 +1
                                                                                          + L1j 0
                                                                                                  (1− L1 /L1 2 +1 ),   together
                                                                                                       j0    j0

with (1)-(2) and (4)-(7), the equilibrium conditions for the relative wages can be written as
                                                                             
                                                        
           L̄bf      Wbm  β1              β2        β1             1
                =                   +           −              α   (1−β
                                                                                                                           (8)
           L̄bm      Wbf 1 − β1         1 − β2 1 − β1 1 +        1     1 ) R1
                                                               α2 (1−β2 ) R2
                                                                                             
                                                                          
           L̄bf      Wwf  α1 β1                 α2 β2         α1 β 1              1
                =                        +                −                     (1−α
                                                                                                                           (9)
           L̄wf      Wbf (1 − α1 )$1          (1 − α2 )$2 (1 − α1 )$1 1 +            1 )$1 R1
                                                                                (1−α2 )$2 R2
                                                                                  
                                                          
          L̄wf       Wwm  $1               $2         $1                1
                =                    +            −                                                                       (10)
          L̄wm       Wwf 1 − $1           1 − $2 1 − $1 1 + (1−α1 )(1−$1 ) R1
                                                                               (1−α2 )(1−$2 ) R2


   The model is closed by assuming free entry. In particular, before learning their productivity ϕ,
firms must be indifferent between entering the market or not. This requires expected profits (given
W, P and the productivity cutoffs) to equal the fixed cost fe of entry. Using the equations defining
the productivity cutoffs, the labor market equilibrium conditions and the free entry condition, the
equilibrium factor prices, price index and productivity cutoffs can be obtained.

   In equilibrium, ϕ∗1 < ϕ∗2 : low productivity firms use the traditional technology 1 while high
productivity firms are willing to pay the higher fixed cost and use technology 2. Following Bustos
(2011a), we focus on the case where the export cutoff ϕ∗x is between ϕ∗1 and ϕ∗2 . Thus, in equilibrium,
some but not all exporting firms use the modern technology.


3.3   Trade liberalization

Trade liberalization can be modeled as a reduction in the trade costs τ . We obtain the following.

Proposition 1. A reduction in the tariff τ (i) lowers the export cutoff ϕ∗x , (ii) lowers the technology
adoption cutoff ϕ∗2 , (iii) increases women’s relative wage in the blue collar category, (iv) leads to
an increase in the relative number of female workers in the blue-collar category among firms that
switch to the modern technology.

                                                    12
     Trade liberalization makes exporting more attractive, which lowers the export cutoff ϕ∗x . Since
the modern technology with higher TFP is more efficient for producing the increased quantity for
the export market, more firms adopt this technology (the cutoff ϕ∗2 decreases). Because blue collar
female workers are more productive under the modern technology, firms switching technology hire
                                                        Wbf
more of these workers, and their relative wage          Wbm    rises.

     As mentioned above, the literature strongly suggests that technology upgrading that involves
switching to computerized machinery in blue collar production processes should benefit women.
By contrast, there does not seem to be any a priori reason why women should have higher or lower
productivity in white collar tasks under either technology. In fact, Table 3 showed that employers
did not express any gender preferences in hiring for “managers,” by far the largest category of
white-collar workers, suggesting that employers view men and women as similar type of workers in
these tasks. Assuming that this is the case, we have the following result.

Proposition 2. If $1 = $2 = $, then a reduction in the tariff τ (i) has no impact on women’s
relative wage or employment in the white collar category, (ii) raises the relative wage of white to
blue collar workers if and only if
                                                                                      (1−α1 ) 2         Wbf
                                                                   α1 (1 − β1 ) (1 + (1−α2 ) )
                                                            
 1        α2 β 2   α1 β 1       1 − α1           β2     β1                                              Wwf
                 −                     −             −                                                          Wbf
                                                                                                                      < 0.
 $       1 − α2 1 − α1          1 − α2         1 − β2 1 − β1       α2 (1 − β2 ) (1 + α1 (1−β1 ) )2    βt
                                                                                                            +
                                                                                      α2 (1−β2 )     1−βt       Wbm


     Part (i) of the proposition states that when technology choice does not affect gender differences
in white collar tasks, trade liberalization does not affect women’s relative outcomes in this category.
In addition, part (ii) offers a contrast to some of the previous literature examining trade and skill
upgrading. When labor inputs are multidimensional (e.g., differentiated by gender as well as
occupation-specific skills), predictions on the changes in aggregate categories, such as the wage
of all skilled workers, will tend to be theoretically ambiguous. The proposition shows that even if
white collar tasks are relatively more important under the new technology (α1 > α2 ), whether total
wages paid in this category rise or fall depends on the parameters of the model and the pre-existing
relative wages of the various inputs. Thus, the impact of trade liberalization on white to blue collar
wages is an empirical matter.




                                                         13
4         Data

The data used in this study come from the Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Salarios, Tecnologia y Ca-
pacitacion (ENESTyC) [National Survey of Employment, Wages, Technology and Training], which
is a survey carried out by the Mexican National Statistical Office (INEGI). The analysis focuses
on two waves of the survey, implemented in 1992 and 2001, which were designed as independent
cross-sections. The questions in the survey refer mainly to the year prior to the implementation of
the survey (i.e., 1991 and 2000).

         The ENESTyC survey was designed to be representative at the sectoral level within the manufac-
turing sector and it is possible to identify the sector in which firms operate at a very disaggregated
level. There are 52 ramas (branches) of activity and around 200 clases (classes).13 Originally,
the surveys not only included medium and large firms but also micro and small establishments.
According to the INEGI classification micro establishments are those with less than 16 employ-
ees; small establishments have between 16 and 100 employees; medium establishments are those
that have between 100 and 250 employees and finally, large establishments report more than 250
employees.14 However, in order to study the within firm effects of trade liberalization we create a
balanced panel of firms between 1991 and 2000. Although the surveys were designed as independent
cross-sections it is possible to link a subsample of firms over time, and we linked a total number
of 938 firms between 1991 and 2000. Since the sample design of the ENESTyC surveys guarantees
that medium and large firms are included with certainty, the average firm size (in terms of both
sales and employment) is larger in the balanced panel (see Table B1 in appendix B).

         Most importantly for our study firms provide information about sales, employment, raw mate-
rials, capital, as well as their ownership structure.15 In addition, firms report detailed information
on export revenue, technology upgrading and female composition of the work force. In particular,
    13
         The industrial classification is based on the Clasificacion Mexicana de Actividades y Productos (CMAP) [Mexican
Classification of Activities and Products]. Industries are grouped in 6-digit industries called clases (classes), 4-digit
industries called ramas (branches), and 2-digit industries called divisiones (divisions).
    14
         The survey is conducted at the establishment level. However, through out the analysis the words establishment,
firm and plant will be used interchangeably.
    15
         See Appendix A for a detailed description of the data and cleaning procedure and Table B1 in Appendix B for
summary statistics of the variables used in the analysis.



                                                             14
firms report the share of export sales in total sales which allows us to determine the export status of
firms in 2000 relative to their position in 1991 before the NAFTA agreement took place. Continuing
exporters are firms that exported both in 1991 and 2000. New exporters are firms that did not
export in 1991 but are exporting in 2000. Stop exporters are firms that exported in 1991 but do
not export in 2000 and finally, non-exporters are firms that never exported during our sample pe-
riod. Table B1 in the appendix shows that 34 percent of the firms in 2000 are continuing exporters
and 24 percent are new exporters. Similar to previous studies in the literature (see Bernard and
Bradford Jensen (1999)) we find that exporters are larger both in terms of employment and sales
and are also more capital intensive (see Table B2 in the appendix). Interestingly we find signifi-
cant differences between continuing exporters, new exporters and non-exporting firms. Continuing
exporters are on average initially more productive (measured as value added per capita), employ a
higher share of skilled labor, pay higher wages and pay higher wages to white collar workers relative
to non-exporting firms. This is not the case for newly exporting firms. However, newly exporting
firms do show a significant increase in wages and white collar wages between 1991 and 2000.

      We are interested in exploring the relationship between export status and technology upgrading.
In order to do so we use measures of investment in technology provided by the ENESTyC survey.
In particular, we use the log change in the value of machinery and equipment between 1991 and
2000. In addition, we make use of several characteristics of the machinery and equipment acquired
that are detailed in the 2001 survey. In this survey firms are asked to provide information on the
following aspects: whether the machinery and equipment acquired was computerized or automatic
(as opposed to manual or involving machinery tools), 61 percent of the firms; whether the machinery
and equipment bought is new (as opposed to used), 69 percent of the firms and finally; whether
the machinery and equipment was imported from developed countries, 53 percent of the firms.
Overall, 35 percent of the firms in our sample bought new computerized machinery imported from
developed countries.

      Finally, a main feature of the ENESTyC survey is that it provides detailed information about
labor outcomes disaggregated by gender and occupational category. The survey asks firms to report
the number of employees and the wage bill according to four occupational categories: Directors,
Managers, Specialized Workers and General Workers.16 In addition, firms are asked to detail within
 16
      Directors are “employees that make decisions related to activities in the areas of planning, direction, production


                                                           15
each occupational category the number of female/male employees as well as the corresponding wage
bill.



5       Empirical Results

5.1     Tariffs, Export Status, and Technology

We start by documenting the relationship between trade liberalization and export status. According
to Proposition 1, a reduction in trade costs lowers the export cutoff and induces firms at the margin
to become exporters. To test this implication using our data, we estimate the following equation:

                N ewExporteri,s,2000 = βτ ∆ExportT arif fs + βx Xi,s,1991 + δs0 + ∆i,s,t                          (11)

where i denotes firm and s refers to six-digit sector classification. N ewExporteri,s,2000 is a dummy
variable that is equal to 1 for firms that did not export in 1991 but exported in 2000, and is
equal to 0 for all other firms. ∆ExportT arif fs is the sectoral change in US tariffs from 1991 to
2000. Xi,s,1991 includes a set of initial firm characteristics that aim to control for firm size, capital
intensity, R&D intensity and foreign ownership. δs0 are two-digit sector fixed effects. Based on
the implications of the model we expect βτ to be negative and significant so that the probability
of being a newly exporting firm is highest in industries that witnessed the largest declines in US
tariffs.

    Columns (1) and (2) in Table 4 show the results from estimating equation (11). Notice that we
cluster standard errors at the cmap level to avoid any potential biases resulting from estimating
the effect of an aggregate variable (tariff changes correspond to cmap level classification) on firm
level outcomes. As expected, the probability of being a newly exporting firm is highest in those
industries where the reduction in US tariffs is largest. In particular, our point estimate of -0.042

policy, financing, marketing, internal organization.” Managers include “employees that are not directly involved in
the production process but apply scientific knowledge and methods in a variety of areas like technology, economics,
sociology, industrial, and government related areas”; professionals (lawyers, chemists, engineers, accountants, etc.;
technicians (lab employees, quality control technician, hydraulic technician, electronic technician, etc.); clerical em-
ployees; and supervisors (intermediate managers in the production process who “link higher end managers with those
employees in the production process floor.”



                                                          16
implies that a firm in an industry experiencing the average reduction in US tariffs (5.2 percentage
points) is 21 percentage points more likely to be a newly exporting firm relative to firms that
experienced zero tariff change. These results suggest that the impact of tariffs on the extensive
margin, the entry of firms into the export market, plays an important role.17

       We next explore the relationship between tariff changes and the intensive margin by regressing
firm-level change in export revenue (as a share of total sales) on tariff changes. Our sample consists
of firms who exported in 2000 (i.e., both firms that enter the export market and firms that were
already exporting in 1991 and continue exporting in 2000).18 Columns (3) and (4) in Table 4 report
the results. While the coefficients are negative in sign, we do not find a significant relationship
between within-firm increase in exports and changes in US tariffs.

       An important mechanism linking trade to worker outcomes in our model is the adoption of
new technology. Following a tariff change, Proposition 1 predicts that firms that switch to the
new technology will hire more blue-collar female workers. Should these effects appear primarily
among continuing exporters or among firms that newly enter the export market? Depending on the
position of the technology adoption and export cutoffs before and after the policy change, technology
adoption may be more extensive among newly exporting firms or among continuing exporters. As
illustrated on Figure 3, if the export cutoff ϕ∗x and the technology adoption cutoff ϕ∗2 are close
to each-other and move together as the tariffs decline, almost all new exporters adopt technology
2 while most continuing exporters do not change their technology. In other cases, technology
adoption may be more extensive among the continuing exporters. In order to investigate this issue,
we estimate the following equation:

             ∆T echnologyi,s0      = β1 ContinuingExportersi,s0 ,2000 + β2 N ewExportersi,s0 ,2000             (12)

                                        + β3 StopExportersi,s0 ,2000 + βx Xi,1991 + δs0 + i,s0 ,2000 ,

where “ContinuingExporters” refers to firms who exported in both 1991 and 2000, “NewExporters”
refers to firms who did not export in 1991 but exported in 2000, “StopExporters” refers to firms
  17
       In columns (1) and (2) the control group are continuing exporters, non-exporters and stop-exporters. However,
similar results (coefficient -0.046(std. error 0.006)) are obtained if we focus on the sample of firms that were not
exporting in 1991 (i.e., we directly compare newly exporters to non-exporters).
  18
       Similar results are obtained if we only focus on the sample of continuing exporters.



                                                            17
who stopped exporting, and the omitted category is “Non-Exporters,” who did not export in
both years. The rest of the RHS variables are the same as in equation (11). “∆Technology”
refers to the log change in the value of machinery and equipment between 1991 and 2000.19 We
refine this variable further by exploiting information in the 2001 survey regarding the type of
technology purchased by the firm. In particular, our model considers technology upgrading towards
less “brawn” intensive skills. One of the advantages of the ENESTyC survey is that it includes
questions on the type of machinery and equipment introduced. We can therefore attempt to
distinguish the mere acquisition of machinery from the type of technology upgrading in our model.
In particular, we consider technology to be upgraded if the machinery and equipment acquired
since 1999 is automatic/computerized (as opposed to manual or involving machinery tools), if it is
new machinery (as opposed to used machinery), and if it is imported from developed countries.

       Table 5 shows the results from estimating equation (12). Columns (1) and (2) show that new
exporters are more likely to have undertaken large investment projects in machinery and equipment
during 1991 to 2000 compared to non-exporters. In Columns (3)-(4) and (5)-(6), we separate the
acquisition of machinery according to whether it involves technology upgrading as defined above.
In Columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is the product of the log difference in the value
of machinery and equipment between 2000 and 1991 and a dummy variable that equals one if the
firm upgraded its technology. The dependent variable in Columns (5) and (6) is defined similarly
for non-upgraded technology. The results confirm that the difference between exporters and non-
exporters comes from technology upgrading, as opposed to the mere purchase of machinery. While
in Columns (5) and (6) there are no significant differences between exporters and non-exporters
regarding non-upgraded machinery and equipment, Columns (3) and (4) show a very different
picture with respect to upgraded machinery. In particular, the results show that newly exporting
firms are particularly likely to upgrade their technology towards modern, less “brawn” intensive
machinery and equipment. Therefore, since upgraded machinery reflects the technology change in
our model, we expect our theoretical results on gender differences to appear mainly among new
exporters where such technology adoption seems to be especially prevalent.
  19
       Similar qualitative results although slightly weaker were obtained when we use log change in the value of machinery
and equipment as share of total assets. Notice firm size is already accounted for by the additional control variables
included in equation (12).



                                                            18
       So far we have presented evidence on how trade liberalization induces firms to enter the export
market and how these firms are more likely to invest in machinery and equipment. While skill-
upgrading is not our main focus, some previous studies find evidence that exporting firms employ
more educated workers. Although we expect to find higher education levels in white collar tasks, in
our model workers are differentiated by gender (gender-specific skills) as well as occupation-specific
skills. Therefore, as Proposition 2(ii) suggests, we may find different results on the effect of trade
liberalization on “skill” measured as the number of workers employed in blue-collar or white-collar
occupations and their relative wages. We estimate the following equation which is similar to the
previous estimating equation except that our dependent variable is now the growth rate in the ratio
of white-collar workers to blue-collar workers hired.

           ∆SkillRatioi,s0 ,2000 = β1 ContinuingExportersi,s0 ,2000 + β2 N ewExportersi,s0 ,2000                (13)

                                        + β3 StopExportersi,s0 ,2000 + βx Xi,s0 ,1991 + δs0 + i,s0 ,2000 .

“Non-Exporters” are again the omitted category and the rest of the RHS variables are the same
as in equation 12. ∆SkillRatio refers to the growth rate of the ratio of white-collar to blue-collar
labor outcomes between 1991 and 2000. Table 6 reports the main results. The first three columns
report results without including initial firm-level characteristics, while the next three columns
report results including these variables. Both in terms of employment and wage bill (reported in
columns (1) and (2)), we find little evidence of faster skill-upgrading in exporter firms. We do,
however, consistently find that relative wage of white-collar workers to blue-collar workers grew
faster in “New-Exporter” firms. For example, in column (3), the coefficient 0.110 indicates that
the skill premium increased 11 percent faster in “New-Exporter” firms relative to “Non-Exporter”
firms.20 Similar to the results we report here, Verhoogen (2008) also finds an increase in the ratio
of white-collar to blue-collar wages but little skill-upgrading in terms of employment ratios. These
results are consistent with our model of multi-dimensional labor inputs.
  20
       In column (7) and (8) we examine whether the change in the ratio is due to the growth of white-collar wages
or blue-collar wages. The results show that the larger increase in the skill premium is due to the larger increase in
white-collar wage.




                                                         19
5.2       Tariffs and Gender Labor Outcomes

5.2.1       Reduced-Form Effects of Tariffs on Gender Outcomes

We now turn to our main empirical results on gender outcomes. A key implication of our model
is that trade liberalization increases the number of new exporting firms and these firms adopt a
new technology that increases the productivity of female workers in blue-collar tasks. Accordingly
we should observe an increase in the relative wage of female workers in the blue collar category
(Proposition 1(iii)). Similarly, we should observe larger increases in relative employment of female
workers in blue collar tasks associated with tariff reductions (Proposition 1(iv)). By contrast if, as
seems plausible, the new technology did not enhance the relative productivity of women in white-
collar tasks, we expect no effect on women’s relative outcomes in this category (Proposition 2(i)).
To test these predictions, we estimate the following equation:

                     ∆F emaleRatioi,s = βτ ∆ExportT arif fs + βx Xi,s,1991 + δs0 + ∆i,s                            (14)

where i denotes firm and s refers to sector. ∆F emaleRatioi,s refers to log change in the ratio of
female to male outcomes for the three variables– employment, wage bill, and wage.21 Columns
(1) to (3) of Table 7 refer to white-collar occupations while columns (4) to (6) refer to blue-collar
occupations. As shown in the first three columns, we find no evidence that tariff reductions improved
relative outcomes of women in white-collar occupations in terms of all three variables, employment
share, wage bill share, and wage. By contrast, we find that reductions in tariffs are associated with
larger increases in the growth of female employment and wage bill shares for blue-collar workers.
For example, the coefficient -0.040 suggests that a firm in an industry experiencing the average
reduction in US tariffs of 5.2 percentage points increased female employment share in blue-collar
occupations by approximately 20 percent more than a firm experiencing zero tariff change. In terms
of wage bill share, the effects are even larger, with the average tariff reduction causing a 24 percent
larger increase in women’s relative wage bill share.
  21
       As a sensitivity analysis we repeated the exercise using winsorized values of these female to male ratios at 1 and
99 percent as well as 2.5 and 97.5 percent of the distribution and all our main findings go through. Similarly, results
are robust to dropping observations with lower/higher values than the 1 and 99 percentile or 2.5 and 97.5 percentile
of the distribution.




                                                            20
       These results strongly support our model: we find improving female outcomes exactly in the
employment category where we expect the relative importance of “brawn” to decline as a result of
improved technology.


5.2.2       Alternative Channels

The previous table showed that tariff reductions increased the employment and wage bill share
of women in blue-collar occupations. We argued that this relationship was driven by the entry
of exporting firms which invested in new machinery and equipment and that this new technology
raised the relative productivity of female workers in blue-collar occupations. In this section we
explore alternative channels which may be driving our results.

       First of all, we note that any alternative story would have to explain both the differential
change in female outcomes by export status and by occupation category (blue vs. white collar).
For example, a supply-side model based on the increase in women’s education level over this period
could explain an overall increase in relative wages, but would have a hard time explaining the
differential changes we find.22

       One possible alternative mechanism is foreign ownership and FDI. It may be the case that the
new exporters are more likely to be foreign firms who not only bring newer technology but also
less discriminatory attitudes towards hiring women. We explore this alternative by estimating the
following equation:

         ∆F emaleRatioi,s = β1 ∆ExportT arif fs + β2 ∆F oreigni,s                                                (15)

                                     + β3 ∆ExportT arif fs × ∆F oreigni,s + βx Xi,s,1991 + δs0 + ∆i,s

where ∆F oreigni,s refers to the change in foreign ownership status.23 The results are reported in
Table 8. Adding the change in foreign ownership status reduces the size of our coefficients. For
example, the effect of tariffs changes on wage bill share is reduced from -0.046 (Table 7, column 5)
to -0.034 in column (5) of Table 8. While we do not find a significant difference in the tariff effect
  22
       In fact, Atkin (2011) argues that trade liberalization in Mexico caused a reduction in education levels because
higher wages gave workers an incentive to drop out of school.
  23
       Foreign ownership status is a dummy variable that takes the value “1” if the firm is more than 10 percent owned
by foreign investors.


                                                           21
between those who did and did not switch foreign ownership status (for example, the interaction
term is not statistically significant at conventional levels), the coefficient is somewhat larger for the
firms who switched. To the extent that the larger effect reflected access to newer equipment and
technology, this would be entirely consistent with our story. On the other hand, if the difference
reflected less prejudiced attitudes of foreign firms, this would suggest that our results are biased.
In Table B3 in the Appendix,we examine whether foreign-owned and domestic companies report
different attitudes towards hiring men over women and find no significant difference. Moreover, in
a separate tabulation, we find that only 8 percent of the new exporters changed foreign ownership
status, suggesting that the majority of new exporters are domestic firms. Taken together, these
results bolster our confidence that changes in technology, and not changing discrimination against
women, are driving our results.

   Another possible channel is import tariffs. Reductions in import tariffs may subject domestic
firms to competition and spur technological innovation (for example, as in Bloom, Draca, and
Van Reenen (2011) or Csillag and Koren (2011)). To the extent that the reductions in import and
export tariffs are positively correlated across industries, we may be capturing the impact of import
tariffs. We examine this possibility directly by replacing ∆ExportT arif fs with ∆ImportT arif fs
and report the results in Table 9. As the first panel illustrates, there is no systematic relationship
between import tariff reductions and women’s relative outcomes. In the second panel, we include
both export and import tariffs, and again show that the effect is driven by the former, with the
coefficient estimates changing very little compared to Table 7.


5.2.3   Effect of Export Status and Technology on Gender Outcomes: Instrumental
        Variables

We have shown that reductions in export tariffs are associated with larger within-firm increases in
the relative employment and wage bill share of women in blue-collar occupations. We have also
shown indirect evidence that the effect is working through the entry of new firms into the export
sector who upgrade their technology. In this section we formally scale these effects on gender
outcomes by regressing gender outcomes on new exporter status or technology upgrading, using
tariff changes to instrument for these variables. As above, we measure technology upgrading with



                                                   22
the log change in the value of machinery for firms who purchased new computerized equipment
from developed countries.24 We estimate the following equations:

                      ∆F emaleRatioi,s = βτ N ewExporteri,s,2000 + βx Xi,s,1991 + δs + ∆i,s                       (16)

                         ∆F emaleRatioi,s = βτ ∆Technology i,s + βx Xi,s,1991 + δs + ∆i,s                         (17)

         Table 10 reports the results from this exercise. The bottom panel shows the results of the first
stage for both equations. As already illustrated in Table 4, there is a strong robust relationship
between new exporter status and tariff changes. Columns (4)-(6) of the first stage regressions
show a similar picture for the effect of tariff changes on technology upgrading. The second stage
results are reported in the top panel. We again find significant impacts of tariff changes on relative
outcomes for women in blue-collar occupations. As expected from the theoretical model and our
previous results we do not find any effect on women’s labor outcomes in the white collar categories.25
The coefficients we estimate have the following interpretation. A 10 percentage point increase in
the share of new exporters increases the growth of female employment and wage bill share by 9.6
and 11.2 percent respectively, and the growth of the female-male wage ratio by 2.9 percent. The
second stage results for the technology regressions also confirm our earlier findings. Firms that
upgrade machinery increase their relative employment of female workers and pay them a higher
wage (although this last effect is not estimated precisely). Our point estimates imply that a 10
percent faster growth in the value of machinery increases the growth of female employment and
wage bill share by 6.5 percent and 7.6 percent, respectively, and the growth of the female-male
wage ratio by 2.4 percent.



6         Conclusion

We presented a model where trade liberalization induced exporting firms to upgrade their tech-
nology in a way that raised the relative productivity of women in blue-collar occupations. Our
empirical findings using firm-level data from Mexico are consistent with the model. We found that
    24
         In Table B4 in the Appendix we present results for all machinery as well as non-upgraded technology, confirming
that the effects are driven by firms that upgraded their technology.
    25
         Results are not reported for space considerations but are available upon request.


                                                             23
firms experiencing larger declines in export tariffs were more likely to hire blue-collar women and
to pay them higher wages. We did not find similar effects in white-collar occupations, where the
relative importance of physically demanding skills is less likely to have changed. Consistent with
the model, we showed that these improvement in blue-collar women’s labor market outcomes were
driven by firms newly entering the export markets who upgraded their technology towards new
computerized production machinery.

   These results suggest an important channel through which current trade liberalization efforts
can affect gender inequality.




References

Acemoglu, D. (2003): “Patterns of Skill Premia,” The Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 199–
  230.

Aguayo, E., J. Airola, C. Juhn, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2011): “Did Trade Liberalization
  Help Women? The Case of Mexico in the 1990s,” working paper, University of Houston, Houston,
  TX, USA.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2011): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
  the Plough,” working paper, Harvard University.

Amiti, M., and D. Davis (forthcoming): “Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and evidence,”
  Review of Economic Studies.

Atkin, D. (2011): “Endogenous Skill Acquistion and Export Manufacturing in Mexico,” working
  paper, Yale University.

Attanasio, O., P. Goldberg, and N. Pavcnik (2004): “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality
  in Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics, 74(2), 331–366.

Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. Murnane (2003): “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279–1333.

Becker, G. (1957): The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.

                                                24
Behrman, J., N. Birdsall, and M. Székely (2000): “Economics Reform and Wage Differentials
  in Latin America,” RES Working Papers 4235, Inter-American Development Bank, Research
  Department.

Bernard, A., and J. Bradford Jensen (1999): “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
  Effect, or Both?,” Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 1–25.

Black, S., and E. Brainerd (2004): “Importing Inequality? The Impact of Globalization on
  Gender Discrimination,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 57(4), 540–559.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen (2011): “Trade Induced Technical Change: The
  Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diffusion and Productivity,” working paper, Stanford
  University.

Brambilla, I., D. Lederman, and G. Porto (2010): “Exports, Export Destinations, and
  Skills,” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bustos, P. (2011a): “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
  Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review, 101(1), 304–340.

         (2011b): “The Impact of Trade on Technology and Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
  Argentina,” working paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Cragg, M., and M. Epelbaum (1996): “Why has Wage Dispersion Grown in Mexico? Is it the
  Incidence of Reforms or the Growing Demand for Skills?,” Journal of Development Economics,
  51(1), 99–116.

Csillag, M., and M. Koren (2011): “Machines and Machinist: Capital-Skill Complementarity
  from an International Trade Perspective,” working paper, Central European University.

Duflo, E. (2003): “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intra-household
  Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1), 1–25.

         (forthcoming): “Womens Empowerment and Economic Development,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature.



                                               25
Ederington, J., J. Minier, and K. Troske (2010): “Where the Girls Are: Trade and Labor
  Market Segregation in Colombia,” University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.

Feliciano, Z. (2001): “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms in Mexico
  on Wages and Employment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55, 95–115.

Frias, J., D. Kaplan, and E. Verhoogen (2009): “Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence from
  Mexican Employer-Employee Data,” working paper, Columbia University.

Goldberg, P., and N. Pavcnik (2007): “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
  Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45, 39–82.

Hanson, G., and A. Harrison (1999): “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in Mexico,”
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(2), 271–288.

Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, and S. Redding (2010): “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global
  Economy,” Econometrica, 4(78), 1239–1283.

        (2011): “Trade and Labor Market Outcomes,” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Iacovone, L., and B. Javorcik (2010): “Multi-Product Exporters: Product Churning, Uncer-
  tainty and Export Discoveries,” The Economic Journal, 120(544), 481–499.

Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
  Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

Ozler, S. (2000): “Export Orientation and Female Share of Employment: Evidence from Turkey,”
  World Development, 28(7), 1239–1248.

Pavcnik, N. (2003): “What Explains Skill Upgrading in Less-Developed Countries?,” Journal of
  Development Economics, 71(2), 311–328.

Qian, N. (2008): “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific
  Earnings on Sex Imbalance*,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 1251–1285.

Rendall, M. (2010): “Brain versus Brawn: The Realization of Women’s Comparative Advantage,”
  working paper, University of Zurich.


                                              26
Revenga, A. (1997): “Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of Mex-
  ican Manufacturing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(S3), 20–43.

Robertson, R. (2004): “Relative Prices and Wage Inequality: Evidence from Mexico,” Journal
  of International Economics, 64(2), 387–409.

Saure, P., and H. Zoabi (2011): “International Trade, the Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth,”
  working paper, Tel Aviv University.

Thomas, D. (1990): “Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach,” The Journal
  of Human Resources, 25(4), 635–664.

Topalova, P., and A. Khandelwal (2004): “Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The
  case of India,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 995–1009.

Verhoogen, E. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manu-
  facturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489–530.

Weinberg, B. (2000): “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers,” Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review, 53, 290–308.

Zabludovsky, J. (2005): “El TLCAN y la polı́tica de comercio exterior en México: una agenda
  inconclusa,” INFORMACION COMERCIAL ESPANOLA-MONTHLY EDITION-, 821, 59.




                                                27
                                   Table 1: Tariffs



Export Tariff           Average      Standard Dev      Min     Max               N

1991                       6.1            3.6           0.1     17.0            206
2000                       0.7            1.4           0.0      6.1            201
Change (2000-1991)         -5.2           2.9          -14.4    -0.1            201


Import Tariff           Average      Standard Dev      Min     Max               N

1991                      16.1            7.7           0.0     70.5            168
2000                       2.6            4.7           0.0     37.5            166
Change (2000-1991)        -13.2           4.3          -35.0     0.0            157

Notes: Export Tariff refers to the NAFTA tariffs applied by US. Tariff data, were available

originally at the 8-digit Harmonized System (HS) classification, and were matched with the

Mexican CMAP classification. Note that the US tariff data include information on both

ad valorem and specific tariffs. Specific tariffs were converted into ad valorem equivalents

by John Romalis and were added to the ad valorem rates. We use as export tariff for

1991 the initial export tariff data available corresponding to 1992. Import Tariff refers to

NAFTA tariffs applied by Mexico. We use as import tariff data for 1991 the initial import

tariff data available which is from 1993. “N”: Number of industries according to the CMAP

classification.




                                            28
            Table 2: Change in Share of Workers by Gender, 1991-2000


Panel A: Mexican Census Data: All Sectors



                                     Employment Share                     Wage Bill Share

                              Between      Within       Total            Between      Within       Total

Women                         1.66         3.55         5.21             2.1          3.15         5.25

Panel B: Mexican Census Data: Tradeable Sectors



                                     Employment Share                     Wage Bill Share

                              Between      Within       Total            Between      Within       Total

Women                         2.49         3.22         5.71             2.09         2.6          5.09

Panel C: ENESTyC Survey: Manufacturing Sectors



                                     Employment Share                     Wage Bill Share

                              Between      Within       Total            Between      Within       Total

Women           White         0.92         0.75         1.67             1.02         2.49         3.51
                Blue          1.97         1.32         3.29             1.87         1.60         3.46
                Total         1.64         1.25         2.89             1.33         2.21         3.55
Notes: Panels A and B report results from the Mexican Census IPUMS 1990 and 2000. Decompositions are based
on 69 industry categories. Panel C reports the results from our balanced panel of 941 firms from the ENESTyC
in 1991 and 2000. Decompositions are based on 274 sectors corresponding to the 6-digit cmap classification.




                                                      29
          Table 3: Employer Preferences in Hiring by Occupational Category

                                      Panel A: Female-Male Preference (Percentage of Observations)



                                        Directors                     Managers                    Specialized Workers                  General workers
                                      Percent Obs.                  Percent Obs.                  Percent Obs.                         Percent Obs.


Male Preferred                        25.79     818                 4.01      922                 54.85      877                       45.77     911
Female Preferred                      0.61      818                 4.23      922                 3.19       877                       4.94      911
Indifferent                           73.59     818                 91.76     922                 41.96      877                       49.29     911



                                      Panel B: Reasons for Male Preference



                                         Director                      Manager                    Specialized Worker                   General Worker
                                      Freq. Percent                 Freq. Percent                 Freq. Percent                        Freq. Percent

Heavy Work                            10        4.63                8         10.53               336        66.01                     376       81.39
Lower Absenteeism                     18        8.33                13        17.11               10         1.96                      8         1.73
Special Abilities                     88        40.74               20        26.32               114        22.4                      40        8.66
Higher Productivity                   14        6.48                13        17.11               15         2.95                      17        3.68
Higher Adaptability                   35        16.2                13        17.11               18         3.54                      10        2.16
Higher Control                        30        13.89               4         5.26                7          1.38                      3         0.65
Lower external turnover               11        5.09                3         3.95                3          0.59                      2         0.43
Other                                 10        4.63                2         2.63                6          1.18                      6         1.3

Total                                 216       100                 76        100                 509        100                       462       100

Notes: Panel A reports the percentage of firms that expressed a gender preference when hiring according to occupational category in 2000. Obs. refers
to the total number of firms and it varies across occupational categories because it is based on those firms that hired in that year and occupational
category (only firms that hired were asked about their gender preferences). Panel B reports the distribution of firms according to the main reasons
expressed in 2000 for preferring men over women according to occupational category.




                                                                            30
                                    Table 4: Tariff Changes and Exports



                                Dependent variable: Change in Export Status and Percentage of Exports


                                NewExporter       NewExporter      ∆ShareExports ∆ShareExports
                                (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)

∆ Export Tariff                 -0.038***         -0.042***        0.017             -0.227
                                (0.008)           (0.008)          (0.431)           (0.445)

ln(K/V A)init                                     -0.023*                            -0.682
                                                  (0.012)                            (0.894)

ln(V A)init                                       -0.004                             2.667**
                                                  (0.009)                            (1.074)

R&Dshareinit                                      -0.001                             -0.103
                                                  (0.001)                            (0.072)

F oreigninit                                      -0.075*                            5.780**
                                                  (0.040)                            (2.063)


Observations                    920               904              527               516
R2                              .054              .068             .052              .097
Sector2dig Fixed Effects        Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. New Exporter refers to those firms that
did not export in 1991 but are exporting in 2000. ∆ShareExports refers to the change between 2000
and 1991 in the share of export revenue in total sales. Columns (1) and (2) include all firms in the
analysis. Columns (3) and (4) refer only to those firms that report export revenue in 2000. ∆ Export
Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit sector classification) applied by the US between 2000
and 1991. ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added
in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending in total income in 1991. F oreigninit is a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned investors
in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                            31
                                        Table 5: Export Status and Technology Upgrading


                                                                            Dependent variable: Technology Outcomes


                                (1)             (2)                (3)                       (4)                      (5)                          (6)
                            Machinery       Machinery       Upgraded Machinery        Upgraded Machinery    Non-Upgraded Machinery       Non-Upgraded Machinery
                           Value Growth    Value Growth       Value Growth              Value Growth             Value Growth                 Value Growth

Continuing Exporters           -0.143           0.196               0.065                   0.180*                    -0.217**                     -0.014
                              (0.138)          (0.140)             (0.085)                  (0.092)                    (0.106)                    (0.111)

New Exporters                 0.243*           0.356**             0.151*                   0.187**                    0.065                       0.133
                              (0.141)          (0.132)             (0.078)                  (0.080)                   (0.114)                     (0.110)

Stop Exporters                -0.343*           -0.114              -0.129                   -0.055                    -0.208                      -0.066
                              (0.179)          (0.194)             (0.124)                  (0.131)                   (0.126)                     (0.133)

ln(K/V A)init                                 -0.535***                                    -0.166***                                             -0.350***
                                               (0.046)                                      (0.029)                                               (0.041)

ln(V A)init                                   -0.228***                                    -0.074**                                              -0.130***
                                               (0.045)                                      (0.030)                                               (0.035)

F oreigninit                                   0.358**                                       0.115                                                0.223**
                                               (0.118)                                      (0.092)                                               (0.089)

Observations.                    936             920                  936                    920                         936                        920
R2                              .033             .22                 .018                    .068                       .032                        .17
Sector2dig Fixed Effects        Yes              Yes                 Yes                     Yes                        Yes                         Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. Continuing exporters are those firms that exported in 1991 and 2000. New exporters are those firms
that did not export in 1991 but export in 2000. Stop Exporters are firms that exported in 1991 but do not export in 2000. The omitted category is Non-Exporter.
Machinery Value Growth is the log change in the value of machinery and equipment between 1991 and 2000. Upgraded Machinery Growth refers to the product of
the log difference in the value of machinery and equipment between 2000 and 1991 and a dummy variable that equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired
since 1999 is automatic/computerized and it is new machinery imported from developed countries. The Non-Upgraded Machinery equals one if the machinery and
equipment acquired since 1999 is not automatic/computerized or it is not new machinery imported from developed countries. ln(K/V A)init is the log of total
assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. F oreigninit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than
10 percent owned by foreign-owned investors in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                                                 32
                                        Table 6: Export Status and Skill Upgrading



                                                     Dependent variable: Growth in White and Blue Labor Outcomes


                                                                      Ratio                                                     Level

                           White-Blue      White-Blue     White-Blue     White-Blue     White-Blue   White-Blue       White         Blue
                           Employment      Wage Bill        Wage         Employment     Wage Bill      Wage            Wage         Wage
                             Growth         Growth         Growth          Growth        Growth       Growth          Growth       Growth
                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)

Continuing Exporter            -0.096          -0.005        0.037             -0.120     -0.060        -0.006         -0.001        0.015
                              (0.087)         (0.095)       (0.044)           (0.098)    (0.105)       (0.048)        (0.043)       (0.031)

New Exporter                   -0.092          0.030        0.110**            -0.091     0.025        0.092*         0.075*         -0.013
                              (0.087)         (0.097)       (0.048)           (0.090)    (0.099)       (0.049)        (0.045)       (0.027)

Stop Exporter                  -0.053          -0.070        0.015             -0.037     -0.074        -0.028         -0.024        0.002
                              (0.165)         (0.183)       (0.074)           (0.170)    (0.187)       (0.072)        (0.068)       (0.037)

R&Dshareinit                                                                   0.001      -0.000        0.001          0.001         -0.000
                                                                              (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)

ln(K/V A)init                                                                  0.015      0.030         0.009         0.025*         0.016
                                                                              (0.025)    (0.026)       (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.010)

ln(V A)init                                                                    -0.022     0.029        0.032**        0.039**        0.007
                                                                              (0.031)    (0.035)       (0.015)        (0.014)       (0.008)

F oreigninit                                                                   0.104      0.105         0.049          0.063         0.014
                                                                              (0.069)    (0.084)       (0.050)        (0.043)       (0.027)

Observations                    933            933           928               917          917           912           917              917
R2                              .032           .02           .013              .035        .023          .021           .028            .026
Sector2dig Fixed Effects        Yes            Yes           Yes               Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. Continuing exporters are those firms that exported in 1991 and 2000. New
exporters are those firms that did not export in 1991 but export in 2000. Stop Exporters are firms that exported in 1991 but do not export
in 2000. The omitted category is Non-Exporter. Employment White-Blue refers to the growth in white to blue employment ratios between
1991 and 2000. Wage Bill White-Blue is the growth in white to blue wage bill ratios between 1991 and 2000. Wage White-Blue is the growth
in white to blue wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment. The growth rate is
computed as ln((white − blueratio) + 0.001) − ln((white − blueratio) + 0.001)t−1 . ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to value added
in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending in total income in 1991. F oreigninit is a
dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned investors in 1991 and zero otherwise.
*** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                                       33
                Table 7: Reduced Form: Tariff Changes and Female-Male Labor Outcomes




                                                      Dependent variable: Growth in Female-Male Labor Ratios


                                           White Collar                                               Blue Collar

                           Female-Male     Female-Male      Female-Male       Female-Male       Female-Male         Female-Male
                           Employment       Wage Bill          Wage           Employment         Wage Bill             Wage
                             Growth          Growth           Growth            Growth            Growth              Growth
                               (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)                 (6)

∆ Export Tariff                0.020           0.012            -0.010           -0.040*         -0.046**             -0.010*
                              (0.025)         (0.024)          (0.007)           (0.022)          (0.021)             (0.005)

ln(K/V A)init                  0.026           0.021            -0.014            0.004            0.019               0.009
                              (0.040)         (0.039)          (0.015)           (0.046)          (0.047)             (0.015)

ln(V A)init                    -0.028          -0.024           -0.005            -0.055           -0.058              -0.007
                              (0.041)         (0.039)          (0.017)           (0.050)          (0.051)             (0.013)

R&Dshareinit                  0.009**         0.008**           -0.001            -0.001           -0.001              0.001
                              (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.001)           (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.001)

F oreigninit                   0.001           -0.001           0.010             -0.038           -0.005              0.032
                              (0.117)         (0.114)          (0.063)           (0.159)          (0.163)             (0.051)

Observations                    899             898              862              895               895                  562
R2                             .026             .02             .019             .0095             .012                 .021
Sector2dig Fixed Effects       Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes                  Yes

Notes:Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. ∆ Export Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit sector
classification) applied by the US between 2000 and 1991. Columns (1) to (3) refer to the White-Collar category while columns (4) to (6)
refer to the Blue-Collar category. Female-Male Employment growth refers to the growth in female to male employment ratios between
1991 and 2000. Female-Male Wage Bill is the growth in female to male wage bill ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male wage is
the growth in female to male wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment. The
growth rate is computed as ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001) − ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001)t−1 . ln(K/V A)init is the log of total
assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending in total income
in 1991. F oreigninit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned
investors in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                                  34
                              Table 8: Alternative Channel: Foreign Ownership


                                                      Dependent variable: Growth in Female-Male Labor Ratios




                                                White Collar                                           Blue Collar

                                 Female-Male    Female-Male     Female-Male        Female-Male     Female-Male        Female-Male
                                 Employment      Wage Bill         Wage            Employment       Wage Bill            Wage
                                   Growth         Growth          Growth             Growth          Growth             Growth
                                     (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)

∆ExportT arif f × ∆F oreign        -0.076**         -0.053          0.019              -0.074          -0.070             0.019
                                    (0.038)        (0.048)         (0.026)            (0.049)         (0.050)            (0.017)

∆ Export Tariff                     0.021           0.014           -0.007             -0.027          -0.034           -0.011**
                                   (0.023)         (0.019)         (0.008)            (0.021)         (0.021)            (0.005)

∆F oreign                          -0.494*          -0.385          0.081              -0.039          0.034              0.233
                                   (0.281)         (0.299)         (0.138)            (0.388)         (0.396)            (0.157)

ln(K/V A)init                       -0.011          -0.001          -0.002             -0.004          0.016              0.018
                                   (0.041)         (0.040)         (0.016)            (0.051)         (0.054)            (0.016)

ln(V A)init                         -0.026          -0.016          0.003             -0.095*         -0.090*             0.003
                                   (0.047)         (0.044)         (0.017)            (0.048)         (0.048)            (0.015)

R&Dshareinit                       0.010**         0.007*           -0.002             0.000           0.002              0.001
                                   (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.001)            (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.001)

Observations                         787             786             758                 784           784                 497
R2                                  .029             .019            .012               .018           .021                .041
Sector2dig Fixed Effects             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes                 Yes
F-test                              0.076           0.369           0.500              0.145          0.098               0.088

Notes:Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. ∆ Export Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit sector
classification) applied by the US between 2000 and 1991. Columns (1) to (3) refer to the White-Collar category while columns (4) to (6)
refer to the Blue-Collar category. Female-Male Employment growth refers to the growth in female to male employment ratios between
1991 and 2000. Female-Male Wage Bill is the growth in female to male wage bill ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male wage is
the growth in female to male wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment.
The growth rate is computed as ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001) − ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001)t−1 . ln(K/V A)init is the log of
total assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending in total
income in 1991. ∆F oreign is the change in ownership status between 1991 and 2000. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10%
levels.




                                                                  35
                       Table 9: Alternative Channel: Import Tariffs


                                                  Dependent variable: Growth in Female-Male Labor Ratios



                                                                    Panel A: Import Tariffs

                                            White Collar                                             Blue Collar

                            Female-Male      Female-Male     Female-Male         Female-Male     Female-Male        Female-Male
                            Employment        Wage Bill         Wage             Employment       Wage Bill            Wage
                              Growth           Growth          Growth              Growth          Growth             Growth
                                (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)             (5)                (6)

∆ Import Tariff                 -0.006           -0.001          0.004               0.018           0.017              -0.005
                               (0.013)          (0.012)         (0.007)             (0.019)         (0.020)            (0.005)

ln(K/V A)init                   0.004            0.010           -0.003              0.008           0.022              0.010
                               (0.036)          (0.036)         (0.016)             (0.049)         (0.049)            (0.015)

ln(V A)init                     -0.039           -0.021          0.007               -0.062          -0.065             -0.006
                               (0.042)          (0.039)         (0.018)             (0.054)         (0.054)            (0.015)

R&Dshareinit                   0.007*            0.006           -0.001              -0.002          -0.001             0.001
                               (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.001)             (0.005)         (0.005)            (0.001)

F oreigninit                    -0.047           -0.023          0.031               -0.098          -0.071             0.011
                               (0.124)          (0.118)         (0.067)             (0.169)         (0.171)            (0.051)

Observations                      837            836               803               833              833                510
R2                               .023            .019             .019              .0092             .01                .021
Sector2dig Fixed Effects         Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes

                                                              Panel B: Export and Import Tariffs

                                            White Collar                                             Blue Collar

                            Female-Male      Female-Male     Female-Male         Female-Male     Female-Male        Female-Male
                            Employment        Wage Bill         Wage             Employment       Wage Bill            Wage
                              Growth           Growth          Growth              Growth          Growth             Growth
                                (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)             (5)                (6)

∆ Export Tariff                 0.023            0.017           -0.008            -0.044*         -0.050**             -0.009
                               (0.024)          (0.023)         (0.007)            (0.026)          (0.025)            (0.007)

∆ Import Tariff                 -0.002           0.001           0.003               0.016           0.015              -0.005
                               (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.007)             (0.019)         (0.020)            (0.005)

ln(K/V A)init                   0.002            0.004           -0.009              -0.006          0.008              0.009
                               (0.041)          (0.040)         (0.016)             (0.049)         (0.050)            (0.016)

ln(V A)init                     -0.038           -0.023          0.007               -0.055          -0.056             -0.006
                               (0.040)          (0.038)         (0.018)             (0.052)         (0.052)            (0.015)

R&Dshareinit                   0.011**         0.009**           -0.001              0.001           0.001              0.001
                               (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.001)             (0.005)         (0.004)            (0.001)

F oreigninit                    0.015            0.030           0.025               -0.069          -0.051             0.007
                               (0.120)          (0.115)         (0.068)             (0.165)         (0.169)            (0.052)

Observations.                    820             819              789                 816            816                  504
R2                               .033            .027             .02                .012            .014                .024
Sector2dig Fixed Effects         Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. ∆ Export Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit
sector classification) applied by the US between 2000 and 1991. ∆ Import Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit
sector classification) applied by Mexico between 2000 and 1991. Columns (1) to (3) refer to the White-Collar category while
columns (4) to (6) refer to the Blue-Collar category. Female-Male Employment growth refers to the growth in female to male
employment ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male Wage Bill is the growth in female to male wage bill ratios between
1991 and 2000. Female-Male wage is the growth in female to male wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed
as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment. The growth rate is computed as ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001) − ln((f emale −
maleratio) + 0.001)t−1 . ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to value added in 1991. ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to
value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending in total income in
1991. F oreigninit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned
investors in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.


                                                                36
Table 10: New Exporters, Technology Upgrading and Female-Male Labor Outcomes (IV)


Panel A: Second Stage

                                               Dependent variable: Growth in Female-Male Labor Ratios in the Blue-Collar Category


                                 Female-Male       Female-Male      Female-Male         Female-Male       Female-Male             Female-Male
                                 Employment         Wage Bill          Wage             Employment         Wage Bill                 Wage
                                   Growth            Growth           Growth              Growth            Growth                  Growth
                                     (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)                     (6)

New Exporter                        0.955*           1.118**           0.293*
                                    (0.551)          (0.531)           (0.154)

Upgraded Machinery Growth                                                                  0.652*            0.763*                   0.242
                                                                                           (0.395)           (0.392)                 (0.157)

ln(K/V A)init                        0.024             0.041            0.013               0.117            0.150*                  0.049*
                                    (0.050)           (0.052)          (0.015)             (0.081)           (0.079)                 (0.028)

ln(V A)init                          -0.052            -0.053           -0.010              -0.020            -0.016                  0.008
                                    (0.051)           (0.052)          (0.015)             (0.051)           (0.052)                 (0.017)

R&Dshareinit                         -0.000            0.000            0.001               0.000             0.001                   0.001
                                    (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.001)             (0.005)           (0.005)                 (0.001)

F oreigninit                         0.033             0.077            0.057               -0.130            -0.113                  -0.001
                                    (0.169)           (0.175)          (0.056)             (0.174)           (0.181)                 (0.064)

Observations                          895              895               562                 895              895                      562

Panel B: First Stage

                                                Dependent variable: New Exporter Dummy and Upgraded Machinery Value Growth




                                                                                          Upgraded         Upgraded                Upgraded
                                                                                         Machinery        Machinery               Machinery
                                New Exporter      New Exporter     New Exporter         Value Growth     Value Growth            Value Growth
                                    (1)               (2)              (3)                   (4)              (5)                     (6)

∆ Export Tariff                    -0.042***        -0.042***         -0.035***           -0.061***        -0.061***                -0.043**
                                    (0.008)          (0.008)           (0.051)             (0.012)          (0.012)                  (0.006)

Observations.                         895              895               562                 895              895                      562
Tests
F-Test                               26.7              26.7             32.24                26.37           26.37                    6.56
Anderson                             3.24              4.72              3.6                 3.24             4.72                     3.6
Cragg-Donald                        26.696            26.696           32.243               26.375           26.375                   6.564

Notes:Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. Panel A reports the results from the Second Stage. Panel B reports the results from the
First Stage. ∆ Export Tariff indicates the change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit sector classification) applied by the US between 2000 and 1991. Upgraded
Machinery Growth refers to the product of the log difference in the value of machinery and equipment between 2000 and 1991 and a dummy variable
that equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is automatic/computerized and it is new machinery imported from developed
countries. New Exporter is a dummy variables that equals one if the firm did not export in 1991 but exports in 2000. Female-Male Employment
growth refers to the growth in female to male employment ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male Wage Bill is the growth in female to male
wage bill ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male wage is the growth in female to male wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed
as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment. The growth rate is computed as ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001) − ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001)t−1 .
ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is the log value added in 1991. R&Dshareinit is the share of R&D spending
in total income in 1991. F oreigninit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned
investors in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                                         37
                                                    Non−oil Exports and Imports as share of GDP
                              30
                              20
                 Percentage
                              10
                              0




                                   1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                                                                 year

                                                            Non−Oil Exports               Imports




Figure 1: Mexican Imports and Exports. Source: Balance of Payment information provided by the
Central Bank of Mexico (Banco de Mexico).




                                                                  38
                                              Female/Male Mean Weekly Wage Ratio
                          .88
                          .86
                  Ratio
                          .84
                          .82
                          .8




                                1990   1992       1994          1996       1998    2000
                                                              year

                                                      ENIGH               Census




Figure 2: Female-Male Weekly Wage Ratio. Source: Aguayo, Airola, Juhn, and Villegas-Sanchez
(2011). The figure is based on Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) and the
1990 and 2000 Mexican Population Census. The wage sample consists of men and women who are
15-64 years old, who reported working full-time (30 hours or more), and who either did not have
self-employment earnings or reported that they were not self-employed. We also winsorize the top
and bottom 1 percent of observations by gender.




                                                         39
Figure 3: Technology upgrading among new and continuing exporters. Notation: Primed thresholds
represent the values after trade liberalization. In panel (a), technology upgrading occurs mainly
among new exporters. In panel (b), it occurs exclusively among continuing exporters.




                                               40
Appendix A                    Proofs

Proof of proposition 1.


Proof. Using (3) we can define the cutoffs ϕ∗x and ϕ∗2 as, respectively π1 (W, P, ϕ∗x , 0) = π1 (W, P, ϕ∗x , 1)
and π1 (W, P, ϕ∗2 , 1) = π2 (W, P, ϕ∗2 , 1). In addition, the exit cutoff ϕ∗1 is defined by π1 (W, P, ϕ∗1 , 0) =
0. It is convenient to express the first two of these as a function of the third one. Some algebra
gives

                                                                   1
                                      ϕ∗x = ϕ∗1 τ (fx /f1 ) σ−1                                                                (A-18)
                                                                                           1
                                                             f2
                                                "                                       # σ−1
                                                                    f1 − 1
                                      ϕ∗2 = ϕ∗1                   1−σ
                                                                                                ,                              (A-19)
                                                         (1 +   τ     ) (λσ−1    − 1)
                             α1 (1−β1 )−α2 (1−β2 )          α2 −α1          (1−α1 )(1−$1 )−(1−α2 )(1−$2 )
              γκ2       Wbm                              Wwf               Wwm
where λ =     κ1        Wbf                              Wbf               Wwf                                            . These cut-
offs are identical to those in Bustos (2011b, p18-19), except for the definition of λ and ϕ∗1 . This
                                                                            R1
implies that the expression for the relative total revenue                  R2    is also identical to hers once λ and ϕ∗1
are defined appropriately (p20):
                                                (         k−σ+1                             k−σ+1              )
                                                     ϕ∗2                                ϕ∗2
                                                                                    
                R1         1                                                  1−σ                           1−σ
                   = σ−1                                               −1+τ                            −τ             .
                R2  λ    (1 + τ 1−σ )                ϕ∗1                                ϕ∗x

                                                                                                        R1
But since under (A-18) and (A-19) this expression does not depend on ϕ∗1 ,                              R2   only depends on W
through λ.

    Given (A-18) and (A-19), parts (i) and (ii) of the Proposition follow directly from Bustos’s
                                                                                                             ∂(R1 /R2 )
(2011b) Proposition 1(e). Proposition 1(b) in Bustos (2011b) implies that                                       ∂τ         > 0. Since
                                            ∂(Wbf /Wbm )
β2 > β1 , it follows from (8) that              ∂τ             < 0 as stated in part (iii). This result together with
(1) implies that firms that do not change their technology after trade liberalization will have a lower
relative demand for blue-collar female workers. Therefore, as stated in part (iv), firms switching
technology must increase their demand for these workers or else (iii) could not hold.



    Proof of proposition 2.


Proof. Part (i) follows directly from (10). To see part (ii), use (1) and (2) to write the relative


                                                                 41
wage paid by a firm using technology t as
                         Wwf Lwf +Wwm Lwm                 $        βt     Wbf
                             Lwf +Lwm          Wwf       1−$ + 1  1−βt + Wbm
                          Wbf Lbf +Wbm Lbm
                                             =                Wwf     βt
                                                                                 .
                                               Wbf      $
                              Lbf +Lbm                 1−$ + Wwm    1−βt + 1

                                               ∂(R1 /R2 )
Using (8)-(10) together with the result that      ∂τ        > 0 (see Proposition 1), one can show that the
derivative of this expression with respect to τ is proportional to the expression in the Proposition.
Note that the condition can be satisfied because α1 > α2 .




Appendix B            Data and Cleaning Procedure

Appendix B.1         Variable Description

-Output: Manufacturing plants: Value of production priced at ”factory price”(ENESTyC). - Labor:
Average number of workers (ENESTyC). - Materials: Expenditure in materials (ENESTyC) -
Capital: Value of Total Assets (ENESTyC). - Foreign: Dummy equal 1 if the capital owned by
foreign investors is more than 10% (ENESTyC). -Exporter: Dummy equal 1 if firm sells to foreign
markets (ENESTyC).


Appendix B.2         Cleaning Procedure

The following establishments were removed:
1. Establishments that report zero or missing values for Output, Materials, Average employment
and/or Total Assets. This means removing a total of 216 firm in 1992 and 640 in 2001.
2. Establishments fully or partially owned by the government.
3. In order to make more comparable the surveyed samples in 1992 and 2001, we remove establish-
ments in sector 3511 “Basic Petrochemicals” and sector 3530 “Oil refinery” because these sectors
were only included in the 2001 survey.
4. In addition, the main variables are winsorized at the tails. The key variables are the real value
of output, the real value of materials expenditure, the real value of total assets and the average
number of workers. We replace values in the lower and upper 1% tails with values at the 1st and
99th percentiles, respectively.

                                                    42
Appendix B.3        Price Index

Ideally, for output, materials and capital we would need data on physical quantities rather than
values. Unfortunately this data is not available in the ENESTyC survey hence, in order to approx-
imate quantities and express all monetary variables in real terms we use industry wide price index
deflators.



   - Output: We express the value of production priced at the “factory” price (venta de fabrica)
in pesos of 2003 using producer price index (PPI) data breakdown by industry, facilitated by
the Central Bank of Mexico. The Central Bank of Mexico uses a different industry classification
(CMAE, Clasificacion Mexicana de Actividades Mexicanas) than the one used in the ENESTyC
(CMAP). We use a table of correspondence between CMAE and CMAP provided by INEGI and
a PPI deflator at the branch level. In order to obtain the PPI at the branch level, for each branch
we take the average over the corresponding classes belonging to that branch.
- Exports: There is no export price deflator breakdown by industry readily available so we follow
Lach, Roberts and Tybout (1998) and Fernandes and Isgut (2005) in the construction of export price
indexes. As in Lach et at (1998) we use data from the United Nations COMTRADE database on
the values and quantities of manufactured exports from Mexico to the rest of the world by product
category, and we conduct the following exercise. First, we develop a correspondence between the
UN ISIC Rev3 classification and the Mexican CMAP branch classification by careful examination
of the product descriptions in each system. Second, we compute unit export values for each ISIC
category by dividing the trade value figures by the trade quantity figures. These unit export values
are expressed in current US dollars so we convert them into unit values in pesos using the average
nominal ER between peso and dollar. Third, following Fernandes and Isgut (2005) we regress the
log of the unit export price on 2-digit sector dummies, year dummies and year-sector fixed effects.
The estimation is done by weighted least squares, with weights corresponding to the square root
of the share of each product category trade value in the total 2-digit sector trade value. From this
regression we obtain predicted log unit export prices for each UN ISIC Rev3 category. Finally,
using the previous weights and the correspondence between the ISIC classification and the CMAP
classification we compute a weighted average of the predicted unit values belonging to the same



                                                43
2-digit sector CMAP classification. We normalize the export price series for each industry to the
same base year as the domestic producer price index.
- Materials: We express the expenditure in materials in pesos of 2003 using a materials price index
(MPI) provided by the Central Bank of Mexico. In particular, we use the MPI according to which
sector consumes those materials. Again, the industry classification of the Central Bank of Mexico
is the CMAE and we use the same previous table of correspondence between CMAE and CMAP
to obtain the CMAP figures at the branch level. Although this price index might be relevant for
plants that buy their materials domestically it might as well be misleading in the case of plants
that import most of their raw materials. To avoid such a bias, we use different price indexes for
the expenditure in materials paid at home and the expenditure in imported materials. To obtain a
price index for imports at the CMAP branch level we follow the same procedure as for the export
price index, this time using Mexican imports from the rest of the world by product category.
- Capital: We use the PPI to deflate the value of total assets.



Appendix C           Appendix Tables




                                                 44
                                  Table B1: Summary Statistics

                                                  Panel A: Cross-Section of Firms

                                                                  1991                                       2000
                                                   Obs          Average         Sd.           Obs          Average       Sd.
Firm Characteristics
ln(K/V A)                                          3905         -0.34           1.40          5095         -0.50         1.67
ln(V A)                                            3905         10.67           1.68          5095         10.37         1.94
ln(K)                                              3991         10.33           2.02          5466         9.88          2.08
Employment                                         3991         365.49          685.99        5466         406.22        872.44
ShareR&D                                           3991         7.67            18.08         .            .             .
F oreign                                           3991         0.22            0.42          4861         0.25          0.43
Exporter                                           3991         0.32            0.47          5459         0.56          0.50
ExportShare                                        3991         17.94           34.31         5387         21.76         34.05
Employment : W hitetoBlueRatio                     3991         0.62            2.59          5466         0.62          1.70
Female-Male Labor Ratios
White Collar
Employment : F emaletoM aleRatio                   3967         0.44            0.64          5407         0.60          0.81
W ageBill : F emaletoM aleRatio                    3963         0.30            0.44          5364         0.44          0.70
W age : F emaletoM aleRatio                        3793         0.71            0.37          5201         0.82          0.54
Blue Collar
Employment : F emaletoM aleRatio                   3991         0.62            1.09          5466         0.66          0.99
W ageBill : F emaletoM aleRatio                    3991         0.57            1.06          5466         0.60          0.96
W age : F emaletoM aleRatio                        2707         0.90            0.34          4106         0.94          0.32
Technology
V alueM achineryEquipment                          3991         28786.41        141814        5465         93101.89      649522.7
ComputerizedM achinery                                                                        5466         0.52          0.50
N ewM achinery                                                                                5466         0.65          0.48
ImportedM achinery                                                                            5466         0.53          0.50
U pgradedM achinery                                                                           5466         0.29          0.45
V alueU pgradedM achinery                                                                     5465         45930.62      524398.4
V alueN ON − U pgradedM achinery                                                              5465         43538.95      386385.1

                                                      Panel B: Panel of Firms

                                                                  1991                                       2000
                                                   Obs          Average         Sd.           Obs          Average       Sd.
Firm Characteristics
ln(K/V A)                                          922          -0.30           1.31          873          -0.08         1.39
ln(V A)                                            922          11.34           1.34          873          11.04         1.50
ln(K)                                              938          11.04           1.69          938          10.94         1.70
Employment                                         938          422.31          510.42        938          441.65        517.87
ShareR&D                                           938          7.51            16.56         .            .             .
F oreign                                           938          0.18            0.38          823          0.20          0.40
Exporter                                           938          0.38            0.49          938          0.57          0.49
ExportShare                                        938          8.42            20.46         938          13.92         22.99
Employment : W hitetoBlueRatio                     936          0.52            0.60          935          0.70          1.15
Female-Male Labor Ratios
White Collar
Employment : F emaletoM aleRatio                   937          0.39            0.46          934          0.43          0.58
W ageBill : F emaletoM aleRatio                    937          0.26            0.32          933          0.32          0.42
W age : F emaletoM aleRatio                        908          0.70            0.32          921          0.82          0.41
Blue Collar
Employment : F emaletoM aleRatio                   934          0.64            1.96          933          0.66          2.20
W ageBill : F emaletoM aleRatio                    934          0.54            1.55          933          0.64          2.35
W age : F emaletoM aleRatio                        653          0.91            0.48          670          0.94          0.30
Technology
V alueM achineryEquipment                          937          38987.91        163054.9      936          146187.8      528044.6
ComputerizedM achinery                                                                        938          0.61          0.49
N ewM achinery                                                                                938          0.69          0.46
ImportedM achinery                                                                            938          0.53          0.50
U pgradedM achinery                                                                           938          0.35          0.48
V alueU pgradedM achinery                                                                     936          79641.83      491033.1
V alueN ON − U pgradedM achinery                                                              936          61915.08      216592.1
Export Status
ContinuingExporters                                                                           938          0.34          0.47
N ewExporters                                                                                 938          0.24          0.43
StopExporters                                                                                 938          0.06          0.24

Notes: ln(K/V A) is the log of total assets to value added. ln(V A) is the log of value added. ShareR&D is the share of R&D spending
in total income. ln(K) is the log of total assets. Employment is the total number of employees. F oreign is a dummy variable that
takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned investors and zero otherwise. Exporter is a dummy
that equals one if the firm reported sales revenue abroad and zero otherwise. ExportShare is the share of export revenue in total
sales. Employment : W hitetoBlueRatio is the ratio of white collar number of employees to blue collar number of employees. White
collar includes the categories: Directors and Managers while Blue Collar refers to Specialized Workers and General Workers. The wage
is computed as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment. V alueM achineryEquipment refers to the deflated value of Machinery and
Equipment. ComputerizedM achinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 was automatic/computerized
(as opposed to manual or involving machinery tools). N ewM achinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999
is new (as opposed to used). ImportedM achinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is imported from
developed countries. U pgradedM achinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is computerized, new and
imported from developed countries. N on − U pgradedM achinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is
neither computerized, nor new nor imported from developed countries. ContinuingExporters are those firms that exported in 1991
and 2000. N ewExporters are those firms that did not export in 1991 but export in 2000. StopExporters are firms that exported in
1991 but do not export in 2000. The omitted category is N on − Exporter.



                                                               45
                     Table B2: Characteristics of Exporters relative to Non-Exporters



                                              Levels in 1991                          Log Changes 1991-2000
                              Continuing         New                  Obs.       Continuing        New                     Obs.
                              Exporter           Exporter                        Exporter          Exporter

Employment                    0.444*** (0.067)    0.206**   (0.064)   938        -0.016    (0.044)   0.006     (0.047)     938
Sales                         0.734*** (0.096)    0.288**   (0.093)   938        0.157**   (0.066)   0.227*** (0.067)      938
Value Added per Employee      0.219**   (0.083)   0.021     (0.086)   922        0.127     (0.102)   0.213**   (0.103)     858
Capital to Labor ratio        0.755*** (0.109)    0.200*    (0.120)   938        -0.100    (0.125)   0.198     (0.130)     938
Skill intensity               0.117**   (0.045)   -0.033    (0.045)   937        -0.040    (0.054)   -0.022    (0.054)     933
Wage                          0.152*** (0.030)    0.052*    (0.030)   938        0.097**   (0.037)   0.060     (0.038)     938
White Wage                    0.130*** (0.034)    0.035     (0.036)   937        0.155*** (0.045)    0.136**   (0.049)     932


Notes:   Robust standard errors in parenthesis.    Exporter premia are estimated from a regression of the form:          ln(Yi,s0 ) =
                                                                                                                  0
β1 ContinuingExportersi,s0 + β2 N ewExportersi,s0 + β3 StopExportersi,s0 + δs0 + i,s0 where i refers to firm and s refers to tow-
digit industry classification. ContinuingExporters are firms that exported in 1991 and 2000, N ewExporters are firms that did not
export in 1991 but do export in 2000 and StopExporters are firms that exported in 1991 and do not export in 2000. The reference
category is N on − Exporters which are firms that never exported.




                                                                46
Table B3: Employer Preference in Hiring by Occupational Category and Foreign Ownership Status



                                                Panel A: Directors


                                    Domestic                                       Foreign

                              Observ.    Percent                             Observ.   Percent

                Male          144        25.49                 Male          36        23.68
                Female        3          0.53                  Female        1         0.66
                Indifferent   418        73.98                 Indifferent   115       75.66

                Total         565        100                   Total         152       100



                                               Panel B: Managers


                                    Domestic                                       Foreign

                              Observ.    Percent                             Observ.   Percent

                Male          27         4.17                  Male          5         3.11
                Female        25         3.86                  Female        9         5.59
                Indifferent   596        91.98                 Indifferent   147       91.3

                Total         648        100                   Total         161       100



                                        Panel C: Specialized Workers


                                    Domestic                                       Foreign

                              Observ.    Percent                             Observ.   Percent

                Male          338        54.52                 Male          82        53.25
                Female        21         3.39                  Female        1         0.65

                Indifferent   261        42.1                  Indifferent   71        46.1

                Total         620        100                   Total         154       100



                                         Panel D: General Workers


                                    Domestic                                       Foreign

                              Observ.    Percent                             Observ.   Percent

                Male          288        44.44                 Male          71        47.02
                Female        35         5.4                   Female        3         1.99
                Indifferent   325        50.15                 Indifferent   77        50.99

                Total         648        100                   Total         151       100




                                                       47
                       Table B4: Technology Upgrading and Female-Male Labor Outcomes (IV)




Panel A: Second Stage

                                                                          Dependent variable: Growth in Female-Male Labor Ratios in the Blue-Collar Category


                                      Female-Male      Female-Male      Female-Male         Female-Male       Female-Male     Female-Male        Female-Male       Female-Male        Female-Male
                                      Employment        Wage Bill          Wage             Employment         Wage Bill         Wage            Employment         Wage Bill            Wage
                                        Growth           Growth           Growth              Growth            Growth          Growth             Growth            Growth             Growth
                                          (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)             (6)                (7)               (8)                (9)

Machinery Growth                          0.543            0.635            0.203
                                         (0.443)          (0.457)          (0.213)

Upgraded Machinery Growth                                                                        0.652*          0.763*          0.242
                                                                                                 (0.395)         (0.392)        (0.157)

Non-Upgraded Machinery Growth                                                                                                                        3.206            3.753              0.907
                                                                                                                                                    (7.529)          (8.537)            (2.775)

ln(K/V A)init                             0.297            0.362            0.123                 0.117          0.150*         0.049*               1.122            1.327              0.354
                                         (0.246)          (0.254)          (0.124)               (0.081)         (0.079)        (0.028)             (2.658)          (3.016)            (1.077)

ln(V A)init                               0.056            0.073            0.041                 -0.020          -0.016         0.008               0.368            0.437              0.134
                                         (0.089)          (0.088)          (0.048)               (0.051)         (0.052)        (0.017)             (0.966)          (1.094)            (0.430)

R&Dshareinit                              0.000            0.001            0.001                 0.000           0.001          0.001               -0.001           -0.001             0.003
                                         (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.001)               (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.001)             (0.008)          (0.009)            (0.007)

F oreigninit                              -0.241           -0.243           -0.032                -0.130          -0.113         -0.001              -0.695           -0.775             -0.088
                                         (0.217)          (0.224)          (0.086)               (0.174)         (0.181)        (0.064)             (1.555)          (1.762)            (0.378)

Observations                              895               895              562                   895            895             562                 895              895                562
Sector2dig Fixed Effects                  Yes               Yes              Yes                   Yes            Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes

Panel B: First Stage

                                                                                                Dependent variable: Growth Value of Machinery




                                                                                              Upgraded         Upgraded        Upgraded         Non-Upgraded      Non-Upgraded       Non-Upgraded
                                      Machinery        Machinery        Machinery            Machinery        Machinery       Machinery          Machinery         Machinery          Machinery
                                     Value Growth     Value Growth     Value Growth         Value Growth     Value Growth    Value Growth       Value Growth      Value Growth       Value Growth
                                          (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)              (5)             (6)                (7)               (8)                (9)

∆ Export Tariff                         -0.073**         -0.073**           -0.051              -0.061***      -0.061***        -0.043**             -0.012           -0.012             -0.011
                                         (0.035)          (0.035)          (0.051)               (0.012)        (0.012)          (0.017)            (0.027)          (0.027)            (0.036)

Observations                               895              895              562                   895            895             562                 895              895                562

Tests
F-Test                                    4.45              4.45              1                  26.37           26.37            6.56               1.49             1.49               0.58
Anderson                                  3.24             4.72              3.6                  3.24            4.72             3.6               3.24             4.72                3.6
Cragg-Donald                              4.454            4.454              1                  26.375          26.375          6.564               1.493            1.493              0.583

Notes:Standard errors clustered at cmap level in parentheses. Panel A reports the results from the Second Stage. Panel B reports the results from the First Stage. ∆ Export Tariff indicates the
change in sectoral tariffs (6-digit sector classification) applied by the US between 2000 and 1991. Upgraded Machinery Growth refers to the product of the log difference in the value of machinery
and equipment between 2000 and 1991 and a dummy variable that equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is automatic/computerized and it is new machinery imported
from developed countries. The Non-Upgraded Machinery equals one if the machinery and equipment acquired since 1999 is not automatic/computerized and it is not new machinery imported from
developed countries. Female-Male Employment growth refers to the growth in female to male employment ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male Wage Bill is the growth in female to male
wage bill ratios between 1991 and 2000. Female-Male wage is the growth in female to male wage ratios between 1991 and 2000. The wage is computed as the ratio of Wage Bill to Employment.
The growth rate is computed as ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001) − ln((f emale − maleratio) + 0.001)t−1 . ln(K/V A)init is the log of total assets to value added in 1991. ln(V A)init is value added
in 1991. ShareR&Dinit is the share of R&D spending in total income. F oreigninit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the firm was more than 10 percent owned by foreign-owned
investors in 1991 and zero otherwise. *** , **, *, denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels.




                                                                                      48
