NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTIONS IN CHINA
Monica Martinez-Bravo
Gerard Padró i Miquel
Nancy Qian
Yang Yao
Working Paper 18101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Oriana Bandiera, Abhijit Banerjee, Ruixue Jia, Peter Lorentzen,
Doug Miller, Scott Rozelle, Lily Tsai, Chris Udry and Noam Yuchtman for their insights; Pedro Dal
Bo and Oeindrilla Dube for their thoughtful discussions; workshop participants at University of California
at Berkeley, University of British Columbia, California Institute of Technology, University of Chicago
Booth GSB, Stockholm University (IIES), Harvard University, Columbia University, Cornell University,
Harvard University China PoliticsWorkshop, New York University, Northwestern University Kellogg
SOM, Princeton University, University of Southern California, University of Toronto, Warwick University,
Fudan University, SUFE, the TIGER conference at Toulouse University, the NBER SI Workshops
for Political Economy and Public Economics and Political Economy and the World Bank for their
helpful comments. We thank Yunnan Guo, Ting Han, Samuel Marden, Emily Nix, Yiqing Xu, and
Linyi Zhang for excellent research assistance. We thank the RCRE at the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture
and their team of surveyors and field workers, and in particular, Wu Zhigang for his crucial role in
our field work and data collection. We acknowledge financial support from Brown University PSTC,
Stanford GSB Center for Global Business and the Economy, Harvard Academy Scholars Research
Grant, Yale University EGC Faculty Grant, the National Science Foundation Grant 0922087 and the
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Starting Grant Agreement
no. 283837. An early version of this paper was entitled “The Effects of Democratization on Public
Goods and Redistribution: evidence from China.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Monica Martinez-Bravo, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Elections in China
Monica Martinez-Bravo, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 18101
May 2012, Revised December 2014
JEL No. H11,O38,P16
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of introducing village elections on public goods expenditures, income distribution
and land use in rural China. We construct a large panel data set of village administrative records to
document the history of political reforms and economic policies for over two hundred villages. We
exploit the staggered timing of the introduction of village elections to find that elections significantly
increased public goods expenditure financed by villagers. In addition, we find that the introduction
of elections caused a moderate decline in income inequality and likely reduced corruption. The results
suggest that local officials are better controlled by local elections rather than by centrally managed
bureaucratic monitoring.
Monica Martinez-Bravo
CEMFI
Casado del Alisal, 5
28014 Madrid, Spain
mmb@cemfi.es
Gerard Padró i Miquel
STICERD
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
g.padro@lse.ac.uk

Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu
Yang Yao
China Center for Economic Research
Peking University
Peking, China
yyao@ccer.pku.edu.cn

1

Introduction

The control of large bureaucracies, as the extensive literature on bureaucratic corruption shows, is
a difficult task.1 The lack of information and appropriate oversight often results in the misbehavior
of local officials.2 In autocratic countries, the control of local officials is further complicated by
the weakness of established channels to receive feedback from citizens.3 To address this agency
problem, several autocratic governments have introduced local elections in recent years.4 To date,
there is little systematic evidence on whether these reforms succeed in making local officials fulfill
their duties.
China is the largest autocracy to try this institutional innovation. During the 1980s and 1990s
village-level elections were introduced to a rural population that numbers almost one billion, which
had never had any experience with elections before. In order to keep political control, the institutional changes implemented were limited. Historically, the village government was comprised
of two bodies that were appointed by the Communist Party: the Communist Party Branch and the
Village Committee. The reform put the Village Committee up for election and left the Party Branch
unchanged. The goal of this paper is to provide rigorous empirical analysis of the policy consequences of this reform and, in the process, shed light on the effectiveness of elections in changing
incentives for local officials in an otherwise autocratic context.
One of the most important responsibilities of village officials in rural China is the provision of
local public goods such as schooling, irrigation or village roads. The limitations of bureaucratic
monitoring meant that, before elections, there was widespread shirking among local officials. In
principle, elections can resolve this agency problem by giving local officials incentives to implement
1A

classic example in this literature is Wilson (1989).
recent overviews of this literature, see Banerjee et al. (2012) and Olken and Pande (2012).
3 Autocracies typically limit the rights to associate, freedom of expression and freedom of the press, which in democratic countries are important for the transmission of information on local scandals and demands. For instance, Besley
and Burgess (2002) show that a free press is important for government responsiveness.
4 For example, local elections have occurred in Indonesia under Suharto (1968-1998), Brazil during the military dictatorship (1964-1985), and Mexico under the PRI (1929-2000). Recently, local elections were also introduced in Vietnam
in 1998, in Yemen in 2001, and in Saudi Arabia in 2005. For a literature review of the nascent political science research
on elections in dictatorships see Gandhi and Lust-Okar (2009) and Malesky and Schuler (2013) for an examination of the
Vietnam case.
2 For

1

policies that appeal to a majority in the constituency in order to obtain re-election.5 Village-level
expenditures on public goods are therefore our main focus in evaluating the effectiveness of the
introduction of elections.
Our study faces two notable difficulties. The first is the lack of detailed data on political and
economic policies in rural China. For our main analysis, we construct the Village Democracy Survey
(VDS), a panel of over two hundred nearly representative villages from 29 provinces for the years
1982-2005. The survey documents the history of economic and governance policies, and contains
detailed economic data on public goods expenditure and the sources of funds. This is the longest and
broadest panel ever constructed to describe Chinese villages and is the first data to systematically
document the changes in the fiscal and political structure of village governments. In additional
exercises, we supplement the VDS with economic data from the the National Fixed-Point Survey
(NFS), which is collected yearly from the same villages as the VDS by the Ministry of Agriculture.
The second difficulty lies in establishing the causal effect of the introduction of elections, which
were staggered in timing across villages. One concern is reverse causality as economic conditions
might affect the demand for elections. Another concern is joint determination, since both elections
and economic change could be the consequences of broader reforms of rural policies. To address
these concerns we take advantage of two features of the Chinese context. First, according to the
descriptive literature, the timing of the introduction of elections was mostly unrelated to village
characteristics. Second, electoral reforms were isolated to the village-level and were not accompanied by changes in institutions or policies for upper-levels of government; nor did the reforms affect
the de jure powers of the village leaders. In the paper, we provide a large body of anecdotal and
quantitative evidence to support these two points.
The main empirical analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we document that the timing of
elections across villages within provinces is uncorrelated with a large number of observable characteristics at the village level, such as baseline public goods expenditure. This is consistent with
the anecdotal evidence which suggests that the timing of reforms was imposed top-down with little
5 The

theoretical basis for this claim comes from the rich literature on political accountability. In broad terms, this
literature examines how elections induce politicians to provide more common interest policies such as more public goods.
See the discussion in Persson and Tabellini, (2000, chapter 1).

2

regard for village-specific characteristics. Second, we implement a difference-in-differences (DD)
strategy to estimate the causal effects of the introduction of elections: we compare outcomes before
and after the first election in each village, between villages that had already introduced elections
and those that have not. The baseline specification includes village fixed effects that control for all
time-invariant differences across villages, year fixed effects that control for all changes over time
that are similar across villages, as well as province-specific time trends to control for the economic
and cultural divergence across China during our period of study. These trends improve the precision
of our estimates, but do not affect the coefficients.
As with any DD strategy, causal interpretation relies on the assumption that in the absence
of electoral reforms, the evolution of outcomes would be “parallel” across villages regardless of
when they implemented the first election. We support our assumption by documenting average
public goods expenditure before and after the first election and showing that there is very little
expenditure in any village prior to the introduction of elections, and therefore no pre-trend. At
the same time, the introduction of elections is accompanied by a dramatic rise in the level and
frequency of expenditures. We also show that our estimates are robust to controlling for pre-election
characteristics, the province-level decision to introduce village elections, which is the main source
of endogeneity, and a large number of other variables.
Our results show that the introduction of elections increased total local government expenditure
on public goods by approximately 50%. The large percentage increase is consistent with the fact
that prior to the reforms, local public goods provision and expenditures were extremely low.6 The
per household increase in expenditure was 1.8% of the median household income. Because of
the infrequent and lumpy nature of public goods expenditure, it is also interesting to examine the
frequency of public goods investment. We find that elections increase the frequency of positive
expenditures by six percentage-points, which is over one-third of the sample mean. This suggests
that the newly introduced electoral accountability pushed officials to exert effort in providing public
goods, which had been neglected under the appointment regime.
To better understand how the increase in public goods expenditures was reached, we investigate
6 This

is noted in previous studies (Luo et al., 2007, 2010) and can be observed in our data. See Section 4.2.

3

the source of funds used to pay for village public goods and the amount of fees paid by households
to the local government. We find that the increase in public goods expenditure is entirely financed
by villagers, and that the introduction of elections increased the amount of local fees paid by all
households as a percentage of income by 0.3 to 0.5 percentage-points (the sample mean is approximately two percentage-points). These results again suggest that elections made local government
more accountable to villagers, which increased the willingness of citizens to supply it with funds
(e.g., Fujiwara, 2011).7 Importantly, they contradict the traditional notion that elected governments
are less able to provide public goods because of short-term consumption demands of citizens.8
The natural interpretation of our results is that elections made local governments more accountable towards villagers. The key concern with this interpretation is that there might have been other
changes happening at the same time as the introduction of elections that would increase public
goods expenditures. We address this concern in several ways. First, we use the VDS to document
that elected village leaders had the power to make public goods investments and that this power
was not undermined when elections were introduced. Second, we show that the introduction of
elections had no effect on public goods expenditures financed by upper levels of government. Since
transfers are the most direct method for the upper government to increase local public goods, this
result strongly suggests that the introduction of elections was not confounded with other policies
that changed the priorities of upper-level government. Third, we examine the effect of the reform
on the characteristics of the newly elected officials versus those in positions that continue to be appointed. We find that the introduction of elections caused newly elected leaders to be younger and
more educated, but had no effect on the Communist Party Branch Party Secretary, who continued
to be appointed. All this supports the descriptive literature which documents that the introduction
of elections was not accompanied by any other changes in the Communist Party or rural policies.
Finally, as we discussed earlier, we subject these results to a large number of robustness checks.
According to the literature on political accountability, elections generate outcomes aligned with
electorate preferences through two mechanisms: the presence of re-election incentives which lead
7 For evidence that expanded democracy can increase public goods in the Brazilian context, see Fujiwara (2011),
which finds that an expansion of the enfranchisement increases public goods provision.
8 For example, see the classic work of Huntington (1968) for a discussion of why democracy hinders the government’s
ability to raise taxes.

4

politicians to exert more effort, and the selection of better politicians (e.g., Besley and Case, 1995;
Dal-Bó and Rossi, 2011; Ferraz and Finan, 2011).9 We find evidence to suggest that both mechanisms contributed to the effects of the introduction of rural elections in China.
In addition to our main results on public goods, we also examine land use and household income
distribution. We find that the introduction of elections reduces the amount of land leased to enterprises and redistributes it back to households. Since the practice of leasing land to enterprises has
been linked to rent-seeking by local officials, this finding suggests that elections also helped curb
corruption. We also find that elections caused a moderate reduction in village income inequality by
reducing the incomes of the richest households, which is consistent with a systematic reduction in
pro-elite policies. Our data suggest that this change was achieved through a redistribution of productive assets such as land and employment at village enterprises, which is probably a consequence
of the fact that village governments do not have the power to impose recurrent taxes and transfers.
In sum, our results suggest that local elections in rural China have helped align village-level
policies with the interests of the majority by making local officials partially accountable to villagers.
This delegation of monitoring from centralized bureaucratic structures to citizens seems to constrain
local officials, even in a high state capacity autocratic context.
This study makes several contributions. First, it is closely related to the growing number of
recent within-country studies that have focused on changes in various aspects of elections in poor
or middle income economies such as Argentina, Brazil and India (Beaman et al., 2009; Dal-Bó and
Rossi, 2011; Ferraz and Finan, 2011; Fujiwara, 2011).10 We differ from these studies in examining
a much starker institutional change: from no elections to elections. In addition, we do this in the
context of an autocracy, where the credibility of the reforms is necessarily limited by the need of
the regime to keep control.
Second, since elections are an essential element of democracy, our results also speak to the
9 For

example, Besley and Case (1995), Dal-Bó and Rossi (2011) and Ferraz and Finan (2011) provide evidence for
the role of re-election incentives in the United States, Argentina and Brazil.
10 Also, see Tyrefors and Pettersson-Lidbom (2014) for historical evidence from Sweden. These studies do not identify
the effects of introducing elections per se. An older working paper by Foster and Rosenzweig (2005) examines the effect
of the introduction of rural elections on public goods provision in India, but focuses on party competition mechanisms.
There is also a related literature examining the differences between elected and appointed officials (e.g., Besley and Coate,
2003; Lim, 2013; Martinez-Bravo, 2014).

5

broader literature on democracy and economic policy.11 The existing empirical evidence relating
democratic transition to public goods and redistribution, which mostly comes from cross-country
studies, is inconclusive (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2013; Besley and Kudamatsu, 2006; Kudamatsu,
2012; Tavares and Wacziarg, 2001).12 Relative to cross-country comparisons, Chinese villages are
much more comparable with each other and the introduction of elections was not the result of social
turmoil and other confounding factors. Our focus on elections complements recent studies that
emphasize the importance of constraints on the executive in determining the effect of democracy on
economic outcomes (e.g. Besley and Persson, 2011).13
Finally, our study adds to a small number of studies on the effects of village-level elections in
rural China (e.g., Luo et al., 2010; Shen and Yao, 2008; Zhang et al., 2004). These earlier works
inspired our study as they link village elections with changes in economic outcomes. However,
the fact that they only had data for a few non-representative provinces meant that they could not
estimate the average effect for China or adequately control for omitted variables.14 Our expanded
data significantly improves the rigor of the evidence by covering a nearly representative sample of
villages for a long time horizon. In addition, we examine a much larger set of new outcomes (e.g.,
land allocation, local fees, household income sources and leader characteristics), which enables us
to shed light on the mechanisms underlying the effect of elections and consider the generalizable
insights from the Chinese experience.
11 For

instance see Acemoglu and Robinson (2001, 2006), Boix (2003), Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2003), Lizzeri and
Persico (2004), Besley and Kudamatsu (2008) who all relate democratization or extensions of the franchise to either increased public goods provision or redistribution. Husted and Kenny (1997) and Miller (2008) provide empirical evidence
for increased welfare spending in the context of franchise extension in the United States.
12 In the cross-section, democracy has been found to be positively associated with government size (Tavares and
Wacziarg, 2001), higher wages (Rodrik, 1999), lower inequality and higher human capital (e.g, Tavares and Wacziarg,
2001), and better health indicators (Besley and Kudamatsu, 2006; Kudamatsu, 2012). However, in a large study looking
at several socioeconomic policy dimensions, Gil et al. (2004) finds that democracy is associated with no difference in
the outcomes they examine. Using dynamic methods, Acemoglu et al. (2014) finds effects of democracy on subsequent
growth, but the effect on inequality is more nuanced in Acemoglu et al. (2013).
13 Democracy is typically viewed as being comprised of two elements: the presence of elections to determine who will
be the executive authority and the presence of institutionalized constraints, such as an independent judiciary or media,
on what the executive authority can do. In the Chinese context, such constraints are absent both before and after the
introduction of electoral reforms. Therefore our paper isolates the effect of elections.
14 For example, Shen and Yao (2008) examines the effect of elections on inequality using a panel of 48 villages in eight
provinces. Several studies have related elections to public goods. For example, Zhang et al. (2004) examines a panel of
sixty villages in one province; and Luo et al. (2010) examine over 2,000 villages in six provinces. Also, Gan et al. (2014)
uses the same sample as Shen and Yao (2008) to examine the relationship between elections and villager health shocks.

6

Our finding that village leaders appointed by the Communist Party are less effective in providing public goods than those elected by villagers is consistent with Jia (2014), which finds that
connectedness between province-level and central government politicians (i.e., within the Party) is
associated with less effective pollution reduction. The cumulative evidence from studies of local
elections complement recent works by Jia and Nie (2013) and Lorentzen (2013) in understanding why local outcomes typical to democracies are often tolerated or encouraged by the autocratic
Chinese government.15
The extensive data collected in the VDS and the NFS variables used in our study, which will be
made public, will be helpful for future research on the political economy and development of China,
as the ICRISAT and REDS data have facilitated research of the Indian economy, and the Penn World
Tables have facilitated cross-country studies.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the background. Section 3 presents
the conceptual framework and empirical strategy. Section 4 briefly describes the data. Section 5
presents the main results on public goods. Section 6 presents additional results on land use and
income. Section 7 concludes.

2
2.1

Background
Villages and Village Governance in Rural China

A majority of the rural population in China lives in villages, which are the lowest level of government administration. Above the village government, there are the semi-equivalent levels of county
and township governments, the prefecture governments, the province governments, and ultimately,
the central government in Beijing. The main economic activity in villages is agriculture. The average village comprises approximately 400 households.
Village governments were first organized by the communist government during the early 1950s,
with two groups of leaders in each village. First, there is the village committee. It typically consists
of three to five members and is led by the village chairman, henceforth VC. Second, there is the
15 Jia and Nie (2013) studies the effect of political decentralization on coal mining accidents, and Lorentzen (2013)
studies the role of local protests.

7

Chinese Communist Party branch in the village. It is similar in size to the village committee and
is led by the village Party Secretary, henceforth PS. Before elections were introduced, all of these
positions were filled by appointment by the county government with input from the village Party
branch.
One of the most important policies under the discretion of the village government is the provision of local public goods, such as irrigation, local roads and primary schools. Village leaders are
supposed to decide which public goods to provide and to raise funds from villagers to finance them.
Village governments do not have legal authority to impose any regular or recurring taxes. Instead,
to fund the activities of the village government, including public goods, they can raise revenues by
imposing ad hoc fees and levies, which we will henceforth refer to as local fees or local taxes for
simplicity.16
The geographic size and social and economic diversity of China means that upper-level bureaucrats encounter enormous difficulties monitoring the activities of local officials. As a consequence
of this informational asymmetry, local officials who shirked in providing public goods were typically able to maintain their positions.17 In response, villagers often resisted paying local fees, which
in turn starved local governments of funds and limited their ability to provide public goods (e.g., Oi
and Rozelle, 2000; Rozelle, 1994; Whiting, 1996). This negative feedback loop further complicated
the monitoring problem of the upper-level bureaucrats since they could not distinguish whether low
levels of public good provision were an outcome of corruption, lack of effort by the local officials,
the refusal of villagers to provide the necessary funds, or lack of demand from villagers.

2.2

Electoral Reforms

Motivation The first local elections were introduced in the early 1980s as collectives were being
dismantled. The difficulties in controlling local officials were paramount in the discussions leading
to the introduction of elections, as shown by this quote from the official debate.
16 Additional responsibilities of the village government are land allocation, the management of village enterprises, the
maintenance of law and order, the collection of grain taxes on behalf of the central government and the implementation
of centrally mandated policies. For more discussion see Section 6.
17 There is an abundance of examples of corrupt village officials who neglected public good provision (e.g. Brandt and
Turner, 2007, Kennedy et al., 2004, Oi and Rozelle, 2000, Rozelle, 1994; and Rozelle and Li, 1998).

8

“Who supervises rural cadres? Can we supervise them? No, not even if we had 48
hours a day....” – Peng Zhen, vice-chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, said at
the chairmanship meeting of the Standing Committee of the Sixth NPC, April 6, 1987
(O’Brien and Li, 1999).
Election proponents argued that village elections could fix the agency problems that were plaguing local administration and generating discontent towards the regime at large. More specifically,
elections were expected to reduce the need for the central government to monitor local officials by
shifting monitoring responsibilities onto villagers. The idea was that making local officials accountable to villagers would impose checks on the VC’s behavior and would also allow villagers to select
the most competent candidates.18
The Reform The initial introduction of elections changed the positions of all village committee
members from being appointed by the party-led county-level government to being elected by villagers. The main legal requirements were that: i) the number of candidates must exceed the number
of positions; ii) term lengths were to be three years; and iii) the winner must obtain 50% of votes
in the last round of voting.19 The village committee member who obtained the highest number of
votes in the last round automatically became the VC. All adult villagers had the right to vote and
could abstain from voting. The village Party Branch was unaffected by the reforms and remained
appointed by the upper-levels of government. There was no change either to the size of the village
committee or party branch (e.g., the number of positions).
The law did not clarify the power relationship between the village committee and the Party
Branch, which remained ambiguous.20 Anecdotal evidence suggests that the power arrangements
between these two bodies were very heterogeneous across villages. Indeed, in many areas the Party
maintained control over villages by allowing the local Party branch to nominate the candidates.
For this reason, we refer to village leaders, which comprise both bodies, as the subject of village
decision-making. Rather than wholesale democratization, this reform is better understood as a
18 See

Kelliher (1997), O’Brien (1994) and O’Brien and Li (1999) for descriptions of the policy debates that led to the
official introduction of local elections.
19 Elections with multiple candidates could thus undergo many rounds of voting.
20 As Kelliher (1997) discusses, according to the law, the village committee operates under the leadership (lingdao) of
the Party.

9

marginal change intended to make the local government more accountable to villagers. Ultimately,
the main change of the reform was to give villagers the power to vote unsatisfactory VCs out of
office.
In these elections, there are no political parties and no slates of candidates with common platforms. Candidates are drawn from the village and are thus typically well-known by the villagers.
As a consequence, candidates typically run on well-understood issues and are probably selected for
qualities that have been long observed by their fellow villagers.21
Elections typically occurred during the lunar Spring Festival, which usually takes place between
mid-January and mid-February each year.
Timing Innovative provincial governments began experimenting with elections in the early 1980s.
Elections were formally codified by the central government in the Organizational Law on Village
Committees (OLVC) in 1987. From this point onwards, all provinces were pushed to introduce
elections in all rural areas. A revision of the OLVC in 1998 required candidate nominations to be
open to all villagers.
The decision to introduce elections at the province-level was the result of political pressure and
bargaining between the central government and the provincial leaders. However, implementation
within provinces was mainly imposed top-down by bureaucratic fiat. Each level of government
would pilot the reform in a few select villages, and the reform would be widely implemented once
the procedures and logistics were tested (O’Brien and Li, 1999).
To understand the process and details of the reform, we conducted a large number of interviews with county- and province-level officials and conducted focus groups with village officials
and prominent citizens in over a dozen villages in four provinces during the summers of 2006 and
2007. All evidence points to the roll-out as having been mostly orthogonal to village characteristics. This is consistent with the speed of roll-out within provinces. By all accounts, villages had
no discretion over the timing of introduction of elections, which is characteristic of reforms in rural
China.22
21 There are very few accounts of actual electoral campaigning. In many cases, elections were set up with only a few
days’ notice (Unger, 2002: p. 221).
22 In his detailed study of elections, Unger (2002, p. 222) writes that “These [elections] should not be interpreted

10

The anecdotal evidence collected by us as well as that from qualitative studies only point to two
exceptions to the “quasi-random” timing of the within-province introduction of village elections.
First, the pilot villages used to test electoral procedures were obviously selected to introduce elections earlier. Second, there are a few accounts of elections being delayed in “problematic” villages
that had a history of non-compliance with unpopular central government policies (e.g., One Child
Policy or the permanent expropriation of village land by the upper-levels of government) or had
a large kinship clan that could dominate other villagers in a majoritarian regime.23 To examine
the quantitative importance of these factors for determining the timing of elections, we collected
data on the allowance of One Child Policy exemptions and the incidence of upper-government land
expropriations in the VDS. Later, we will examine the correlation between these variables and the
introduction of elections. Afterwards, in the robustness section, we control for them explicitly to
check that they do not confound our main results. Finally, we also check that our estimates are not
driven by pilot or straggler villages in each province.

3
3.1

Conceptual Framework
Accountability

The anecdotal evidence described above suggests that prior to the introduction of elections, local officials could benefit from asymmetric information by shirking in their efforts to provide and maintain
public goods. Elections were introduced in order to mitigate these agency frictions. Hence, if the
reforms were effective in making local officials at least partly accountable to villagers, we would expect the introduction of elections to increase public goods expenditure by the village government.24
Due to this increase in accountability, villagers should also be willing to contribute more funds to
as bottom-up initiatives by the villagers themselves; they are not in a position to play any precedent-setting part in
the initiation of new electoral reforms. There is a mistaken belief among some people outside China regarding this...
elections are quietly being instituted at levels above the village, engineered first in selected districts at a distance from
Beijing, through the connivance of the [central] Ministry of Civil Affairs and middle-ranking officials out in the regions”.
Unger (2002) also notes the general passivity of villages in implementing rural reforms such as land reforms and the
adoption of the Household Responsibility Reform earlier in the reform era.
23 The role of kinship groups in elections has also been discussed by Han and O’Brien (2009) and Oi and Rozelle
(2000).
24 The theoretical basis for this claim is the political agency literature in which voters express dissatisfaction with
observed outcomes by ousting incumbents in elections. Please see a brief discussion in Section 5.6.4.

11

the government, further improving the provision of public goods. The purpose of the rest of this
paper is to investigate the effect of the introduction of elections on public goods expenditure and the
mechanisms driving this effect.

3.2

Empirical Strategy

The empirical strategy used in our main analysis assumes that the introduction of elections was
quasi-random once province-specific time trends and village and year fixed effects are included.
Specifically, we use a differences-in-differences (DD) strategy, where we compare the evolution of
outcomes in villages that have had their first election to villages that have not yet implemented their
first election. Our baseline estimates control for village and year fixed effects. Village fixed effects
control for all time-invariant or slow-moving differences between villages, such as geographic characteristics (e.g., hilliness or distance from a city) or culture. Year fixed effects control for changes
over time that affect all villages similarly (e.g., national policy changes, macroeconomic growth).
In addition, we add province-time trends, which control for the widening differences across regions
brought about by unequal economic growth during the long time horizon of our study. Since we believe that the timing of elections is endogenously determined at the province level, but quasi-random
within provinces, these trends have the additional advantage of capturing a significant amount of the
cross-province variation.25 The baseline specification also controls for the second wave of reforms
that opened the nomination of candidates to villagers. This allows us to control for potential heterogeneity in the effect of elections.26 The baseline equation that characterizes the effect of elections
is
Yvpt = β E vpt + λ Ovpt + γ pt + δv + ρt + εvpt ,

(1)

where the policy outcome of village v in province p during calendar year t, Yvpt , is a function of:
a dummy variable, E vpt , that takes the value of one after the first election in village v has taken
25 In the robustness section, we show that the magnitude of our estimates is similar, though less precisely estimated,
when we control for province-year fixed effects. We also provide several other checks to make sure that province-level
decisions do not drive our estimates.
26 This improves the precision of our estimates, but does not affect the magnitude of estimated effects of the introduction
of elections. For brevity, we only report results where we control for the introduction of open nominations. Results
without these controls are very similar and are available upon request. Note that we do not control for other procedural
differences in elections because they are more likely to be endogenous.

12

place; a dummy variable, Ovpt , that takes the value of one after the first open nomination in village v
has taken place; province-year trends, γ pt; village fixed effects, δv ; and calendar-year fixed effects,
ρt . Since the timing of elections was largely decided at the province level, we cluster the standard
errors at the province-level. As we only have 29 provinces, we address the possibility of small
sample bias in the clustered standard errors by also presenting p-values derived from wild bootstraps
as recommended by Cameron et al. (2008).27 The main coefficient of interest is β . Following the
discussion in Section 3.1, we expect β to be positive if elections increased public goods expenditure.
Interpreting β as the causal effect of introducing elections does not require us to assume that
election timing within provinces was random. Instead, it requires the weaker assumption that conditional on the baseline controls, the introduction of elections is not correlated with time-varying
village characteristics that affect the outcomes of interest through channels other than elections. We
do not take this identification assumption as given and provide a large body of evidence supporting
its validity later in the paper. Before we present the main results, we present evidence that the timing
of elections within provinces was uncorrelated with a large number of village-level characteristics.
We will also use the data on public goods expenditure to document that there are no pre-trends
leading up to the first election, and that the rise in expenditure accompanies the introduction of
elections. After we present the main results, we conduct a large number of additional robustness
and sensitivity checks. In particular, we show that our estimates are similar when we control for
the timing of the first introduction of village elections in each province, which is the main source of
potential endogeneity.

4

Data

4.1

The VDS and NFS Surveys

The primary data used in this paper for elections and public goods expenditure are from the Village
Democracy Survey (VDS), a village-level survey conducted by the authors of this paper, where we
record the administrative data kept by village governments. The first wave, conducted in 2006,
records the history of electoral reforms, de facto leader power, public goods expenditures, the
27 The

bootstraps are estimated using 999 repetitions.

13

sources of funds for public goods expenditures, and the enforcement of central government policies. For public goods, the accounting methods, the categories for expenditure, and the sources of
financing are all determined by the Ministry of Agriculture. The second wave, conducted in 2011,
records the names and characteristics of all village leaders since 1982. To ensure accuracy of the
historical data, the retrospective VDS relies on administrative records for each village when possible. When village records are not available, we rely on the recall of survey respondents, which
include all current and former living village leaders and elders (e.g., teachers) in each village. This
applies to very few of our variables and we will note them when relevant. The VDS forms a balanced panel of 217 villages for the years 1982-2005. However, villages only begin to record public
goods data in 1986. Hence, our panel effectively covers the period 1986-2005. The main sample
used in our analysis comprises a balanced panel of 217 villages from 29 provinces.28
The villages we survey are the same villages surveyed by the National Fixed-Point Survey
(NFS), a detailed village- and household-level economic survey collected and maintained by a research center of the Ministry of Agriculture of China. It is collected each year beginning in 1986,
with the exception of 1992 and 1994 due to administrative issues.29 In the examination of mechanisms, robustness checks and the additional exercises in Section 6, we also use data from the NFS.
We will describe these data as they become relevant.
Our data have several advantages. First, to the best of our knowledge, the VDS data are the
most comprehensive data on village-level reforms ever constructed. They cover a period starting in
1982, when modern villages were defined after the Household Responsibility Reforms. In addition
to recording the history of electoral reforms, we also record the timing of other major rural reforms,
the occurrence of village mergers, and numerous other village-level characteristics. This allows
us to control for heterogeneity across villages more comprehensively than past studies, which is
28 There

are 31 provinces in China at the end of our sample period. The two excluded provinces are Tibet and
Chongqing. Tibet is excluded because it is subject to different political and economic policies. Chongqing is a citymunicipality that is excluded because it did not achieve provincial status until 1997. The three other city-municipalities
with provincial status (Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin) are included in our data. Each contain a substantial rural population
(30% or higher). We will control for whether a village is a suburb of a city later in the section on robustness and show
that our results are not influenced by their inclusion.
29 The NFS villages were chosen in 1986 to be nationally representative for rural China. Within each village, approximately 25% of households were randomly selected in 1986 and followed over time; new households were introduced over
time to maintain representativeness. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, there is very little attrition and households
and villages are mainly added to adjust for gradual demographic changes.

14

particularly important given the natural diversity across China. The richness of the data also allows
us to provide a detailed analysis of the effect of elections on a range of outcomes and to assess the
mechanisms driving the main results.
Second, the village administrative records that we surveyed in the VDS were collected contemporaneously. Hence, we avoid recall bias. Third, since the format of village records were mandated
by the Ministry of Agriculture, the data are easily comparable across villages. Finally, the panel
structure of the survey allows us to control for village fixed effects and province-year trends.
The main drawback of our data is that relative to the period through which elections were rolled
out, the panel is short. This limits our ability to observe the long run effects of elections.
All observations in the empirical analysis are at the village-year level. We will describe the
variables as they become relevant.

4.2

Descriptive Statistics

4.2.1

The Timing of Elections

Several pieces of descriptive evidence are consistent with the anecdotal evidence on the timing
of electoral reforms discussed in Section 2. First, the data show that there is substantial withinprovince variation in the timing of the first election in each village. In a village-level cross-sectional
regression, when we regress the year of the first election on province fixed effects we find that the
R-squared is 0.33. Thus, approximately 67% of the variation in the timing of elections is within
province. This is important for our empirical strategy, which largely relies on this variation.
Second, the timing of the rollout is consistent with rapid top-down implementation within
provinces and counties. Our data indicate that 16% of villages held their first elections prior to
the official introduction of elections by the county government, 66% held their first elections the
year that the county introduced elections, and 18% held their first election afterwards.30 Table 1
shows that the average village implemented its first election within the same year as the official in30 Note that the timing of the official introduction of elections in each county is based on respondent recall.

To maximize
accuracy, our surveyors only record a date if all respondents surveyed in a given village agree. If there is no consensus,
this variable is recorded as missing. Since provinces are large and respondents could not confidently recall the year of the
first election within a province, the date of province-level introduction is inferred as the year of the first election in each
province according to our survey.

15

troduction of elections in its county and five years after the first election in the same province. Since
the 29 provinces of our sample include approximately 2,885 counties and 623,669 rural villages (as
defined by the number of village governments, cunming weiyuanhui), these statistics imply that the
average county was able to introduce elections in 143 villages within one year.
Third, the fact that a small number of villages implemented elections before and after the official introduction in each county is consistent with the anecdotal evidence that each administrative
division typically piloted the reform before officially introducing it and also delayed elections in
a few villages. Hence, given our identification assumption, it is important to check that our baseline estimates are not driven by the early movers or the stragglers, which we do in our robustness
exercises.
In addition, we can provide direct evidence that the timing of the first election is uncorrelated
to most pre-reform village characteristics. Since we are interested in within-province variation, we
demean the year of the first election and village characteristics by province fixed effects. We then
estimate bivariate regressions of the residualized election timing on each of a large number of residualized village characteristics such as village size, proximity to an urban area, proxies for social and
economic structure, measures of the pre-existing level of public goods provision and other outcomes
of interest. We measure all these village characteristics in the first year that data are available.31 The
sample for this estimation is therefore a cross section of villages. For brevity, we present the results
for village demographic and physical characteristics, the main outcome variables of our regression
analysis, and the unpopular upper-government policies that we discussed in Section 2.32 Since it
is difficult to compare magnitudes across different regressors, Table 2 presents the standardized
coefficients for each regression. Only one of the correlates is statistically significant. Given the
large number of correlates that we examine (we examine over eighty additional insignificant socioeconomic correlates that are not presented in the paper for brevity), the significance of one correlate
31 Most

variables reported by the NFS are available starting in 1986. Land variables are available starting in 1987.
Measures of the One Child Policy and upper-government land expropriation from the VDS are available starting in 1982.
The results are similar if we measure the latter two variables in 1986. The results are also similar if we measure all
variables as the average of the first two years for which they are available. These alternative results are available upon
request.
32 See the Online Data Appendix for a description of the variables: upper-government land expropriation and One
Child Policy exemptions, which we collect in the VDS.

16

is not necessarily meaningful. Nevertheless, in the robustness exercises later in the paper, we will
control for this and other potentially confounding variables.
The data also provide several pieces of descriptive evidence to suggest that elections were effectively implemented. We find that 79% of elections had more candidates than positions, as the law
required. Most of the elections with too few candidates were the first elections in their villages, and
were all immediately followed by fresh elections in the subsequent year. This is consistent with the
view that opponents to the electoral reform were unable to fully derail the introduction of elections,
and with qualitative accounts of dissatisfied villagers demanding and obtaining recalls (O’Brien and
Li, 2006). Table 1 shows that, as legally required, elections occur every three years on average.33
Finally, and not reported in the table, we find that there was a 38% VC turnover rate for the first
election, which is more than twice as high as the average turnover rate in the sample (17%).
4.2.2

Trends in Public Goods Expenditures

Before presenting the regression results, we examine the raw data on public goods expenditures and
provide evidence for the parallel trends assumption. Villages record public goods expenditures as
the sum of expenditures on seven categories that are defined by the Ministry of Agriculture: irrigation, primary schools, sanitation, within-village roads, electricity, the environment (e.g., planting
trees), and “other”.34
Our DD strategy assumes that in the absence of elections, the outcomes of villages that introduced elections earlier would have evolved along parallel trends with the outcomes of villages that
introduced elections later. Since it is impossible to observe the counterfactual trend, we follow the
literature in conducting a pre-trend analysis. The presence of a trend in the years leading up to the
introduction of elections would suggest that late reformers evolved on different trends from early
reformers and cast doubt on our identification strategy.
Our data allow us to separately examine expenditures according to the source of funds, which we
categorize into funds from village sources and from outside the village (mostly upper government
33 Note that there is variation in this variable (the standard deviation is approximately one year), which mitigates the
concern that village records report elections as they are supposed to occur rather than when they actually occur.
34 In addition to public goods expenditures, village government expenditures also cover other items such as salaries of
local cadres and expenditure on festivals and celebrations. In our data, public goods expenditures account for approximately 27% of total village government expenditures.

17

transfers). Since according to our discussion in Section 3.1, an increase in accountability should
only affect the amount of expenditures financed by villagers, we focus on this outcome first.
To investigate the presence of pre-trends we would like to plot average expenditure in public
goods for each year before and after the first election. However, if we use the full sample of villages,
the patterns observed could suffer from a potential confounding factor: each year average comprises
a different set of villages. This is because elections were staggered in timing across villages. While
this is an advantage for our identification strategy in that it allows us to control for calendar time
effects, it also means that when we reorganize the data according to the number of years since the
first election, the interpretation of the figure may be confounded with composition effects.
To address this, we restrict the sample to keep a constant set of villages. We do this for several
different windows since the villages in the sample change as we adjust the window. For brevity,
we present the figures for two windows for which we can observe a symmetric number of years
before and after the first election. Figure 1a plots average expenditures from two years before the
first election until two years after the first election (since elections have three year terms, this is
the end of the first term after the introduction of elections). Year 0 on the x-axis indicates the year
of the first election.35 Figure 1a shows that on average, villages make large investments one year
after the reform. Figure 1b extends the window to begin nine years prior to the first election until
nine years after the first election. This reduces the number of villages in the sample. However,
the pattern is similar to the pattern from the full sample. There is very little activity prior to the
introduction of elections and public goods expenditures increase beginning one year after the first
election. Expenditures are not made every year, and in between large expenditures, there are smaller
expenditures. The latter is consistent with the fact that several of the public goods in our data will
require large fixed costs to construct (e.g., irrigation, roads), and smaller expenditures in between
for maintenance.
Three facts emerge clearly from these figures. First, there was very little activity in public goods
expenditures prior to the introduction of elections and the pre-reform level is close to zero. Second,
the level of expenditure and the amount of activity increased with the introduction of elections.
35 Throughout

the paper, we report real values that are deflated using the official province-specific rural CPI. We use
the conversion rate of 7 RMB = 1 USD, which was the historical average for the period we study.

18

Finally, the lumpy nature of public goods expenditures translates into the noise observed after the
first election.
These figures also illustrate the variation driving our empirical estimates. The main post-reform
estimate from equation (1) is essentially the difference in the average expenditures in the pre-reform
and post-reform periods shown in the figure (after controlling for village and year fixed effects, and
province trends).
Figures 2a and 2b display average public good expenditure financed by the upper government
for the same restricted samples as Figures 1a and 1b. We see no increase after the introduction of
elections. This shows that only expenditures financed by villagers change as a result of elections
and supports the claim that the introduction of elections was not accompanied by other changes in
government policy.

5
5.1

Public Goods
Main Results

Table 3 presents the effect of elections on public expenditures from estimating equation (1). For all
estimates we report standard errors that are clustered at the province level in parentheses and wild
bootstrapped p-values in square brackets immediately below.
Panel A presents the regression estimates where the dependent variable is total public goods
expenditure of the village. Before presenting the baseline equation, we first present estimates where
we control for only village and year fixed effects. Column (1) shows that the coefficient for the
post-first election dummy variable is 18.4. In column (2), we show that the effect on public goods
financed by villagers is similar in magnitude, 16.4. Both estimates are statistically significant at
the 10% level. The bootstrapped p-values indicate slightly less precisely estimated. In column (3),
we find that there is no effect on public goods financed by other sources. The coefficient is small
and statistically insignificant. The top row, which reports the means, shows that, consistent with the
anecdotal literature, village leaders are responsible for raising most of the funds required for village
public goods – approximately 70% of total funding for village public goods comes from village
sources.
19

In Columns (4)-(6), we add province-year trends. The coefficients are similar, but the estimates
for all public goods and public goods financed by villagers are now significant at the 5% level. The
bootstrapped p-values are similarly precise. The increase in precision is likely to be due to the fact
that the province trends control for the significant social-economic divergence across regions during
the period of our study. This is our baseline specification. The estimate for public goods financed
by other sources (column 6) continues to be statistically indistinguishable from zero.
For brevity, and to be conservative, we will refer to the bootstrapped p-values when discussing
statistical significance in the remainder of the paper.
Column (4) in Table 3 shows that the introduction of elections increased total public goods expenditures from all sources by approximately 153,110 RMB (22,044 USD). This is a large increase
relative to the sample mean of 138,100 RMB (21,873 USD), which is rather low due to the negligible expenditures in the early years of the sample. To assess the magnitude another way, we can
compare it to the average increase in total public goods expenditure between the first and last years
of our sample (1986 and 2005). This was 483,499 RMB (69,071 USD). Thus, the introduction of
elections explains 32% of the total increase observed in the data. The result is consistent with our
hypothesis that elections changed the incentives of village leaders and led them to exert more effort
and be more responsive to villagers’ demands for more public goods.
In Panel B, we examine an alternative dependent variable: a dummy variable which equals one
if any public goods expenditure is made in a year. This examination is motivated by Figure 1, which
suggests that the introduction of elections not only increased the level of expenditure, but also the
frequency of expenditure. Public goods expenditure data turns out to be very lumpy. Villages do not
make any public goods investments in most years. The means at the top of Panel B show that only in
about 22% of the village-year observations in our sample public investments are positive. Consistent
with the fact that most investments are funded by villagers, we see that village-financed investments
are made in seventeen percent of the sample, while upper government funded investments are made
in only seven percent of the sample.
We focus our discussion of the results on frequency on the baseline specifications in columns
(4)-(6). Column (4) shows that the introduction of elections increased the probability that any

20

expenditure is made during a year by 5.7 percentage points. The estimate is statistically significant
at the 10% level. Column (5) shows that for expenditures financed by villagers, the introduction of
elections increased the probability by 6.3 percentage points. The estimate is statistically significant
at the 5% level. Column (6) shows that there is no effect on the frequency of expenditures financed
by other sources.
These results show that elections increased both the level and frequency of public goods investments, and that the increase is driven by villager financing. The latter is important for three
reasons. First, it demonstrates that elections affect policy at the village level, since the responsive
funds are under the control of village leaders. Second, it contradicts the notion that “democratically” elected leaders cannot raise revenues for public goods in our context. Third, it contradicts the
alternative interpretation that the estimated effects of the introduction of elections are driven by an
increased willingness of the upper-government to fund local public goods, since direct transfers are
the most immediate policy tool that upper levels of governments would use to affect local public
good provision.

5.2

Alternative Measures

One may wonder whether the increase in total public goods expenditure (funded by villagers) is
driven by an increase in village population, or whether the large magnitude of the increase in total
expenditures is plausible. We investigate these two questions by examining expenditure per household and per worker as dependent variables. The NFS data do not record population. Instead, they
record the number of households and workers. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 4 show that the introduction of elections increased expenditures by 180 RMB (25.7 USD) per household and 110 RMB
(15.7 USD) per worker. Both estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level.
These results show that the increase in total expenditures due to elections was not entirely driven
by population increases. They also show that the magnitude of the increase is very plausible. Median household income in our sample is 10,126 RMB. The estimate in column (2) thus implies
that the increase in public goods expenditures is approximately 1.8% of household median income
(180/10126 = 0.018).

21

Next, we examine the logs of expenditures and per capita (per household and per worker) expenditures. The estimates are positive and statistically significant at the 5% level in columns (4)-(6).
Thus, our main result that the introduction of elections increase public goods expenditures is not
sensitive to the functional form.36

5.3

Interpreting the Magnitude

Note that the estimated levels in column (1) of Table 4 yields a coefficient that is about 170% of
the sample mean, while in column (4), we obtain an effect of 44 log-points, which is equal to
approximately 55%. This is consistent with the size of investments varying widely across villages
(for the 20% of observations that experience positive expenditures, the mean expenditure financed
by villagers is 570,776 RMB and the standard deviation is 2,846,690 RMB). Thus, one may be
concerned that the estimated average effect of elections on the level of investment might be driven
by outlier observations that make particularly large investments.
To investigate this possibility, we omit observations where expenditures are within the top one
percent of the sample. Table 5 shows that this lowers mean expenditure from 94,560 RMB for the
full sample in column (1) to 23,860 RMB for the restricted sample in column (2). Not surprisingly,
the coefficients show that the extent to which elections increases the level of expenditure is also
lower in the restricted sample. The coefficient declines from 16.08 for the full sample to 1.121 for
the restricted sample. Both are statistically significant at the 5% level.
One explanation for the change in the estimates is that the effect of elections is proportional. To
investigate this possibility, we examine log expenditure as the dependent variable. The estimates
in columns (3)-(4) for the full sample and restricted sample are 44 and 40 log-points respectively
(which correspond to an increase of 55% and 49%, respectively).37 These coefficients are very
similar in magnitude and both are statistically significant at the 5% level. The stability of these
36 We

compute the log of total public goods as the log of total public goods + 0.1 in order to retain observations with
zero public good investments. Note that the increase in log total public goods expenditure in column (4) is much larger
in magnitude than the increase in log per household or log per worker expenditures in columns (5) and (6). This is most
likely due to the aging of the baby boom cohort (rural fertility during the 1950s-1970s was very high). Over the period
of our study, this will increase the number of working age adults as well as the number of households in each village (as
children grow up, marry, and move out of their parents’ homes). Note that because of policy restrictions, there is very
little permanent rural migration in rural China.
37 Column (3) in Table 5 replicates Column (4) in Table 4, for ease of comparison.

22

coefficients suggests that the average effect of elections is best captured in proportional terms – i.e.,
elections increase public goods expenditures financed by villagers by approximately 50%.
Another way to normalize the effect of elections is to report standardized coefficients. Columns
(1)-(2) show that the standardized coefficients are also stable across the different samples. They
show that a one standard deviation change in the timing of the first election causes approximately a
0.04 to 0.05 standard deviation change in public goods expenditures.

5.4

Dynamic Effect

In Table 6, we investigate whether the effect of elections persisted after their initial introduction by
estimating the level of public goods expenditures after the first term. Column (1) re-states the full
sample estimates for comparison purposes. Column (2) omits the year of the first election. Column
(3) additionally omits the year afterwards. Column (4) additionally omits two years after the first
election. Since elections terms are three years, column (4) effectively omits the entire first term
after the reform. The precision of the estimates declines as we reduce the sample size. However,
the estimate in column (4) is very similar to the full sample estimate in column (1) and we conclude
that the effects of the reform are not exclusive to the first election term.
In columns (5)-(8), we repeat this exercise for the frequency of investments. As with the estimates on levels, these coefficients are similar across sample restrictions. They are always significant
at the 10% level or higher.

5.5

Robustness

There are three main concerns for our empirical strategy. The first concern is that despite controlling
for province time trends, our baseline results are partly driven by cross-province variation in timing,
which is determined by provincial leaders for potentially endogenous reasons. We address this
issue in three ways. First, to control for the province-level timing of the decision to introduce
village elections, we add a dummy variable that indicates whether any village in a given province
has introduced elections (Table 7 column (2)). The results are similar to the baseline estimates,
which are displayed in column (1) for ease of comparison. Hence, our results are not an outcome

23

of province-level variation in the timing of the introduction of the reform, which is the main source
of endogeneity concerns. A second way of accounting for province-level factors is to introduce
province-year fixed effects instead of province-year trends. This allows the influence of province
characteristics to vary flexibly over time. Column (3) shows that this stringent set of controls reduces
the precision of our estimates. However, what is important is the fact that the coefficient is nearly
identical in magnitude as the baseline specification. Finally, we control for province-level variables
such as per capita GDP, per capita agricultural GDP, and per capita government expenditure in
public goods.38 In column (4), the coefficients with these controls are statistically similar to our
baseline.
The second main concern is that our estimate could be driven by pilot or straggler villages in
the reform implementation (see Section 2), which may have been chosen endogenously. In column
(5), we repeat our estimate on a restricted sample where we drop pilot and straggler villages.39 The
estimate is similar to the baseline.
The final concern is that there may be village-specific and time-varying determinants of the
introduction of elections that are not controlled for by the baseline controls and that affect the outcomes of interest through channels other than elections. The strongest evidence against this concern
was shown earlier in Section 4.2. Recall that Table 2 showed that the timing of the introduction of
elections is uncorrelated with most observables features of the village. Furthermore, Figure 1 documented that there was no pre-trend in public goods expenditures and that the rise in public goods
expenditures occurs with the introduction of elections.
Nevertheless, one may still be concerned that the timing of the introduction of elections is correlated with pre-conditions that affect our outcomes of interest through channels other than elections.
We address this concern by directly controlling for the interaction term of the village characteristic
that was significantly correlated with the timing of the introduction of elections – the occurrence of
upper government land expropriation (see Table 2) – and the full vector of year fixed effects. Given
38 These

data are reported by China Statistical Yearbooks.

39 A pilot village is defined as a village that implemented elections more than two standard deviations before the average

timing of villages in the same province. A straggler village is defined as one that implemented elections more than two
standard deviations after the average timing of villages in the same province. If all of the villages in a province implement
elections in the same year, then that province will have no pilot or straggler villages.

24

the anecdotal evidence on the delay of elections for villages with a history of non-compliance to
unpopular central government policies, we also control for the interaction of whether there were
exemptions to the One Child Policy and year fixed effects. These characteristics are measured in
the first year that data are available (1982).40 The interaction with year fixed effects controls for the
influence of these variables over time in a fully flexible manner, and to some extent, it also controls
for the influences of all of its correlates over time. Column (6) of Table 7 shows that the coefficient
with these additional controls is very similar to our main estimates.
We also consider the possibility that several other village-level factors could potentially confound the effect of elections on our outcomes of interest. These factors include whether a village
is a suburb of a city (a dummy variable for being in a suburb interacted with year fixed effects),
whether the Tax and Fee Reform had been implemented (a dummy variable which takes the value
of one if the reform has been introduced), and the level of village social capital (a proxy for social
capital interacted with year fixed effects). To proxy for the latter we follow Tsai’s (2007) work in
using the presence of a lineage group (i.e., an ancestral hall, family tree), village temple, or a large
kinship group to proxy for social capital.41 To maximize the statistical precision of our estimates,
we use the principal component of these three measures as our social capital proxy. Column (7)
shows that the resulting coefficient is similar to the baseline.
In column (8), we re-estimate the baseline on a sample restricted to villages that never experienced an administrative merger with another village since 1982. This addresses the possibility that
our main results are somehow confounded because the probability of having experienced a merger
is correlated with the timing of the electoral reform, and whether a village experiences a merger is
correlated with some factor that can affect our outcomes of interest. The coefficient is also similar
to the baseline.
Additional Sensitivity Checks We conduct many additional sensitivity checks that are not presented here for brevity.42 For example, we check that our estimates are not driven by selection
40 Note that if we measure these policies in 1986, we obtain similar results. These alternative estimates are available
upon request.
41 To measure the size of the kinship groups, the VDS recorded names from the village roster.
42 They are available upon request.

25

within counties by instrumenting for the introduction of elections at the village level with the introduction at the county level or with the introduction at the province level. We also control for
public goods expenditures in 1986 (the first year that data are available) interacted with year fixed
effects to control for the fact that villages with different levels of public goods in the base year may
evolve differently over time; or the average annual increase in public goods expenditures between
1986 and 1988 for each village interacted with year fixed effects to control for the fact that villages
with different trends in public goods in the base years can evolve differently over time. All of these
robustness exercises produce estimates that are similar in magnitude to our baseline results.
The results in this section show that the baseline results are very robust and unlikely to be
confounded by other factors. They support the interpretation of the estimates as capturing the causal
effects of the introduction of village elections.

5.6

Mechanisms

In this section, we provide evidence on the policy mechanisms and theoretical channels through
which the introduction of elections increased expenditure on public goods.
5.6.1

Local Taxes

In addition to the village-level data used in the main analysis, we were able to obtain household
level data for a subsample of villages of the NFS survey. This subsample comprises 160 villages in
eighteen provinces. The observable characteristics of these villages do not differ significantly from
the full sample.43 The disaggregated expenditure data report the fees and levies paid by households.
Thus, we can use these data to examine whether the increase in public goods expenditure from
villagers was accompanied by an increase in the amount of fees and levies paid by households.44
On average, households in the subsample pay 198 RMB per year in local fees, which is approximately two percent of total household income.45 At the top of Table 8, we present mean household
43 See

Online Appendix Table A.3 for a comparison of observables.
the data only report the sum of local fees paid to the village and county governments and do not
distinguish payments to the village government. Therefore, interpreting the following results requires the assumption that
elections did not change the taxes paid to county governments. To the best of our knowledge, this was the case. The
main reform affecting local fees was the Tax and Fee Reform. The VDS documents the introduction of this reform which
occurred towards the very end of our sample. Controlling for the introduction of this reform has no effect on our results.
45 According to our data, this amounts to 64% of the fees that households pay to levels of government above the
county (excluding the value of grain taxes). The largest proportion of taxes that agricultural households pay to the central
44 Unfortunately,

26

payments of local fees as a percentage of total household income – i.e., the fee rate – according
to households’ positions in the income distribution. Below that, we present the effect of the introduction of elections on the fee rate. The coefficients for post first election are all positive and
statistically significant at the 10% level or higher. They are similar in magnitude for households
in different quintiles of the village income distribution. The results indicate that the introduction
of elections increased the amount of local fee rates by approximately 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points.
This is almost one-fourth of the sample mean rate of two percentage points.
These results support the idea that local tax revenues increase when villagers feel the government is more accountable. At the same time there is no evidence of progressivity in local fees.
Together with the low levels of collection, the lack of progressivity suggests that while local taxes
can be used to fund local public goods, they are not an important tool for income redistribution.
5.6.2

Signature Rights

To support our interpretation that elected VCs increased public goods expenditures to appease voters, we document that VCs had power to make public goods investments and that this power was
not undermined when elections were introduced. To do this, we document the “signature rights” of
VC and PS on several relevant policies. Village policy decisions are recorded in writing, and each
decision is approved with the signature of one or more officials. The VDS copied the village records
to document whether public goods expenditures by the village government were approved by the
VC, PS or both. The means in Table 9 show that 19% require only the VC’s signature for making
public goods expenditures, 66% require both the VC and PS, and 15% require only the PS’s signature. When we estimate equation (1) with these variables as dependent variables, we find that the
introduction of elections increased the VC’s unilateral power. In column (1), we see that the probability that only the VC’s signature was required increased by 4.2 percentage points. The coefficient
is statistically significant at the 10% level. At the same time, columns (2)-(3) show that elections reduced the probability that both signatures were required, and also reduced the probability that only
the PS’s signature was required. However, these estimates are not significant at conventional levgovernment is in the form of grain, which the government buys at a below-market price set by it. The value of this tax
payment is not included in the NFS category of taxes to the central government.

27

els. These results suggest that the local Communist Party branch did not circumvent the reform by
taking power away from the VC. If anything, the introduction of elections seems to have increased
the VC’s capacity to decide on relevant policies such as public goods, which is consistent with the
notion that elections gave VCs a democratic mandate.46
5.6.3

The effect of Elections on Leader Characteristics

Anecdotal and qualitative evidence suggest that the timing of electoral reforms did not coincide
with changes in the village Communist Party branch. Such simultaneous change would confound
our interpretation of the results as the consequence of increased accountability of the newly elected
leader in the village. We can substantiate the anecdotal evidence by comparing the effect of the
introduction of elections on the characteristics of the VCs, who were affected by the electoral reform, to those of the PS, who continued to be appointed by the Communist Party after elections
were introduced. If there is no change in the Communist Party, then PS turnover and characteristics
should not change with the introduction of elections. Table 10 Panel B shows the estimates from
regressing PS turnover rate, age and years of educational attainment on the baseline explanatory
variables. Elections have no effect on any of these outcomes. In contrast, Panel A shows that elections increased turnover rate, reduced age, and increased the years of educational attainment of the
VC. The estimates are significant at the 5% level or higher.
The comparison of the results for VCs and PSs support the view that reforms were circumscribed
to the VC and is consistent with the anecdotal literature which emphasizes that the introduction of
village elections was not accompanied by other changes at higher levels of government.
5.6.4

Political Agency Channels

In the literature on political agency, citizens use elections to control politicians through two mechanisms.47 First, elections can help voters address moral hazard problems by rewarding good performance with re-election – i.e., elections serve as means to provide the correct incentives to office
46 We also document the signature powers over the management of village enterprises, the right to reimburse expenditures from public funds, and land reallocation. The data show that VCs had de facto power over village policies that are
relevant to the outcomes we examine later in the paper (income, land, etc.).
47 This literature is large, starting with the seminal contribution of Barro (1973). For textbook treatments, see Besley
(2006), and Persson and Tabellini (2000) .

28

holders. Second, voters can use elections to select the politicians that are more competent or whose
preferences are better aligned with citizens’ preferences. In this section, we explore whether these
forces are relevant in our context.
We first recall the results discussed in the previous subsection (Table 10 Panel A). The finding
that the introduction of elections changed the characteristics of the average VC supports the notion
that villagers used elections to select a different type of leader from the type that was appointed prior
to the introduction of elections. This is consistent with the presence of the selection mechanism that
is highlighted in the theoretical literature.
To investigate the presence of an increase in incentives, we examine whether the introduction of
elections had any effect in villages where there was no leader turnover in the first election – i.e., we
estimate the interaction effect of the introduction of elections and whether there was turnover for
the first election. The impact of elections in villages where there was no turnover isolates the effect
of re-election incentives, since the presence of the same official before and after elections rules out
the possibility that changes in policy are due to villagers having selected a better official.
Table 11 presents the results. We introduce the interaction of the introduction of elections with
a dummy variable that equals one for villages where there is VC turnover in the first election. In this
specification, the effect of elections on villages that experienced no turnover (64% of the villages
in our sample) is captured by the uninteracted post-first-election coefficient. To address the fact
that the weights across villages change depending on how we transform the dependent variable, we
show the results for total public goods expenditures, per household public goods expenditures, and
the logs of each of these measures.
For all of the outcomes examined, the sign of the uninteracted post-first-election dummy variable is positive, and is similar or larger in magnitude as the average effect shown in Table 4. This
implies that the re-election incentives contributed to the average effect of introducing elections on
raising public goods expenditure. The estimates are statistically significant at the 10% or higher
level for total expenditures and expenditure per capita in columns (1) and (2). However, these results become insignificant when we estimate the standard errors using the wild-bootstrap method.
We also note that the magnitude and precision are sensitive to functional form.

29

Together with our earlier finding that elections changed the characteristics of village leaders,
the results are suggestive that both selection and incentive effects were present in our context. Note
that we cannot use the interaction effects presented in Table 11 panel B to quantify the relative
contribution of the incentive and selection mechanisms due to the fact that whether there was VC
turnover in the first election is endogenous. For example, elections could cause leader turnover
where villagers do not have particularly high demand for public goods.

6

Additional Results

In this section, we investigate whether the introduction of elections affected rent seeking and proelite bias in village policies, which should in principle decline if elections increased accountability.
We note that the evidence for rent-seeking is suggestive since we do not directly measure corruption,
and instead infer it from proxies; and that the results on income will use both the full sample of
villages as well as a subsample for which we have household-level data. For these reasons, we
interpret the results in this section as suggestive and supplementary to the main results for public
goods. For brevity, we only present the baseline results in the paper. We subject the results in
this section to a similar set of robustness checks as the public goods estimates. Please see Online
Appendix Tables A.2 and A.6.

6.1

Land Use

In addition to public goods, local officials are also responsible for the use and allocation of collectively owned means of production. The most important asset is arable land, all of which is publicly
owned in China. Most land is allocated to households for farming in long-term contracts.48 A
fraction of land, no more than fifteen percent according to national law, may be retained under the
direct control of the village government so that it can make small adjustments to household allocations without implementing a large-scale reallocation for the entire village. During the 1980s and
1990s, land retained by the village government was often leased to highly profitable village enter48 Rural households cannot sell their land rights in China and, during the period of our study, were also prohibited from
renting out their land. In most cases rural households were also restricted from hiring laborers because households that
did not farm their own land would lose land rights. See Jacoby et al. (2002) for a related study about tenure security in
rural China.

30

prises. However, villagers typically dislike this practice, because they suspect it is a source of rents
for the village leadership and its cronies.49
The village leadership and other village elites likely captured most of the rents from running
village enterprises (only the top half of villagers shared any profits from enterprises). Therefore,
the introduction of elections may be expected to reduce the amount of land leased to enterprises
because voters wish to reduce pro-elite bias in village policies.
Data for the use of village land is reported by the NFS for all villages for the years 19872005 (excluding 1992 and 1994). The villages in our sample use approximately 96% of arable
land (approximately 51% of total village land) for household farming. Approximately 75% of the
remaining arable land is leased out to “enterprises”, a term which we use for firms run by collectives
or villagers. Since elections can only reduce the amount of land leased out to firms if such land
existed prior to the first election, we restrict our analysis to villages that ever used any arable land
for non-household farming prior to the introduction of the first election. This reduces the sample to
108 villages from 28 provinces.
The estimates are displayed in column (1) of Table 12, where we use the same specification
as in equation (1). It shows that the introduction of elections reduced the amount of land that is
leased out to enterprises by approximately 57.7 mu (3.85 hectares), where the sample average is
approximately 108.5 mu (7.23 hectares). The estimate is statistically significant at the 10% level.

6.2

Income

If the introduction of elections caused a reduction in the pro-elite bias of policies under the discretion
of the village leadership, then we should find that it also caused income losses for elite households.
To examine this possibility, we look at the effect of elections on household income across the village
income distribution.
We have data on total household income for households on the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th
percentiles of the within-village-year income distribution for the full sample of villages for 19862005 (excluding 1992 and 1994). All income measures are deflated using a province-specific rural
49 Consistent with this view, in a cross-sectional study Brandt and Turner (2007) find that redistributing collective land
to the direct control of villagers is positively correlated with re-election probabilities.

31

CPI. In the top row of Table 12, we present the mean household income for each group to illustrate
the extent of income inequality in villages. In our sample, the richest households (90th percentile)
typically earn twice as much as the median households (50th percentile), which earn about twice
as much as the 10th percentile households. There is substantial inequality within villages. This
can be the result of cronyism if the richest households are benefitting from their connections to the
village leadership. At the same time, it could also be a consequence of some households being
entrepreneurial and successful and thereby experiencing more rapid income growth during the early
reform era than less productive households. These two causes of inequality are, of course, not
mutually exclusive.
To examine the effect of the introduction of elections on income distribution, we estimate the
baseline equation (1) with the household income of each percentile of the village income distribution
as the dependent variable. The coefficients in columns (2)-(6) of Table 12 are progressively more
negative and larger in magnitude for richer households, which is consistent with the introduction of
elections reducing incomes by larger amounts for richer households.
In column (7), we examine the ratio of the median household income to the 90th percentile
household. The estimates show that elections increased the income of the median household relative
to the 90th percentile household by 1.7 percentage points. The estimate is statistically significant at
the 5% level. Relative to the mean income ratio of 0.53, the increase is moderate in magnitude.
These results suggest that upon the introduction of elections, the village leadership changed
economic policies in such a way that the former economic elites were less favored. The relative
drops of income only affect the richest households, which is consistent with the interpretation that
they are a result of policy changes designed to please the majority of villagers.
The welfare implications of this reduction in inequality are unclear and partly depend on the
origins of pre-reform inequality. Moreover, since we do not observe a significant increase in income
at any level of the income distribution, we cannot rule out the possibility that the changes due to the
introduction of elections increased economic inefficiencies. For instance, it is very much possible
that village enterprises were creating surplus, but the lack of benefits for the majority of villagers
coupled with lack of commitment on how to share the surplus might have led villagers to prefer

32

direct access to land.

6.3

Policies for Redistribution

In this section, we provide additional evidence on the means through which village leaders reduced
elites’ incomes. For this analysis, recall that village governments cannot impose recurrent taxes
and that the lack of progressivity on local fees suggests that taxes are not the main instrument for
redistribution.
First we document that household income mostly comes from agriculture (67%); wages (15%),
which are mostly earned from employment with village enterprises; and village enterprise profits
(7%).50 The village government controls household access to land, which is the main input for
agriculture, and as we discussed earlier, also controls the management of village enterprises. Thus,
the data show that about 90% of average household income can be influenced by the village government. If the VC desires to engage in limited redistribution, he can reallocate land, salaried jobs
or dividend income across households.
In Table 13, we present the estimates for the effect of the introduction of elections on each
source of income. For brevity, we focus on the median-to-top income ratios. Column (1) presents
the result for total income, which is comparable with the result for the full sample in Table 12 and
statistically significant at the 5% level. Columns (2)-(4) show that the introduction of elections had
similarly sized effects on each source of income; the ratios for agricultural income, wage income
and enterprise (profit sharing) income all increase by around two percentage points. The estimates
for agricultural and enterprise income are significant at the 5% level.51
The results on land and income provide suggestive evidence that the introduction of elections
curbed rent-seeking and reduced income inequality by reducing the income of the richest households of the villages. The change in income inequality is moderate in magnitude and achieved
50 See

Online Appendix Table A.4 for a balance sheet for average household income and expenditure. Village enterprises were officially called different names at different stages of the early reform era due to regulatory changes regarding
the ownership of former collective assets. Hence, our category of income from village enterprises is the sum of all of
these types of incomes reported in the NFS (e.g., income from collectives, partnerships or cooperatives, and enterprise
dividends). Income from collectives and enterprise dividends make up over 97% of this category.
51 Note that we also examine household farmland. The estimates for the median-to-top ratios of household farmland
are positive but statistically insignificant. The lack of precision is likely to be partially due to our inability to measure
land quality. For example, a household may prefer to have a small piece of fertile land over a large piece of poor quality
land.

33

through the manipulation of income streams that the village government can influence through its
control over land allocation and village enterprises. These results are consistent with the fact that
the village government could not impose recurrent taxes, which means that elected leaders could
not easily commit to ex-post income redistribution. Since productive assets might have originally
been allocated to productive households, this mode of redistribution may be one of the reasons why
we do not find that local elections in China increased income. We discuss other possible reasons in
the conclusion.

7

Conclusion

In order to better control local officials and prevent shirking, the Chinese government introduced
village-level elections starting in the 1980s. These reforms were partial as the local branch of the
Communist Party was not affected. In this paper, we examine whether the introduction of elections
in such an autocratic context can be successful in changing incentives of local officials. We find
that elections prompted local officials to dramatically increase expenditures in public goods. This
increase was financed almost entirely by funds raised directly from households. This suggests that
elections were successful in making local officials more accountable to villagers and that the latter
became more willing to fund the local government in return for more public goods provision. In
addition, we find some evidence on land use and income distribution to suggest that elections might
have also curbed rent-seeking and reduced the pro-elite bias in village policies.
To interpret our results, it is important to note that the quantitative magnitudes of the empirical
estimates are specific to the context of our study. For example, the large positive effect of elections
on public goods is likely to be partly due to the severe under-provision of public goods in rural
areas during the early reform era. Similarly, the moderate size of the effect of the introduction of
elections on income inequality is likely to be due to the fact that village governments cannot impose
recurrent taxes. It is reasonable to speculate that if village leaders had access to the standard policies
for redistributing income, we might find much larger reductions of inequality from elections.
At the same time, our qualitative results provide generalizable insights. The finding that local
elections improve public goods is consistent with the idea that elections are powerful tools for con-

34

trolling local officials. Our finding that electoral control can dominate bureaucratic control even
in China is striking given that this is a context long known for its efficient and entrenched bureaucracy. It is perhaps not surprising that several autocratic countries have introduced similar reforms
in recent years.
To the extent that this institutional reform can be understood as a marginal increase in democracy in rural China, our results are consistent with recent democratization theories that characterize
democracies as regimes that are likely to engage in redistribution (e.g. Acemoglu and Robinson,
2006) and to provide more public goods (e.g., Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2003).
This study and the data it provides open several interesting avenues for future research. First,
we note that autocratic central governments are interested in maintaining political control. This
suggests that a partial introduction of representative institutions such as village elections might be an
unstable institutional equilibrium. While elections can improve citizen satisfaction with the regime
by improving local governance, they can also help villagers coordinate to resist unpopular policies
designed by upper-levels of government. We explore this in a companion paper, Martinez-Bravo et
al. (2011). Another important question regards the heterogeneous effects of elections, which can
potentially provide insights into the pre-conditions for successful representative institutions. For
example, in subsequent research, Padró i Miquel et al. (2014), we investigate the roles of social
fragmentation and social capital in determining the effects of elections on public goods. Finally, it
is important to understand when local elections are a step towards wider regime change versus when
they are used as an instrument of control by the central regime.

52

52 This is related to the recent work of Cantoni et al. (2014), which investigates whether a reform in Chinese high school

political curricula led to long-run changes in political attitudes.

35

References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, “A Theory of Political Transitions,” American Economic Review, September 2001, 91 (4), 938–963.
and , Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2006.
, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson, “Democracy, Redistribution, and
Inequality,” working paper, 2013.
,

,

, and

, “Democracy Does Cause Growth,” Working paper, 2014.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Corruption,” in Rovert Gibbons
and John Roberts, eds., Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press,
2012.
Barro, Robert, “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice, 1973, 14, 19–42.
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova,
“Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009,
124(4), 1497–1540.
Besley, T. and T. Persson, Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development Clusters
The Yrjo Jahnsson Lectures, Princeton University Press, 2011.
Besley, Timothy, Principled Agents: Motivation and Incentives in Politics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
and Anne Case, “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy Choices? Evidence
from Gubernatorial Term Limits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110 (3), 769–798.
and Masayuki Kudamatsu, “Health and Democracy,” American Economic Review, May 2006,
96 (2), 313–318.
and , “Making Autocracy Work,” in Elhanan Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Performance, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008.
and Robin Burgess, “The Political Economy of Government Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1415–1451.
and Stephen Coate, “Elected versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 2003, 1(5), 1176–1206.
Boix, Carles, Democracy and Redistribution, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Brandt, Loren and Matthew A. Turner, “The usefulness of imperfect elections: The case of
village elections in rural China,” Economics & Politics, 2007, 19 (3), 453–480.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph Siverson, and James Morrow, The Logic
of Political Survival, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2008, 90
(3), 414–427.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Jane Zhang, “Curriculum and
Ideology,” Working paper, 2014.
Dal-Bó, Ernesto and Martin Rossi, “Term Length and The Effort of Politicians,” Review of Economic Studies, October 2011, 78(4) (4).
36

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from
the Audits of Local Governments,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101(4), 1274–1311.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, “Democratization and the Distribution of Local
Public Goods in a Poor Rural Economy,” Brown University Working Paper, Brown University
2005.
Fujiwara, Thomas, “Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health: Evidence
from Brazil,” Princeton University Working Paper, 2011, pp. 1–63.
Gan, Li, Lixin Colin Xu, and Yang Yao, “Health Shocks, Village Elections, and Long-Term
Income: Evidence from Rural China,” China Economic Review, 2014, 30, 155–168.
Gandhi, Jennifer and Ellen Lust-Okar, “Elections Under Authoritarianism,” Annual Review of
Political Science, 2009, 12 (1), 403–422.
Gil, Ricard, Casey B. Mulligan, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Do Democracies Have Different
Public Policies than Nondemocracies?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (1), 51–74.
Han, Rongbin and Kevin O’Brien, “Path to Democracy? Assessing Village Elections in China,”
Journal of Contemporary China, 2009, 18 (60), 359–378.
Huntington, Samuel P., Political order in changing societies, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1968.
Husted, Thomas A. and Lawrence W. Kenny, “The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the Size of Government,” Journal of Poliical Economy, 1997, 105(1), 54–82.
Jacoby, Hanan G., Guo Li, and Scott Rozelle, “Hazards of Expropriation: Tenure Insecurity and
Investment in Rural China,” American Economic Review, 2002, 93 (5), 1420–1447.
Jia, Ruixue, “Pollution for Promotion,” Working Paper, University of California at San Diego 2014.
and Hua Nie, “Decentralization, Collusion and Coalmine Deaths,” Working Paper, University
of California at San Diego 2013.
Kelliher, Daniel, “The Chinese debate over village self-government,” The China Journal, 1997,
pp. 63–86.
Kennedy, John J., Scott Rozelle, and Yaojiang Shi, “Elected leaders and collective land: Farmers’
evaluation of village leaders’ performance in rural China,” Journal of Chinese Political Science,
2004, 9(1), 1–22.
Kudamatsu, Masayuki, “Has Democratization Reduced Infant Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa?
Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10(6), 1294–
1317.
Lim, Claire, “Preferences and Incentives of Appointed and Elected Public Officials: Evidence from
State Trial Court Judges,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1360–1397.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico, “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy
and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s Age of Reform,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 2004, 119 (2), 705–763.
Lorentzen, P.L., “Regularizing Rioting: Permitting Public Protest in an Authoritarian Regime,”
Quartely Journal of Political Science, 2013, 8(2), 127–158.
Luo, Renfu, Linxiu Zhang, Jikun Huang, and Scott Rozelle, “Elections, Fiscal Reform and
Public Goods Provision in Rural China,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 2007, 35(3), 583–
611.
37

, , , and , “Village Elections, Public Goods Investments and Pork Barrel Politics, Chinesestyle,” Journal of Development Studies, 2010, 46 (4), 662–684.
Malesky, Edmund and Paul Schuler, “Star Search: Do Elections Help Nondemocratic Regimes
Identify New Leaders?,” Journal of East Asian Studies, 2013, 13(1), 35–68.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, “The Role of Local Officials in New Democracies: Evidence from Indonesia,” The American Economic Review, April 2014, 104 (4), 1244–1287.
, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao, “Do Local Elections in NonDemocracies Increase Accountability? Evidence from Rural China,” NBER Working Papers
16948, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2011.
Miller, Grant, “Women’s suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in American History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123(3), 1287–1327.
O’Brien, Kevin J., “Implementing Political Reform in China’s Villages,” Australian Journal of
Chinese Affairs, 1994, (32), 33 – 59.
and Lianjiang Li, “The Struggle over Village Elections,” in Merle Goldman and Roderick MacFarquhar, eds., The paradox of China’s post-Mao reforms, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1999.
and

, Rightful Resistance in Rural China, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Oi, Jean and Scott Rozelle, “Elections and power: The locus of decision-making in Chinese villages,” The China Quarterly, 2000, 162, 513–539.
Olken, Benjamin A. and Rohini Pande, “Corruption in Developing Countries,” Annual Review of
Economics, 2012, 4, 479–505.
Padró i Miquel, Gerard, Nancy Qian, Yiqing Xu, and Yang Yao, “Making Democracy Work:
The Effect of Social Capital on Elections in China,” Yale University Working Papers 2014.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, Political Economics- Explaining Economic Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Rodrik, Dani, “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
1999, 114 (3), 707–738.
Rozelle, Scott, “Decision-Making in China’s Rural Economy: The Linkages between Village Leaders and Farm Households,” The China Quarterly, 1994, (137), 99–124.
and Guo Li, “Village leaders and land-rights formation in China,” American Economic Review,
1998, 88 (2), 433–438.
Shen, Yan and Yang Yao, “Does grassroots democracy reduce income inequality in China?,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92(10-11) (10-11), 2182–2198.
Tavares, Jose and Romain Wacziarg, “How democracy affects growth,” European Economic Review, August 2001, 45 (8), 1341–1378.
Tsai, Lily Lee, Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public Goods Provision
in Rural China, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Tyrefors, Bjorn and Per Pettersson-Lidbom, “Democracy, Redistribution, and Political Participation: Evidence from Sweden 1919-1938,” Econometrica, 2014, 82(3), 961–993.
Unger, Jonathan, The Nature of Chinese Politics: From Mao to Jiang, Cambridge, MA: M.E.
Sharpe, 2002.
38

Whiting, Susan, “Contract Incentives and Market Discipline in China’s Rural Industrial Sector,”
in John McMillan and Barry Naughton, eds., Reforming Asian Socialism, The Growth of Market
Institutions, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996.
Wilson, James Q., Bureaucracy, Basic Books, 1989.
Zhang, Xiaobo, Shenggen Fan, Linxiu Zhang, and Jikun Huang, “Local governance and public
goods provision in rural China,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88(12), 2857–2871.

39

Figure 1: Public Goods Expenditure by Villagers vs. the Number of Years Since the 1st Election –
Restricted Sample
Public Goods Exp from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
0
10
20
30
40

(a) Two-Year Window

-2

-1

0
Years Since 1st Election

1

2

5

10

Public Goods Exp from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
0
10
20
30
40

(b) Nine-Year Window

-10

-5

0
Years Since 1st Election

Notes: The y-axis is the average public goods expenditure financed by villagers. The x-axis is the
number of years since the first election (year 0 is the year that elections are introduced). Public
goods expenditures are deflated by a province-specific rural CPI. The sample is restricted such that
the same villages are observed for each year since the first election.

40

Figure 2: Public Goods Expenditure by the Upper Government vs. the Number of Years Since the
1st Election – Restricted Sample
Public Goods Exp from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
0
10
20
30
40

(a) Two-Year Window

-2

-1

0
Years Since 1st Election

1

2

5

10

Public Goods Exp from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
0
10
20
30
40

(b) Nine-Year Window

-10

-5

0
Years Since 1st Election

Notes: The y-axis is the average public goods expenditure financed by the upper government. The
x-axis is the number of years since the first election (year 0 is the year that elections are introduced).
Public goods expenditures are deflated by a province-specific rural CPI. The sample is restricted
such that the same villages are observed for each year since the first election.

41

42
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS

Has Election
Has Open Nomination
Years between Election Introductions in Village and Province
Years between Election Introductions in County and Province**
Years between Election Introductions in Village and County**
Years since last election
VC different from previous term*
1st Election Changed VC*

5,208
5,208
217
217
217
1,084
4,312
182

2,287
2,295
5,208
5,208

3,084

3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612

4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340

Obs
4,340
5,208

0.73
0.20
5.02
4.28
0.74
3.16
0.16
0.38

4.36
6.70
10.03
6.69

0.08

9,245
2,295
0.51
2,215
79.72
60.46

13.81
3.31
0.02
4.98
0.71
0.31
2.58

Mean
416.15
0.30

0.44
0.40
5.07
4.67
2.28
1.02
0.36
0.49

2.36
3.82
8.13
6.24

0.19

14,719
2,329
0.32
2,312
367.26
347.61

133.23
63.69
0.34
88.25
7.75
12.41
48.04

Std. Dev.
276.17
0.46

Notes: Each observation is at the village-year level. VDS indicates that the variable is reported by the Village Democracy
Survey. NFS indicates that the variables are reported by the National Fixed Point Survey. *Not all villages retained records of
VC's names from prior to the first election. **The year of the first election in a county is based on respondent recall.

NFS
NFS
VDS
VDS

The Number of Village Committee Members
The Number of Village Party Cadres
Party Secretary Tenure
Village Chief: Tenure

NFS
NFS
NFS
NFS
NFS
NFS

Total Village Land
Arable Land (Mu)
Share of Village Land that is Arable
Used for HH Farming (Mu)
Not Used for HH Farming (Mu)
Leased Out to Enterprises (Mu)
NFS

VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS
VDS

Total Public Goods Expenditure (10,000 Constant RMB)
Irrigation
Schooling
Roads & Sanitation
Electricity
Environment
Other

Median HH Annual Gross Income Growth

Source
NFS
NFS

Variable
# of HH in Village
Near City

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Table 2: Correlates of the Timing of the Introduction of Elections
Dependent Variable: Year of 1st Election

(1)
Coef.

(2)
Obs

(3)
R-Square

Near City
Presence of Family with a Family Tree (jiapu)
Presence of Family with Ancestral Temple (citang)
Population Share of largest Clan
Distance to High School
Total Number of Households

-0.029
0.109
0.140
0.198
0.155
0.324

217
217
217
217
217
217

0.001
0.012
0.019
0.039
0.024
0.105

Total Public Goods Exp (10,000 RMB)

0.016

217

0.000

Income 90th Percentile (RMB)
Income 50th Percentile (RMB)
Income 10th Percentile (RMB)

0.131
-0.081
-0.160

217
217
217

0.017
0.007
0.026

Income Growth 90th Percentile
Income Growth 50th Percentile
Income Growth 10th Percentile

0.159
-0.023
-0.074

217
217
217

0.025
0.001
0.005

Land Leased Out to Enterprises (Mu=1/15 Hectare)
Land used for Household Farming
Total Village Arable Land

-0.145
0.136
0.156

217
217
217

0.021
0.018
0.024

-0.222
-0.260**

217
217

0.049
0.068

One Child Policy Exemptions
Upper Government Land Expropriation

Notes: Standardized coefficients are presented in column (1). Each row corresponds to a different
bivariate regression estimated in a cross section of villages. The dependent variable is the year of the
1st election while the regressor of interest is defined by each row. The regressors of interest are
measured in the base year (defined as the first year that data are available for each variable). All
variables are demeaned by province fixed effects. *, **, and *** indicates statistical significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

43

Table 3: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Village Government Public Goods Expenditure
Dependent Variable
From All From From Other
Sources Villagers Sources
(1)

(2)

(3)

From All
Sources

From
Villagers

From Other
Sources

(4)

(5)

(6)

A. Public Goods Expenditures (Constant 10,000 RMB)
Dependent Variable Mean

13.81

9.46

4.28

13.81

9.46

4.28

Post 1st Election

18.401
(9.247)

16.351
(9.433)

2.165
(2.029)

15.311
(7.190)

16.080
(7.717)

-0.672
(1.525)

Wild Bootstrap p-value

[0.086]

[0.148]

[0.384]

[0.042]

[0.046]

[0.738]

N

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Controls:
Province - Trend
Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,340
0.108
29

Dependent Variable Mean

0.22

0.17

0.07

0.22

0.17

0.07

Post 1st Election

0.056
(0.024)

0.050
(0.023)

0.025
(0.014)

0.057
(0.031)

0.063
(0.024)

0.007
(0.015)

Wild Bootstrap p-value

[0.032]

[0.048]

[0.118]

[0.078]

[0.012]

[0.594]

N

N

N

Y

Y

Y

4,340
0.176
29

4,340
0.162
29

4,340
0.183
29

4,340
0.187
29

4,340
0.170
29

4,340
0.198
29

Controls:
Province - Trend
Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340
4,340
0.097
0.067
0.113
0.103
0.073
29
29
29
29
29
B. Any Public Goods Expenditures (Dummy Variable)

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, village and year fixed effects.
Columns (4) to (6) also control for province trends. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are
presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The number of clusters
is stated at the bottom of the table. The sample is a balanced village-level panel of 217 villages for the years
1986-2005.

44

45
4,340
0.103
29

Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,340
0.167
29

[0.030]

0.018
(0.008)

0.02

4,335
0.165
29

[0.024]

0.011
(0.005)

0.01

4,340
0.171
29

[0.020]

0.446
(0.173)

-3.48

4,340
0.152
29

[0.014]

0.111
(0.044)

-4.38

4,335
0.151
29

[0.020]

0.081
(0.034)

-4.44

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects.
Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in
square brackets. The number of clusters is stated at the bottom of the table. The sample is a balanced village-level panel
of 217 villages for the years 1986-2005. The number of observations vary because of missing values in the dependent
variable.

[0.046]

16.080
(7.717)

9.46

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable Mean

Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditures from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
Log
Log
Log
Village Total Per Household Per Worker
Village Total Per Household Per Worker
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Table 4: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Village Government Public Goods Expenditure – Alternative Measures

Table 5: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Public Goods – Excluding High Expenditure
Observations
Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditures from Villagers
Constant 10,000 RMB
(1)
(2)
Full Sample Omit Top 1%
Dependent Variable Mean

Ln Expenditure
(3)
(4)
Full Sample Omit Top 1%

9.456

2.386

-3.479

-3.575

Post 1st Election

16.08
(7.717)

1.121
(0.381)

0.446
(0.173)

0.405
(0.136)

Wild Bootstrap p-value

[0.046]

[0.020]

[0.020]

[0.002]

Standardized Coef.

0.0509

0.0418

0.0637

0.0619

Observations
R-squared

4340
0.103

4296
0.133

4340
0.171

4296
0.164

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, village and year fixed
effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild
bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. Sample restrictions are stated in column
headings. Columns (2) and (4) exclude observations if the amount of public expenditures is
equal to or above the 99th percentile of the sample.

46

47
[0.046]
4,340
0.103
29

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,194
0.107
29

[0.042]

18.078
(8.931)

9.62

(2)

4,045
0.123
29

[0.126]

13.377
(7.878)

8.83

(3)

3,854
0.125
29

[0.128]

16.115
(9.049)

9.10

(4)

Omit Year of
1st Election
and 2 Years
Afterwards

4,340
0.170
29

[0.012]

0.063
(0.024)

0.17

(5)

4,194
0.172
29

[0.064]

0.051
(0.025)

0.16

(6)

4,045
0.171
29

[0.044]

0.058
(0.023)

0.17

(7)

Omit Year of
Omit Year of 1st Election
Full Sample
1st Election and 1 Year
Afterwards

3,854
0.181
29

[0.010]

0.073
(0.025)

0.17

(8)

Omit Year of
1st Election
and 2 Years
Afterwards

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects. Standard errors,
clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The number of
clusters is stated at the bottom of the table. The sample of columns (1) and (5) is a balanced village-level panel of 217 villages for the years
1986-2005.

16.080
(7.717)

9.46

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable Mean

(1)

Omit Year of
Omit Year of 1st Election
Full Sample
1st Election and 1 Year
Afterwards

Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditure from Villagers
Village Total (10,000 Constant RMB)
Any (Dummy Variable)

Table 6: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Village Government Public Goods Expenditure After the First Election Term

48
[0.046]
4,340
0.103
29

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,340
0.105
29

[0.036]

14.190
(6.620)

4,340
0.221
29

[0.192]

14.626
(9.509)

4,018
0.119
29

[0.048]

18.077
(8.509)

4,100
0.119
29

[0.040]

14.338
(8.012)

4,340
0.203
29

[0.050]

16.072
(7.690)

4,340
0.114
29

[0.016]

16.692
(7.740)

3,500
0.105
29

[0.076]

16.734
(8.459)

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects, and the additional
controls stated in the column headings. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap pvalues are presented in square brackets. The number of clusters is stated at the bottom of the table. The sample is a balanced village-level
panel of 217 villages for the years 1986-2005. The number of observations vary due to missing values in the control variables.

16.080
(7.717)

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditure from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)
Control for Year
Control for
Control for
FE x Base Year
Control for
Prov Per
Year FE x Omit if Ever
Prov
Control for
Omit Early Vars (One Child
Capita GDP
Near City, Merged with
and Late Policy and Upper
Baseline Introduction Prov-Year
and Growth,
Social
Another
Government
of 1st
FE
Introducers
Per Capital
Capital, Post
Village
Land
Election
Agric GDP
Tax & Fee
Expropriation)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Table 7: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Village Government Public Goods Expenditure, Village Land and Household Income
– Robustness to Controls

49

3.141
0.522
(0.246)
[0.072]
2,792
0.542
18

Dep. Variable Mean

Post 1st Election

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R2
Clusters

2,792
0.598
18

[0.094]

0.391
(0.214)

2.746

20th - 40th
(2)

2,792
0.609
18

[0.088]

0.406
(0.206)

2.476

40th - 60th
(3)

2,792
0.625
18

[0.076]

0.388
(0.190)

2.173

60th - 80th
(4)

2,791
0.583
18

[0.036]

0.315
(0.131)

1.749

80th - 100th
(5)

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects. Standard
errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. The number of clusters are stated at the bottom of the table. The
samples are village-level panels and include 160 village for the years 1986-2005. Data for 1992 and 1994 are interpolated. The panel
is not fully balanced because of missing values in the dependent variables.

0 - 20th
(1)

Total Household Income Quintiles:

Dependent Variable: Household Annual Local Fee Payments (% of Household Annual Income)

Table 8: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Household Payment of Local Fees

50

[0.098]
4,457
0.779
29

Wild Bootstrap p-value
Observations
R-squared
Clusters

4,457
0.808
29

[0.376]

-0.026
(0.028)

0.66

4,457
0.774
29

[0.554]

-0.017
(0.027)

0.15

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province
trends, and village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province
level, are reported in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values, clustered at the province
level are presented in square brackets. The sample is a panel of 189 villages for the
years 1982-2005. There are fewer villages than the full sample (217) because of
missing data for village leaders.

0.042
(0.023)

0.19

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable Mean

Dependent Variable: Signature Right for Public Goods Investment (Dummy Variable)
VC
VC + PS
PS
(1)
(2)
(3)

Table 9: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on the De Facto Powers of the VC and PS

Table 10: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on the Characteristics of the VC and PS
Dependent Variable: Characteristic of Village Leader
Turnover
Age
Years of Edu Party Member
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Village Chairman (VC)
Dependent Variable Mean

0.16

42.15

7.88

0.77

Post 1st Election

0.045
(0.020)

-2.442
(1.037)

0.791
(0.224)

-0.034
(0.043)

Wild Bootstrap p-value

[0.001]

[0.040]

[0.000]

[0.468]

Obs
R2

4,312
0.065

Dependent Variable Mean

0.15

44.35

8.42

Post 1st Election

-0.006
(0.018)

0.312
(0.632)

-0.121
(0.139)

Wild Bootstrap p-value

[0.199]

[0.607]

[0.478]

4,365
0.071

3,546
0.677

4,356
0.572

Obs
R2

4,188
4,194
0.430
0.611
B. Party Secretary (PS)

4,274
0.484

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends,
and village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are
reported in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values, clustered at the province level are
presented in square brackets. The sample is a panel of 189 villages for the years 19822005. There are fewer villages than the full sample (217) because of missing data for
village leaders. The number of observations vary across columns due to missing values in
the dependent variable.

51

52
[0.548]
4,340
0.110
29

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R2
Clusters

4,340
0.170
29

[0.606]

-0.045
(0.033)

0.060
(0.034)
[0.530]

4,340
0.173
29

[0.538]

-0.435
(0.540)

0.855
(0.563)
[0.388]

4,340
0.154
29

[0.714]

-0.045
(0.107)

0.153
(0.110)
[0.280]

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects.
Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square
brackets. The number of clusters is stated at the bottom of the table. The sample is a balanced village-level panel for the years
1986-2005.

-40.826
(28.515)

54.509
(28.762)
[0.432]

Post 1st Election x 1st Election VC Change

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditure from Villagers (10,000 RMB)
Total,
Per Household,
Total,
Per Household,
In Levels
In Levels
In Logs
In Logs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Table 11: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections for Villages where the Pre-Election Incumbent Remained in Office

53

-57.73
(32.47)
[0.070]
2,034
0.558
28

Post 1st Election

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R2
Clusters

3,763
0.775
29

[0.172]

282.0
(198.0)

3,763
0.823
29

[0.590]

179.7
(326.7)

7,090

(3)

(2)
4,878

25th

10th

3,763
0.828
29

[0.912]

-80.00
(602.7)

10,126

(4)

50th

3,763
0.812
29

[0.50]

-901.3
(1,254)

14,767

(5)

75th

3,763
0.708
29

[0.104]

-4,806
(3,011)

23,615

(6)

90th

3,763
0.597
29

[0.046]

0.017
(0.007)

0.529

(7)

50th/90th

Income
Ratio

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects. Standard
errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets.
The number of clusters are stated at the bottom of the table. The samples are village level panels. The sample in column (1) is
restricted to villages that ever leased land to enterprises prior to the first election and includes the years 1986-2004. The
dependent variable is the amount of land leased out in year t+1 (i.e., a lead variable). Columns (2)-(7) include all 217 villages
and the years 1986-2005, except for 1992 and 1994. The panels are not fully balanced because of missing values in the
dependent variables.

108.5

Dependent Variable Mean

Village Land
Leased to
Enterprises
(Mu=1/15 Hectare)
(1)

Dependent Variable
Percentiles of the Within-Village Distribution of Total
Household Income (Constant RMB)

Table 12: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Village Land and the Household Income

54
2,792
0.723
18

[0.018]

0.021
(0.007)

0.46

2,564
0.651
18

[0.284]

0.019
(0.017)

0.15

2,257
0.658
18

[0.016]

0.026
(0.013)

0.08

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province
trends, village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level,
are presented in parentheses. The number of clusters are stated at the bottom of the
table. The samples are village-level panels and include 160 villages for the years
1986-2005. Data for 1992 and 1994 are interpolated. The panel is not fully balanced
and the number of observations vary across columns because of missing values in
the dependent variables.

2,792
0.568
18

[0.090]

Wild Bootstrap p-value
Obs
R2
Clusters

0.016
(0.008)

0.53

Post 1st Election

Dependent Variable Mean

Dependent Variable: 50th/90th Income Ratio
Total
Agriculture
Wage
Enterprises
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Table 13: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Household Income Sources

ONLINE APPENDIX
A

Data Appendix

The variables for upper-government land expropriation and One Child Policy exemptions are from
the VDS. To ensure truthful reporting, we ask the respondents to check the years in which the village
experienced any permanent loss of village land due to upper-government expropriation, and to check
the years in which any household in the village had a second or higher parity birth. Respondents’
answers are based on village records and rosters. In a companion paper, we check that changes in
expropriation correspond to changes in total village land (reported in the NFS) and changes in One
Child Policy exemptions correspond to the number of children age 7-13 seven years later (reported
in the NFS). The questionnaire for the VDS is available online at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nq3/NANCYS_Yale_Website

1

Table A.1: The Timing of Electoral Reforms

Year

First Election
Number of Villages Cumulative % of
Introducing
Villages
(1)
(2)

1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

13
13
42
3
35
12
7
15
25
1
3
6
2
9
4
3
6
9
7
2
0
0
0
0

Total

217

5.99
11.98
31.34
32.72
48.85
54.38
57.6
64.52
76.04
76.5
77.88
80.65
81.57
85.71
87.56
88.94
91.71
95.85
99.08
100
100
100
100
100

First Open Nominations (Haixuan)
Number of Villages Cumulative % of
Introducing
Villages
(3)
(4)
1
1
7
0
4
1
1
1
1
0
1
3
3
3
18
0
6
42
12
12
11
3
1
7

0.72
1.44
6.47
6.47
9.35
10.07
10.79
11.51
12.23
12.23
12.95
15.11
17.27
19.42
32.37
32.37
36.69
66.91
75.54
84.17
92.09
94.24
94.96
100

139

Notes: Each observation is a village. The sample comprises a balanced panel of 217 villages for 1982 to
2005.

2

3

[0.070]
2,034
0.558
28
0.017
(0.007)
[0.046]
3,763
0.597
29

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R-squared
Clusters

Post 1st Election

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Observations
R-squared
Clusters

3,763
0.598
29

[0.034]

0.016
(0.007)

2,034
0.559
28

[0.076]

-55.563
(32.898)

(2)

3,763
0.637
29

[0.026]

0.020
(0.010)

2,034
0.744
28

[0.082]

-49.482
(30.816)
[0.058]

-57.211
(33.405)
[0.140]

-50.189
(39.526)

3,477
0.606
29

[0.022]

3,553
0.601
29

[0.088]

3,763
0.603
29

[0.032]

1,919
1,940
2,034
0.591
0.559
0.564
28
28
28
B. Income Ratio 50th/90th (Constant RMB)
0.018
0.012
0.018
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.007)

[0.088]

-54.178
(30.785)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Village Land Leased to Enterprises (Mu=1/15 Hectare)

3,763
0.602
29

[0.024]

0.017
(0.007)

2,034
0.578
28

[0.084]

-58.631
(31.474)

(7)

3,035
0.605
29

[0.094]

0.014
(0.007)

1,740
0.614
27

[0.190]

-52.162
(37.345)

(8)

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects, and the additional controls stated in
the column headings. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets.
The number of clusters are stated at the bottom of the table. The samples are village-level panels. Panel A is restricted to villages that ever leased land to
enterprises prior to the first election and includes the years 1986-2004. The dependent variable is the amount of land leased out in year t+1 (i.e., a lead
variable). Panel B includes all villages and the years 1986-2005. Additional sample exclusions are stated in column headings. Data from 1992 and 1994 are
interpolated. The panels are not fully balanced because of missing values in the dependent variabes.

-57.727
(32.472)

Post 1st Election

(1)

Control for Year FE x
Control for
Control for Prov
Control for Year Omit if Ever
Control for
Omit Early Base Year Vars (One
Prov
Per Capita GDP
FE x Near City, Merged with
Child Policy and
Prov-Year
and Late
Baseline
Introduction of
and Growth, Per
Social Capital,
Another
FE
Introducers Upper Government
1st Election
Capita Agric GDP
Post Tax & Fee
Village
Land Expropriation)

Dependent Variable

Table A.2: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Land Use and Income of the 90th Percentile

4

3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612
3,612
3,084
2,287
2,295
5,208
5,208
5,208
5,208
217
217
217
1,084
4,312
182

Total Village Land
Arable Land (Mu)
Share of Village Land that is Arable
Used for HH Farming (Mu)
Not Used for HH Farming (Mu)
Leased Out to Enterprises (Mu)

Median HH Annual Gross Income Growth

The Number of Village Committee Members
The Number of Village Party Cadres
Party Secretary Tenure
Village Chief: Tenure

Has Election
Has Open Nomination
Years between Election Introductions in Village and Province
Years between Election Introductions in County and Province**
Years between Election Introductions in Village and County**
Years since last election
VC different from previous term*
1st Election Changed VC*

0.73
0.20
5.02
4.28
0.74
3.16
0.16
0.38

4.36
6.70
10.03
6.69

0.08

9,245
2,295
0.51
2,215
79.72
60.46

0.44
0.40
5.07
4.67
2.28
1.02
0.36
0.49

2.36
3.82
8.13
6.24

0.19

14,719
2,329
0.32
2,312
367.26
347.61

Std. Dev.
276.17
0.46

2798
2798
2798
2798
2798
717
2,505
2,505

1,583
1,587
2,798
2,798

2,145

2,495
2,495
2,495
2,495
2,495
2,655

0.84
0.24
5.10
4.40
0.70
3.19
0.16
0.16

4.22
6.98
10.71
7.38

0.080

7,224
1,782
0.52
1,705
77.25
61.85

0.36
0.43
4.98
4.63
2.25
1.07
0.36
0.36

2.08
3.84
7.82
5.89

0.186

10,119
1,188
0.31
1,173
351.67
327.37

Household Sample
Obs
Mean
Std. Dev.
2,798
418.31
285.91
2,798
0.27
0.44

Notes: Each observation is at the village-year level. *Not all villages retained records of VC's names from prior to the first election. **The year of the
first election in a county is based on respondent recall.

Obs
4,340
5,208

Variable
# of HH in Village
Near City

Full Sample
Mean
416.15
0.30

Table A.3: Descriptive Statistics for Household Land and Incomes in the Full Sample and the Household Subsample of Villages

5

2,792
2,792
2,792
2,792
2,792

Total Expenditures
Household management expenditures
Taxes to central government
Levies and fees to local governments
Total Consumption

5,917
1,887
123
78
3,275

Mean
12,516
8,391
2,022
851
1,252

13,325
6,520
379
157
6,465

Std. Dev.
14,978
10,834
3,201
2,138
3,047

Notes: Village enterprise income is the sum of income from collectives, dividends and parternship/
cooperatives. The sample comprises of an unbalanced panel of 160 villages in 18 provinces for the years
for the years 1986-2005. Data for 1992 and 1994 are interpolated.

Obs
2,792
2,792
2,792
2,792
2,792

Total Income
from agriculture (and home production)
from wages
village enterprise income
other

Table A.4: Balance Sheet of Household Income and Expenditure

6
[0.372]
2,792
0.716
18
160

Wild Bootstrap p-value
Observations
R-squared
Clusters (# Provinces)
# Villages

-80
(603)
[0.912]

-901
(1254)
[0.50]

14,767

(4)

75th

2,792
0.774
18
160

[0.862]

-74
(360)

6,605

2,792
0.787
18
160

[0.48]

-564
(682)

9,496

2,792
0.774
18
160

[0.192]

-1,912
(1406)

13,977

3,763
3,763
3,763
0.823
0.828
0.812
29
29
29
217
217
217
B. Household-Level Subsample

180
(327)
[0.590]

10,126

(3)
A. Full Sample

50th

2,792
0.712
18
160

[0.05]

-5,239
(3275)

22,267

3,763
0.708
29
217

-4,806
(3011)
[0.104]

23,615

(5)

90th

12.21
6.92
5.18
64.68
0.24
417.75

Panel B Sample
Spending in Public goods all sources
Spending in Public goods from Villagers
Spending in Public goods not from Villagers
Village Land Leased to Enterprises
Near City
Number of households

1347
1347
1347
1130
1347
1210

15.63
10.70
4.86
62.38
0.30
422.35

Sum Stats of different variables by the different Samples
Panel A sample
Spending in Public goods all sources
3763
Spending in Public goods from Villagers
3763
Spending in Public goods not from Villagers
3763
Village Land Leased to Enterprises
3103
Near City
3763
Number of households
3569

109.70
74.44
80.69
321.58
0.43
301.70

144.88
127.77
68.38
353.27
0.46
281.57

0
0
0
0
0
42

0
0
0
0
0
41

2005
2003
2005
3064
1
1987

4038
4010
2005
7256
1
2372

Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed
effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are
presented in square brackets. The samples are village-level panels and include the years 1986-2005. The panels are
not fully balanced because of missing values in the dependent variables. The number of villages and provinces are
stated at the bottom of each panel.

166
(193)

Post 1st Election

Observations
R-squared
Clusters (# Provinces)
# Villages
4,478

3,763
0.775
29
217

Wild Bootstrap p-value

Dependent Variable Mean

282
(198)
[0.172]

Post 1st Election

7,090

(2)

(1)
4,878

25th

Dependent Variable: Household Income (RMB)
10th

Dependent Variable Mean

Percentiles of the Village Income Distribution:

Table A.5: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Household Income – Comparison of Full Sample and Village Subsample Estimates

7

2,792
0.569
18

0.021
(0.007)
2,792
0.724
18

0.019
(0.017)
2,564
0.651
18

0.026
(0.013)

Observations
R2
Clusters

Post 1st Election

Observations
R2
Clusters

Post 1st Election

Observations
R2
Clusters

Post 1st Election

0.025
(0.013)

2,564
0.651
18

0.020
(0.017)

2,792
0.724
18

0.020
(0.007)

2,792
0.569
18

0.015
(0.008)

(2)

0.018
(0.009)

0.010
(0.007)

0.017
(0.008)

0.023
(0.009)

0.016
(0.007)

0.024
(0.006)

0.013
(0.019)

0.013
(0.019)

0.019
(0.016)

0.020
(0.016)

0.024
(0.013)

0.024
(0.017)

0.024
(0.014)

2,564
2,367
2,394
2,564
0.686
0.679
0.648
0.657
18
18
18
18
D. Dependent Variable: 50th/90th Enterprise Income Ratio

0.029
(0.022)

2,792
2,582
2,616
2,792
0.746
0.730
0.720
0.731
18
18
18
18
C. Dependent Variable: 50th/90th Wage Income Ratio

0.021
(0.010)

2,792
2,582
2,616
2,792
0.613
0.583
0.576
0.577
18
18
18
18
B. Dependent Variable: 50th/90th Agricultural Income Ratio

0.015
(0.011)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Dependent Variable: 50th/90th Total Income Ratio

0.022
(0.015)

2,564
0.656
18

0.019
(0.015)

2,792
0.728
18

0.020
(0.008)

2,792
0.579
18

0.017
(0.008)

(7)

0.022
(0.012)

2,065
0.657
18

0.016
(0.015)

2,215
0.741
18

0.022
(0.007)

2,215
0.567
18

0.014
(0.006)

(8)

Control for Year
Omit if Ever
FE x Near City,
Merged with
Social Capital,
Another Village
Post Tax & Fee

Observations
2,257
2,257
2,257
2,065
2,089
2,257
2,257
1,811
R2
0.658
0.660
0.699
0.675
0.644
0.664
0.668
0.610
Clusters
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects, and the additional controls stated in the
column headings. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The
number of clusters are stated at the bottom of the table. The samples are village-level panels and include 160 villages for the years 1986-2005. Data for 1992 and
1994 are interpolated. Additional sample exclusions are stated in column headings. The panels are not fully balanced because of missing values in the dependent
variabes.

0.016
(0.008)

Post 1st Election

(1)

Baseline

Control for Year
FE x Base Year
Control for Prov
Control for Prov
Control for ProvOmit Early and Vars (One Child
Introduction of
Per Capita GDP
Year FE
Late Introducers Policy and Upper
1st Election
and Growth
Government Land
Expropriation)

Table A.6: The Effect of the Introduction of Elections on Household Income Ratios – Robustness to Controls

