                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE POLITICAL RISKS OF FIGHTING MARKET FAILURES:
   SUBVERSION, POPULISM AND THE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

                                         Edward L. Glaeser

                                        Working Paper 18112
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18112


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




I am grateful to Yueran Ma and Kristina Tobio for research assistance. The Taubman Center for State
and Local Government provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Political Risks of Fighting Market Failures: Subversion, Populism and the Government
Sponsored Enterprises
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 18112
May 2012
JEL No. D0,G0,H0

                                              ABSTRACT

There are many possible ways of reforming the Government-Sponsored Enterprises that insure mortgages
against default, including a purely public option, complete privatization or a hybrid model with private
firms and public catastrophic insurance. If the government is sufficiently capable and benign, either
public intervention can yield desirable outcomes; the key risks of any reform come from the political
process. This paper examines the political risks, related to corruption and populism, of differing approaches
to the problems of monopoly, externalities and market breakdowns in asset insurance. If there is a
high probability that political leadership will be induced to pursue policies that maximize the profitability
of private entities at the expense of taxpayers, then purely public options create lower social losses.
If there is a high probability that leaders will pursue a populist agenda of lowering prices or borrowing
costs, then catastrophic risk insurance can lead to lower social losses than either complete laissez-faire
of a pure public option.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
   I.       Introduction



   The Federal Housing Finance Agency projects that the bailouts of the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) and the Federal National Mortgage
Association (Fannie Mae) will require between 220 and 311 billion dollars (“FHFA
Updates”). It is striking that two enterprises, allegedly operating without any government
guarantee, received a bailout bigger than the gross domestic product (GDP) of Ireland or
Egypt, but the financial distress and ensuing bailout were hardly unexpected. For many
years before the downturn, analysts warned of ensuing disaster, while the market treated
their securities as if they were essentially backed with the full faith and credit of the
United States government (Jaffee 2006).

   In response the crisis, observers have offered the full range of reform proposals
ranging from complete public control of Fannie and Freddie to total government exit
from the mortgage-insurance business. These proposals have swirled within a larger
debate over banking sector regulation and taxation, where advocates have urged bank
size limitations, bans on proprietary trading, and Tobin taxes, and even temporary
nationalization. In some cases, it is difficult to understand what even the most well-
managed public intervention would achieve, but in every case, it is difficult to assess the
political risks that may distort any reform operation.

   Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae might be privatized with stern assurances that even
though the government has bailed them out in the past, this will never, ever happen again,
but should investors believe those assurances? The institutional rules may be written to
prevent bailouts, but those rules can be changed; profit-making mortgage insurance giants
will certainly have the resources and incentives to influence congress and regulators. The
institutional arrangements for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will face the twin political
risks of subversion, where private companies capture policy (Stigler 1971), and political
favoritism, where public leaders use government policy to pursue their own pet
objectives, such as populism.




                                               3
   These risks help determine the consequences of any institutional reform. If private
mortgage insurer entities are replaced with a purely public mortgage entity, then political
leaders may seek to use that entity for political benefits that are barely related to general
welfare. If the private entities are re-privatized, then their new leaders may be able to
influence the system and again obtain de facto free public insurance for a private entity.

   Such political risks are endemic in any public response to market failure, and the
benefits of reducing market failures can be offset by the risks of political failure. Public
ownership once seemed like a reasonable response to the downsides of natural
monopolies, which is why distinguished Progressive Era economists, such as Ely (1901)
argued for municipal ownership of utilities and transit systems. Yet public ownership has
often been associated with operating losses, and allegations of excessively generous
union contracts (Pashigian 1976). Since Stigler (1971), economists have argued that
regulatory agencies, such as the Interstate Commerce Commission, are often captured by
the industries that they are meant to control.

   This paper examines the impact of the competing political risks of corruption and
political favoritism in three settings with market failures. The paper follows the
institutional design literature (e.g. Laffont and Tirole 1991) and assumes that the broad
contours of the policy are set optimally, but that the implementation of the policy faces
the risks of private influence and public malfeasance. In these settings, the risk of
corruption is modeled by assuming that with some probability policies are implemented
to maximize the profits of a favored firm (or firms). The risk of political favoritism is
addressed by assuming that, with some probability, political leaders just seek to
maximize the well-being of some segment of society. In this paper, I typically refer to
favoritism as populism and assume that populist leaders favor the poor, but a more
realistic assumption might be that politicians favor the strongest political groups, which
might mean public sector unions or agricultural workers or the wealthy.

   In the formal models, the risks of corruption and populism are treated as exogenous
variables that help determine optimal institutions. Section II of this paper discusses the
forces that determine these risks. While there is significant evidence suggesting that
cultural norms strongly influence corruption (Fisman and Miguel 2007), there is also

                                                 4
ample room for using the tools of economics to make sense of the incidence of corruption
(Becker and Stigler 1974). For example, the scale of profits that can be achieved by
subverting public officials will surely help determine whether public officials are
subverted. Political favoritism will be more likely if politicians are tied to particular
population subgroups (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly 1999) or if subgroups have an
unusually powerful role in determining elections.

   Section III then re-examines two problems which provide a clear motivation for
public intervention—monopoly and externalities—in light of the risks of corruption and
populism. I consider four possible approaches to the problem of a natural monopoly:
laissez-faire, price regulation, quantity-subsidies and total public ownership. I assume
away all of the standard reasons why any particular intervention cannot achieve the first
best, so that in the model, a benevolent leader can and will achieve economic efficiency
with any of the interventions. In my framework, the case for and against particular
interventions depends on their strength at resisting the rival risks of corruption (serving
the interests of the monopoly) or populism (serving the interest of those citizens who do
not pay taxes and do not own the corporation).

   Laissez-faire creates the standard welfare losses due to underproduction, but there are
no extra risks from either corruption or populism. If the political leader is potentially
corruptible, public ownership will continue to yield the first best outcome, since it does
not produce a private entity able to bribe the public official. In the case of populism,
however, public ownership leads to high social losses from under-pricing (the good will
literally be free in the model), over-consumption and large operating losses.

   In the case of a corrupt official, price controls produce the laissez-faire outcome, as
the price ceiling is set at the profit maximizing level, which is the same level chosen by
the monopolist in the absence of the price regulation. Populist produces monopsony level
price controls which produces shortages, but unless the shortages lead to misallocation
across consumers (Glaeser and Luttmer 2003), the social welfare from monopsony may
well be higher than the social welfare from monopoly, depending on whether supply is
more or less elastic than demand.


                                              5
   If there is either corruption or populism, the public official will set subsidies at the
highest possible permissible level. This strange congruence, where completely different
motives produce identical policy distortions, reappears regularly in this paper. Maximal
subsidies occur under corruption because subsidies increase the monopolist’s profits.
Populism produces maximal subsidies because the politician’s poorer constituents do not
pay for the taxes needed to pay for the subsidies, yet they benefit from the lower prices
that subsidies produce. The implicit subsidy, through implicit government insurance,
enjoyed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac may well reflect a combination of influence by
those companies and a desire by some politicians to favor middle-income borrowers.

   When populism is the larger risk, price controls produce more losses, but when
corruption is more common, public ownership leads to higher levels of social welfare.
These results may explain why public ownership seemed natural to many as a solution to
monopoly pricing in late 19th century America. If the political risks of corruption and
populism are sufficiently high, then laissez-faire may produce higher levels of public
welfare than interventions.

   When externalities are the problem, instead of monopoly, I consider quantity controls
instead of price controls. Otherwise, the results are similar to the monopoly setting.
Public ownership continues to yield optimal social welfare with corruption and low
pricing with populism. A quantity control leads to the monopoly outcome with
corruption, and either laissez-faire or a monopsony-related quantity limitations with
populism.

   If the externality is negative and calls for a Pigouvian tax, then the downside from
corruption or populism is relatively limited if the taxes are used to reduce the other taxes
paid by wealthier taxpayers. Corruption will lead to no regulation, and populism will
lead to a tax between zero and the optimal Pigouvian tax. If the tax does benefit the
politicians’ supporters, then Pigouvian taxes create the danger of significant over-taxing
for revenue purposes. In some circumstances, the risks of populist over-taxing can mean
that there are lower losses from revenue-less taxes (where the tax is pure social loss) than
from revenue raising taxes. This result provides conditions when public campaigns that


                                              6
vilify smoking or drinking sugary soda, which are sometimes linked with libertarian
paternalism may be desirable (Sunstein and Thaler 2009).

    If the externality was positive, which calls for a Pigouvian subsidy, then both
corruption and populism again lead to maximal subsidies. As in the monopoly case,
these subsidies can lead to significant welfare losses. As such, political risks create an
important difference between positive and negative externalities and suggest that there is
considerably more risk from subsidies than from taxes, because taxes have a natural
barrier at zero.

    In Section IV, I turn to default insurance and regulation in a model that loosely
follows Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Investors lend to borrowers and receive claims on
future income, but they investors may turn out to be impatient and seek to resell those
securities. Private information about the quality of those securities creates the possibility
for a lemons market breakdown that leads to higher borrowing costs ex ante. Default
insurance creates a means of mitigating that problem, but private and public default
insurance creates its own problem. Private insurance companies have an incentive to
issue too little equity, in order to maximize the returns on equity for shareholders during
good states of the world. Limited liability limits the losses during bad states. In some
cases, the public may end up covering the losses of the private insurer to avoid a market
breakdown.

    The significant risk in this scenario is the private mortgage insurers have an incentive
to leave themselves under-capitalized. Protected by limited liability, insurers would like
to have negative profits in bad states and higher profits, per unit of investment, in the
good state. By under-capitalizing, the firm increases profitability in the good state and
creates no added costs to shareholders in the high default state, since insurer profits are
zero in the adverse state of nature with high default levels. This creates the risk of under-
funded insurers, which can lead to a breakdown of the entire market.

    Again, the public sector can react to this problem with capital requirements, asset
fees, catastrophic risk insurance or outright nationalization. As in the case of banking,
corruption and populism push in the same direction—more subsidized risk-taking.


                                              7
Nationalization tends to be more efficient in the case of corruption, but it creates the
greatest losses from populism. The case for private for public ownership depends on the
relative risks of populism and corruption.

    In Section V, I apply this model briefly to the case studies of Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae. Populism seems to have motivated some political support for these entities, but
they were also aggressive in lobbying and funding political campaigns. Their political
support seems to have generally limited attempts to strongly regulate their activities. By
contrast, public entities, like the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Ginnie Mae,
have performed somewhat better which may suggest that populism is less risk than
corruption.

    While the model is quite stylized, it does provide some insight relating to the current
debates over Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. Public intervention of any sort in these
markets is fraught with political risk. The possibility of populism or subversion both
push to excessive risk-taking and insufficient capital reserves. Private ownership creates
none of the protection it provides in more standard scenarios, since the public sector is
still able to spend without limit. If the risk of corruption is sufficiently high, public
ownership may be safer for taxpayers than privatization.




    II.       Political Risks, Dictatorship and Disorder

    The new institutional economics (Djankov, Glaeser, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes and
Shleifer 2003) presents institutional design as a tradeoff between different private and
public welfare losses. In most societies, there is no means of achieving perfection, just
the chance to trade off between public abuses, sometimes referred to as dictatorship, and
private abuses, sometimes referred to as disorder. Countries face an institutional
possibilities frontier offering choices between systems with more dictatorship
(communism) and more disorder (laissez-faire capitalism). The shape of that frontier
depends on cultural and economic fundamentals, such as the level of human capital. One
explanation for Wagner’s Law, the fact that government spending increases more than
proportionally with national income, is that as countries develop the institutional

                                               8
possibilities frontier shifts and citizens increase their ability to control the government
more effectively. As citizens become better at disciplining the state, public interventions
becomes more attractive.

   In this paper, I will also address welfare losses coming from two different sources,
and one of those sources is tied to private initiative (corruption) while the other reflects
purely public malfeasance (political favoritism or populism). Yet both issues are
basically examples of “dictatorship,” in the sense that social costs occur through the
action of the state. In the examples, I consider there will also be social losses from
laissez-faire policies and those represent “disorder.”

   In the model, I treat the probability of facing a corrupt or populist public leader as
fixed and exogenous but these probabilities actually reflect deeper economic and political
variables. This preliminary section briefly discusses the forces that shift those
probabilities.

   The Beckerian (1968) approach to corruption suggests that corruption occurs when
the benefits of accepting money or favors in exchange for subverting public policy
outweigh the costs to the individual. Those costs are likely to include both real penalties,
such as going to jail or losing an election, and psychic costs, which may differ from
culture to culture. In a Coasian world where bargaining is easy, a corrupt bargain should
occur whenever the total benefits of the deal to the private entity exceed the costs to the
public leader.

   That logic suggests that the magnitude of the benefits that can accrue from corruption
should help determine the level of corruption. As the economic scale of an activity
increases, the gains from corruption should also increase. Glaeser and Shleifer (2003)
argue that the increasing size of industrial concerns during the 19th century meant that
firm’s ability to bribe increased as well, and that led to a subversion on many institutions,
such as the courts, during the Gilded Age. The move from a tort-based system of
addressing railway-related externalities to greater regulation may have been a response to
the fact that the costs to judges of being corrupt were overwhelmed by the increasingly
large economic rents that came from skewing justice.


                                              9
   If bargaining across firms is difficult, especially when trying to arrange for large
bribes, then competition will lead to less corruption risk than monopoly. The political
dangers from concentrated economic entities have led observers from Woodrow Wilson
to Simon Johnson (Johnson and Kwak 2011) to call for size limitations on particular
firms, like large banks. One argument for why larger firms may find regulations
attractive is that there are returns-to-scale in rent-seeking that enable those firms to
particularly excel in subverting the regulator and getting the rules changed to suit their
own needs (Peltzman 1976). In the models, I treat the probability of corruption as being
identical in the case of regulating a natural monopoly and regulating a competitive
market with externalities, but it seems likely that the risk is higher in the case of
monopoly.

   Finally, the possible rents from corruption depend heavily on the nature of the
intervention itself. In principle, the problem of combating monopoly under-production
can be addressed with either a price ceiling or a subsidy to production. The profits
gained from subverting the price ceiling are capped at the standard monopoly earnings,
but the profits gained from subverting a subsidy are virtually limitless.

   While the benefits that come from corruption may be quite obvious, the costs that
prevent corruption are often less clear. Fisman and Miguel (2007) provide striking
evidence that diplomats from cultures that are thought to be less corrupt are also less
likely to rack up parking tickets while at the United Nations. There is no legal penalty for
these tickets, but still the diplomats from less corrupt cultures have fewer tickets. Does
this reflect a complicated set of social enforcement mechanisms, where Swedish
diplomats are informally punished if they abuse their host community, or has Swedish
culture inculcated a taste for honesty?

   While culture surely matters, it certainly seems possible for a strong central leader,
like Lee Kwan Yew, to radically reduce corruption through a combination of severe
penalties and lower standards for proof.i The Beckerian approach may omit important
psychological and cultural forces around wrong-doing, but the probability of arrest and
the size of the punishment still help deter crime. In highly corrupt societies, the


                                              10
probability of arrest often appears to be extremely low, partially because everyone is in
on the game.

   When political cultures work to limit corruption, typically officials end up enforcing
rules on each other. Fishback, Kantor and Wallis (2006), for example, present evidence
suggesting that the federal bureaucracy created by New Deal programs significantly
reduced American municipal corruption. The process of creating documents for a
different branch of government created a natural outside observer. American history is
replete with examples, such as the famous Lexow Committee of 1894, where corruption
was investigated by politicians representing a different party who were in power within a
different level of government.

   One impact of increasingly tough penalties on overt corruption is that corruption will
take more opaque and more legal forms. If it is no longer possible to pay senators with
paper bags full of cash, then campaign donations and the promise of future favors will
have to suffice. Being forced to use more roundabout and inefficient means of
subversion is essentially a tax on corruption which should reduce its incidence, but that
hardly means that subversion is likely to vanish altogether.

   Across countries, corruption is correlated with ethnic fragmentation (Mauro 1995),
French legal origin (Djankov, LaPorta, Lopes-de-Silanes and Shleifer 2003) and
education. That latter correlation also holds for U.S. states (Glaeser and Saks 2006).
These facts may say something about the culture created by education and English
common law or they may reflect political institutions in well educated, former English
colonies that discipline corrupt politicians.

   The second political risk is that a political leader may subvert policies in order to
achieve some objective other than maximizing social welfare. As maximizing social
welfare is rarely well-defined, outside of economists’ mathematical models, political
favoritism or populism is rarely punished with criminal sanctions. Instead the costs that
can occur are limited to punishment at the voting booth or perhaps psychic costs to the
politician. Moreover, while corruption is perhaps reasonably approximated with the
assumption of discrete choices—take the bribe or don’t—political favoritism is almost


                                                11
surely a matter of degree in almost every case—how much to slant policies towards a
favored group.

   Since we understand so little about the costs of political favoritism to individual
politicians, most of the literature discussing its incidence has focused on the benefits of
such favoritism. Ethnic and cultural fragmentation appear to be associated with
favoritism (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly 1993), either because fragmentation reduces the
consensus on the common good or because it leads to politicians who have close ties with
a particular national subgroup (Glaeser and Shleifer 2005). Politicians who are closely
tied to a particular subgroup are likely to support that group both because of innate
preferences and because they perceive their political futures as being tied to the well-
being of that group. Jim Crow politicians, such as Theodore Bilbo, appear to have
advanced racist policies for both reasons.

   Political favoritism should also be more common when particular groups have
disproportionate political influence. For example, critical swing voters should attract
favoritism. Well organized political groups, like public sector unions, should elicit
favoritism. Finally, those groups that are specifically favored by political institutions, as
farmers are by the U.S. Senate, should attract targeted support.

   Political favoritism may be less costly if the impact on the favoritism on general well-
being is easy to observe and if the political leader is held electorally accountable for the
community’s success. For that reason, executives, such as mayors, are often thought to
be less prone to such favoritism than legislators, such as city council members, who are
not held responsible for the general success of their locale. Indeed, the tendency to
punish political leaders for widespread local problems is sufficiently strong so that
governors are punished for the pure bad luck of low oil prices or a national recession
(Wolfers 2006).

   The political risks of corruption and favoritism do vary greatly across time and space,
but they are never actually non-existent. The next section examines their impact on
standard models of monopoly and addressing externalities.



                                             12
    III.    Management of Monopoly and Externalities

    When there are either externalities or a natural monopoly, laissez-faire fails to
produce the socially optimal outcome. Yet public responses generate their own risks
when politicians are not perfectly benevolent. Here I first examine monopoly and then
externalities and in each setting, I consider four institutional options: (1) laissez-faire; (2)
quantity or price controls; (3) taxes and/or subsidies; and (4) pure public ownership and
control. When the costs of public ownership will only be paid by the rich, I also consider
the possibility that taxes on firms will be given as transfers to the poor.

    Following the discussion above, I assume that the government constrained by the
basic institutional options. Laissez-faire gives the government no options whatsoever.
Quantity controls means that the government can reduce firm production as much as it
likes, including shutting the firm down altogether, and price controls can act as either a
floor or a ceiling. In either case, the government cannot force firms to produce more than
they would like given the existing price. Taxes and subsidies can only be levied per unit
produced and there will be an upper limit on the subsidy denoted . This upper limit is
necessary because otherwise, corruption and populism would lead to infinite subsidies.
Moreover, if there is supposed to be a tax it cannot be turned into a subsidy and a subsidy
cannot be turned into a tax. There are no constraints on prices or quantities in the case of
public ownership, except that the government must charge the same price to all
consumers.

    In all cases discussed here, I assume that a benevolent government could achieve first
best outcomes under any of the activist regimes. I don’t mean to suggest that there aren’t
informational or organization barriers to producing first best outcomes, even if political
leaders are benign. I assume these issues away to focus on the political risks that may
influence optimal policy. As such, the barriers on government behavior will only become
important if the government is less than benign.

    I consider two risks that might afflict the government that is administering policies,
with the limits imposed by the institutional regime: corruption and populism. Corruption



                                               13
occurs with probability     and implies that the government has been bribed into doing
the will of the business sector. Government policies will then maximize profits.

   Populism occurs with probability        , and this state means that the government will
choose policies to maximize the well-being only of the poor citizens. The welfare losses
of populisms will be particularly stark because I assume a starkly utilitarian welfare
function. If the welfare function was more egalitarian, then the social costs of this regime
will be somewhat mitigated.

Managing Monopoly

       In this first example, I consider the management of a natural monopoly. The
technological basics of the model are standard. There is a single producer, that has
perhaps paid fixed costs to enter, and that pays a cost C(Q) to produce Q units that are
shared among the N consumers.

       Each consumer is ex ante identical, but who randomly become wealthy with
probability   or poor with probability 1      . If they are wealthy, they earn a higher
income, own the shares of all produces and pay all taxes. If they are poor, they earn a
lower income, own no shares and pay no taxes. The utility functions of both groups are
V(q)+Income-pq, where q is the quantity consumed of the product, p is its price and V(q)
is weakly concave, and that V’(q)=0 for a finite level of q, which is denoted          . The
demand curve for every person rich or poor is V’(q)=p, so everyone consumes the same
amount of the product.

   While I will discuss issues of egalitarianism at length, I will assume evaluate different
positive outcomes based on individual’s expected utility as of birth or—equivalently—
the equally weighted purely utilitarian welfare function, which reduces to NV(q)-
C(Nq)+Other Income. Holding consumption of the good constant, the price paid for the
good is essentially a transfer. I will ignore the other income, which does not change

across settings, and let                      , describe the relevant social welfare

function, which will change across different institutions and political outcomes. The
optimal level of “q,” denoted        satisfies ′               ′         ) and produces


                                             14
welfare             . I assume that U(.) is globally concave, i.e. 0         "           "     , so
welfare always falls as the quantity moves further away from the otptimal amount.

     The first order condition for demand is ′                , which as q=Q/N, delivers the
inverse demand curve: ′         /        ). The laissez-faire quantity of output, denoted
will satisfy the monopolists first order condition                                                 .
As                   0,                and                          .

     If the government is benign and perfectly informed, the problem can be solved in any
number of ways. Most drastically, the government can nationalize the monopoly and
                                               ∗
choose to produce the efficient quantity,          , of the good and set a price that clears the
market.

     Less severely, the government can impose a price maximum of              which equals
      ∗                                                   ∗
 ′        . Given that price, the firm maximizes ′                      , which leads to the
efficient output level. The maximum price limit eliminates the firm’s incentive to under-
produce, since it cannot raise prices.

     Finally, the government can engage in quantity-based subsidy scheme that would pay
the firm a bonus of “t” units per unit produced. If this bonus was paid for with a lump
sum tax, the firm would choose the optimal quantity and price if the bonus equals / at

the efficient output level or                           . When the firm maximizes

                                , it will also produce the optimal quantity of output.

     Given identical consumers that own the monopolist, there are no equity issues. I have
assumed away any inefficiency of government ownership, or information limitations that
might mean that price limits or production subsidies are chosen incorrectly, which is the
best case scenario for anti-monopoly intervention. In the case of either populism or
corruption, the key assumption is that the politicians’ preferences are not perfectly
aligned with the welfare of voters.

     I now turn to the performance of these institutions in the presence of political risks.
In the case of corruption, public ownership continues to produce the optimal quantity.


                                                   15
There is no private entity to bribe the politicians and thus even when the politicians are
venal, there is no one to take advantage of their venality. Hence welfare remains
           . In reality, a sufficiently corrupt politician will still figure out ways to extract
rents from public ownership, like overpaying for inputs and providing outputs free of
charge in exchange for kickbacks, but these are outside of the scope of the model.

    In the case of a price restriction, a corrupt politician serving the monopolies’ interests
cannot do better for the firm than putting the price at the monopoly price. This means
that output will be        and welfare will be            .

    In the case of a subsidy, the problem of corruption automatically leads to the maximal
subsidy, as firm profits are always increasing in the level of the subsidy. The level of
output in the case, denoted        satisfies                                       , as the
subsidy regime must admit the optimal subsidy,                                 . The subsidy
must increase the firms’ quantity produced, which will lower welfare beyond the optimal
amount, so higher subsidy limits will always reduce well-being. If is sufficiently high,
the firm may produce beyond the point where the price of the good is zero, and the
welfare from the corrupt regime will be worse than in either alternative institutional
setting or in the case of laissez-faire.

    What will populism do under the three different regimes? Since the losses born by
the public company are born by the rich, whom the populism ignores, the populist will set
p=0, which leads to consumption                       .

    In the price control, the populist will over-restrict setting essentially the monopsony
price for the good. The populist will choose          to maximize                        , where
       is the supply delivered at that given price maximum, which satisfies
=C’(          . I define the quantity implied by the populist’s ideal restriction as          . In
the appendix, I prove that:

    Claim 1: If NC     N               ′′        , then the populists’ ideal price restriction
leads to lower consumption and social welfare levels than monopoly pricing, and the



                                                 16
populists’ idea restriction leads to higher consumption and social welfare levels than
monopoly pricing if NC      N              ′′        .

   That claim reminds us that the distortion created by a monopsony price cap can be
larger or smaller than the distortion created by monopoly pricing. The monopsony
distortion is generally smaller when supply is more elastic, i.e. C”(.) is greater, and the
monopoly distortion will be larger when demand is more elastic, i.e. V”(.) is greater.

   Finally, I turn to the subsidy. Since the populist is just maximizing V(q)-pq, it will
choose the subsidy that minimizes price, which means that maximal subsidy. Oddly, the
corrupt politician, completely in the pay of the company, and the populist that puts the
poor first, both agree on production subsidies for the monopolistic firm, because their
costs are born by the wealthy taxpayers. The following small table captures the outcomes
in the eight possible situations:

                                Corrupt Politician              Populist Politician
Laissez-Faire                   Monopoly Outcome                Monopoly Outcome
Public Ownership                Competitive Outcome             Free Good
Price Control                   Monopoly Outcome                Monopsony Outcome
Subsidize Quantity              Maximum Subsidy                 Maximum Subsidy



   I assume that the maximum subsidy is always less desirable than either the monopoly
outcome or the monopsony outcome, which means the in the presence of political risk,
quantity subsidies are never desirable. The desirable of the other options are described
by the following proposition:

Proposition 1: If the free, good outcome is better than the monopsony outcome, then
public ownership always dominates price controls, but if the free, good outcome is worse,

then price controls dominate public ownership if and only if                                .

Laissez-faire dominates public ownership if and only if                               and

dominates price controls if and only if                                 1.

                                                17
   The proposition provides the basic results on how political risks shape the desirable
policies. If high subsidies lead to socially undesirable outcomes, then addressing the
monopoly problem by subsidizing output leads to bad outcomes in the case of either
populism or corruption.

   The tradeoff between public ownership and price controls depends on the relative
probability of corruption or populism. In settings where corruption is normal, but
populism is rare, then this makes public ownership more attractive, for public
ownership’s great strength is that it is it does not produce a private entity ready to bribe
the politician. This result may explain why public ownership was relatively popular
during the Progressive Era. In those years, corruption seemed like a great threat and the
perils of populist politicians who could run public utilities at massive losses in order to
placate their constituents may have seemed less apparent.

   But political risks also tend to make any intervention less attractive, even when there
is an obvious monopoly problem. If the risks of populism are relatively high, then public
ownership becomes less attractive than laissez-faire. If monopsony is worse than
monopoly and if the risks of both populism and corruption are high, then price controls
may be worse than just allowing the monopolist to function.

   Managing Externalities

   We now consider a setting where the case for intervention reflects an externality—
good or bad—and making two alternations to the model. First, supply is now made by
measure one of competitive firms, each with cost functions C(Q). In the absence of
subsidies or quantity controls, this leads to first order condition P=C’(Q) which
determines supply. This keeps the core functions identical to the monopoly case, but
drops the assumption that the firm sets prices. I do however assume that if the politicians
are corrupt they will try to maximize the earnings of the entire industry not just a single
firm. Furthermore, I assume that individual welfare equals V(q)+x*Average Level of q+
Income-Pq, where x represents the size of the externality (x may be positive or negative).

Social welfare is now                               , which is optimized at        that



                                              18
satisfies ′                  ′       , which will be greater than         if and only if the
externality is positive, i.e. x>0.

    The pure laissez-faire case actually yields               which would be the first best output
in monopoly case discussed above, but is suboptimal here because of the externalities.
The first best can be achieved through public ownership, which just chooses the optimal
level of output, or through a Pigouvian tax or subsidy equal to “x.” A quantity control
fixing output at                 would also yield the optimal quantity with a negative externality.
Quantity controls do not provide a natural means of handling a positive externality. In
principle, a fixed price level could also achieve the optimal quantity, but it would do so
by creating shortages and the possibility of misallocation across consumers, so I ignore
that option.

    We now consider the impact of corruption and populism on these three interventionist
options. In the case of corruption, public ownership continues to produce the first best
outcome; there is again no private entity to corrupt the political leaders. In the case of a
populist politician, who ignores the wealthy taxpayers costs of funding the operation, the
good is produced and sold to maximize                              , which means p=0 and quantity
is set so that either    ′               (if x is negative) or ′       0 if the externality is
positive. In the case of a negative externality, the good is sold at a price of zero, and
rationed to individuals. In the case of a positive externality, you would like to force
people to consume beyond the point where V’(q)=0, but that is impossible. I denote the
quantity as         , which will equal              when x>0 and will be less than          if x<0.
This seems likely to be an extremely poor outcome from an efficiency perspective.

    In the case of quantity controls and negative externalities, corruption will lead to the
monopoly outcome for firms, called               in the previous section; since the corrupt
politician essentially internalizes the firms’ desire to collectively restrict production. This
quantity may actually be above                 if the externality is negative and severe, but will
lie below          if the externality is moderate or positive.

    In this case of populism, the government will choose “q” to maximize the value of
                        , which means that if x<0, quantity will satisfy       ′

                                                    19
 ′              0. The populist is interested in lowering the prices paid by consumers, and
that will reduce its willingness to reduce quantities. Since restricted quantity creates a
gap between supply and demand, price is set by the demand curve and p’(q)=V”(q). The
quantity-controlling populist sets q so that        "              0 as long as the “q” implied
by this is below the free market quantity. I denote this quantity              (the monopsony
quantity in the presence of an externality). If x is sufficiently large so that the optimal
quantity, implied by ′                    ′                0, is greater than the free market
quantity, a populist government with quantity controls will not intervene since it can only
force firms to produce less than they normally would, not to produce more.

     Subsidies, used in the case of a positive externality, will be set to the maximum
amount allowable if the politician is corrupt. If the politician is populist, then the subsidy
will be chosen to maximize                              . This will also lead to maximum
possible subsidy, since prices fall with the subsidy and there is the added benefit of
increasing the positive externality.

     Taxes, used in the case of negative externality, will be set to zero if the politician is
corrupt and trying to maximize industry profits. In the case of a negative externality and
tax, the populist politician’s behavior depends on whether the politician’s poorer
constituents are able to benefit from the tax or whether the tax goes to defray the other
tax costs paid by the wealthy. If the tax revenues benefit only the richer voters, the
populist will choose the tax to maximize                                      , which leads to the
same condition as in the case of the quantity control with a negative externality:
     "         . Just as in that case, the politician chooses a tax to produce either
(the monopsony amount in the presence of an externality) or the free market quantity,
whichever is smaller. This provides another setting where populism and corruption can
lead to exactly the same outcome.

     If the politician’s constituents can benefit from the tax revenues, then the populist
maximizes                                               . I assume that they cannot be targeted
towards the poor in particular, but they can be remitted back to everyone in some form,
like spending on public services. The preferred tax satisfies                      "    , which


                                               20
is higher than the optimal tax. I denote the associated quantity as             because the
tax is transferring from firms to the populists constituents.

   The table again represents the different outcomes

                                Corrupt Politician              Populist Politician
Laissez-Faire                   Externality not internalized    Externality Not Internalized
Public Ownership                First Best Outcome              Free Good or Good Priced
                                                                at Externality Alone
Quantity Control                Monopoly Outcome                Monopsony Quantity with
(Negative Externality)                                          Externality or Free Market
Subsidize Quantity              Maximum Subsidy                 Maximum Subsidy
(Positive Externality)
Tax Quantity                    Externality not internalized    Monopsony Quantity with
(Negative Externality)                                          Externality or Free Market
No revenues for the poor
Tax Quantity                    Externality not internalized    Tax equals externality plus
(Negative Externality)                                          transfer
Revenues help the poor



   Proposition 2a describes the welfare tradeoffs between the options when there is a
negative externality. Proposition 2b describes the tradeoffs when the externality is
positive.

   Proposition 2a (Negative Externality): If the Pigouvian tax is rebated to wealthier
citizens, then Pigouvian taxes dominate quantity controls if and only if welfare under free
competition is greater than welfare with monopoly production levels; if                       ,
then Pigouvian taxes always strictly dominate laissez-faire, and dominate public

ownership if and only if                             . If the Pigouvian tax is not rebated to

wealthier citizens, then the Pigouvian tax yields higher expected welfare than the quantity



                                             21
control if and only if
                                                                       ,         .

   The proposition highlights the relative strength of Pigouvian taxes, especially when
they are not vulnerable to being used for political favoritism. The Pigouvian tax always
dominates laissez-faire, because even if it is subverted, it is likely to only produce the
laissez-faire outcome. As long as free competition is preferable to the monopoly
outcome generated by a corrupt quantity regulator, then the Pigouvian tax is also
preferable to a quantity control, because it is somewhat less vulnerable to abuse. The
comparison with public ownership again depends on the probability of populism vs.
corruption. When corruption is a far greater threat, then public ownership remains the
safer reform. When populism is more common, then the Pigouvian tax yields higher
expected welfare.

   When revenues can serve populist purposes, it is not necessarily true that Pigouvian
taxes become worse, but there do appear to be more cases where the Pigouvian tax is
dominated by quantity controls. The revenue-raising tax may not be so bad at all, but it
can be, and the Pigouvian tax can produce less welfare than the quantity control even if
free competition provides better outcomes than the monopoly-like outcome that is created
by a corrupt politician using a quantity control to restrict production.

   Proposition 2b (Positive Externality): The Pigouvian subsidy dominates public

ownership if and only if                       and dominates laissez-faire if and only if

                              . Public ownership dominates laissez-faire if and only if

                         .


   This proposition suggests that there are many more occasions when laissez-faire is
dominant when externalities are positive than when externalities are negative. Political
risks are relatively contained with Pigouvian taxes, because there is a natural barrier at
zero, but there is rarely such a natural risk with a subsidy. Pigouvian taxes are therefore
relatively safe, even with these political risks, while Pigouvian subsidies are not.


                                              22
Laissez-faire is more attractive than subsidies whenever the combined risk of populism
and corruption are sufficiently high and more attractive than public ownership as long as
the risk of populism is sufficiently great. The tradeoff between public ownership and
subsidies depends on the relative risks of populism, which can make public ownership
riskier, and corruption which increases the risks associated with Pigouvian subsidies.

   One implication of this discussion is that limiting the incentives for government
malfeasance may be quite desirable and such limits might be using tax-like instruments
that raise no revenues. One interpretation of psychological approaches to paternalism,
such as advertising depicting the health consequences of smoking to people’s lungs, is
that they are revenue-less taxes that reduce the pleasure of the activity without generating
any associated returns to the treasury. While sometimes these interventions can be
justified as providers of information, there is little evidence supporting the view that
smokers are ignorant of the risks of smoking (Viscusi 1992). The alternative view is that
these interventions create psychological costs when people consume the depicted goods.
George Loewenstein and Glaeser (2009) have both questioned the value of these policies
precisely on these grounds. If politicians were always benevolent, then these taxes would
always be suboptimal relative to using standard Pigouvian taxes.

   Yet the presence of political risk, and especially the risk of populist politicians who
like taxing externalities to provide benefits for their constituents, makes such policies
somewhat more attractive. I now consider the possibility that the government can use a
tax, imposed directly on consumers, that generates no revenues. I only treat the case with
negative externalities and I assume, as above, that the tax benefits everyone, not just the
populist politicians’ constituents.

   I assume that                      .5    and                 .5     .

   Proposition 3: If the politicians are benevolent, then the revenue-raising tax is
preferable to the revenue-less tax, and if the politicians are corrupt then no taxes are
raised in either case, but if the politicians are populist, then revenue-less taxes dominate
revenue-raising taxes when x is sufficiently close to zero.



                                             23
   The conditions under which a revenue-less tax dominates a revenue-raising tax are
fairly extreme, yet the basic point remains. The revenue-less tax may be subject to less
abuse by a populist politician looking to raise revenues for his favorite constituents. In
extreme cases, this benefit may offset the apparent waste of an intervention that causes
harm to consumers without raising any offsetting revenues.




   IV.     Bank Runs, Liquidity and Mortgage Insurance

   I now turn to the particularly relevant issue of political risks and financial regulation.
I begin with a model of banks and bank runs, borrowing heavily from Diamond and
Dybvig’s classic model of bank runs. I then turn to a model of security-insurance, which
can be interpreted as the mortgage insurance provided by the Government-Sponsored
Enterprises (GSEs). In both cases, laissez-faire creates significant welfare losses, but the
presence of political risks creates potential losses from interventions.

   Default Insurance and Political Risk

   The following model is an adaptation of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). At time zero,
there are three classes of individuals: investors, non-discretionary borrowers and
discretionary borrowers. Borrowers, of both varieties, are endowed with no units of the
consumption good in periods zero or one, but they may receive one unit of the
consumption good in period two. Non-discretionary borrowers are completely impatient
and only care about consumption at time zero, which is denoted       . Discretionary
borrowers maximize             , where      1,. It will be socially inefficient for
discretionary borrowers to consume in period zero, rather than period two, and this
creates a potential welfare loss from overly subsidized borrowing. But since these
borrowers will not enter the market unless borrowing is highly subsidized, they will not
figure in the discussion of the model until I turn to government interventions.

   Borrowers, of either type have an ex ante probability      of receiving no income in
period two. If this occurs, they will default and there is no method of punishing them or
otherwise extracting resources from them. At time one, it is revealed whether default


                                             24
levels among borrowers will be high or low. The unconditional probability of either state
is equal to one-half, and if the default level is high then a proportion     ∆ of the
borrowers will default. If the probability of default is low, then a proportional         ∆ of
the borrowers will default.

    I will primarily consider a lending market where investors give money to borrowers
in period zero and in exchange they receive a claim to the borrowers’ potential income in
period two. These claims are meant to be a stylized version of a mortgage contract
(albeit without collateral) or any other loan, and I will refer to them as debt contracts.
These claims can be traded in period one, but there is a potentially a lemons problem that
can compromise the tradability of the debt contracts. I will later compare this market in
which lending operates through tradable securities with a market served by financial
intermediaries.

    At time zero, all investors are endowed with units to invest. I will assume that there
are enough investors, and they have enough income in every period, so that there is never
any shortfall in funds to lend. There are two types of investors—patient and impatient—
and investors learn their type at time one. With probability t, investors are impatient and
receive utility equal to               . With probability 1-t, individuals are patient and
have utility equal              . As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), the possibility of
impatient investors creates a benefit from period one liquidity. By assuming that
investors have abundant funds, I ensure that the prices of debt contracts will equal their
expected value to investors in every period. Since discretionary borrowers value the
future more than investors (of either variety), they will not borrow unless borrowing is
subsidized by the state.

    In period one, investors learn the aggregate state of the world and whether they are
impatient. They also receive specific information about debt contracts that they have
purchased. Investors who lend to a specific borrower learn whether that individual is low
risk, in which case the probability of default is zero, or high risk, in which case the
probability of default is 1/v. I assume that only one investor will directly learn the
quality of any one asset, which follows a tradition of considering asymmetric information
in the mortgage market (Glaeser and Kallal 1997). It is simpler to assume that there is

                                              25
only one investor for each borrower, which I do, but a lemons problem would also result
even if the asset was shared among investors, as long as only one person knew the
borrower’s quality.

        The equilibrium price as of time zero for a claim on one unit of borrower’s
consumption in time two is denoted       . Investors are not able to resell these claims until
period one, when they have learned whether or not they are patient and whether or not
their borrower is high risk. Importantly, only the investor knows his own type and the
type of the lender, so that traded securities are effectively anonymous in period one. The
price of a claim for one unit of borrower consumption in period two, as of period one
denominated in period one consumption, is denoted         .

        The equilibrium price in period one is determined by the willingness-to-pay of
patient investors, and since their utility function is                , the price will equal the
expected value of the asset in period two. In period one, there are essentially “types” of
debt contracts that might be sold, categorized by the following box:

Asset        Held by patient investors                    Held by impatient investors


High Risk Expected Value=(v-1)/v                          Expected Value=(v-1)/v
             Share of Assets Outstanding:                 Share of Assets Outstanding:
               1             ∆ or 1                   ∆               ∆ or          ∆
Low Risk     Expected Value=1                             Expected Value=1
             Share of Assets Outstanding:                 Share of Assets Outstanding:
               1       1           ∆    or                    1            ∆   or   1
                       1       1             ∆                    ∆



        Impatient investors who hold high risk securities will always want to sell their
assets, and if they are the only group that sells the price of the asset will be one minus the
default rate or (v-1)/v. However, impatient investors with low risk securities would also
like to front load consumption, and they will always do this if 1               . If that

condition holds, the impatient investors with the safe securities will want to sell, even if

                                                 26
they are sure to be perceived as selling high risk securities. It is socially efficient for
those impatient investors to sell, since they value earlier consumption while there is an
abundance of patient investors who do not.

         While there is never any welfare gain from patient investors selling their
securities in the first period, patient investors with high risk securities will still want to
sell as long as the sales price is greater than (v-1)/v, as it will be if any low risk, impatient
investors are also selling. Any equilibrium where both groups of impatient investors sell
will also have patient investors dumping risky securities. By contrast, the patient
investors with low risk securities will never sell.

         As Proposition 4 describes, there typically are multiple equilibria. The
proposition also describes the time zero price, which will be determined by the expected
benefits to investors of buying the securities in the first place.

         Proposition 4: (a) If                 , then there exists an equilibrium where, in either

state of the world, only impatient investors who have high risk investments sell their
securities and the market price of these securities equals                     and the price in period zero

equals 1           1           1           .

                                       ∆
         (b) If                            , then there also exists an equilibrium where, in either
                                   ∆

state of the world, all impatient investors sell their securities in period one and the price
in period zero equals 1        . This equilibrium Pareto dominates the equilibrium with less
trade.

                               ∆                              ∆
         (c) If                                                   , then there also exists an equilibrium
                           ∆                              ∆

where impatient investors sell all their securities when default rates are low, but only
impatient investors with high risk debts sell when aggregate default rates are high.

                                                                           ∆
         The proposition notes that as long as                                           , there is the
                                                                       ∆

possibility for multiple equilibria. In one equilibrium, securities are thought by buyers to
be low quality, prices are low, and only low quality securities are sold. In a second


                                                     27
equilibrium, securities are assumed to be mixed in quality, prices are higher and as a
result, impatient investors sell their securities. In the high trade equilibrium, patient
securities with high default risks also sell their securities during the first period. There is
also a mixed equilibrium where a fraction of investors with high quality investors sell
their securities in period one. Since that equilibrium is essentially unstable, I will not
discuss it at length.ii

        It is also possible that there is a market breakdown if the aggregate default rate is
expected to be high, since in that case, there are more patient security owners with high
risk securities. Their greater presence in the market reduces the price that impatient
investors with good securities receive in the high trade equilibrium, and lower prices may
cause these groups to leave the market altogether and for a complete lemons market
breakdown to result.

        The model can explain why the liquidity of securities is likely to become more of
a problem during periods of greater distress. When the probability of default is low, then
it is easier to sustain the high trade equilibrium, because the number of impatient security
holders with low risk securities is a large share of the selling pool. As the share of sellers
who have high risk securities increases, the quality of pool deteriorates, eventually
causing impatient sellers to just sit on their good securities.

        The proposition focuses on equilibria that involve pure strategies, although there
                                             ∆
typically also exists (when                              ) an additional equilibrium where
                                         ∆

some, but not all, of the impatient investors with low risk securities sell. In that case, the
first period price must equal    to make those investors indifferent between selling and
not. That equilibrium is somewhat less interesting because it is inherently unstable. If a
slightly larger fraction of the impatient investors with good securities sell, then the price
of those securities will rise causing all impatient investors to sell. If a slightly lower
fraction of the impatient investors with good securities sell, then the price of those
securities will fall and no investors with good strategies will sell

        The potential for a lemons market breakdown creates scope for public
interventions. If the public sector, or the private sector, is able to homogenize the assets,

                                                 28
so that all of them carry equivalent risk, then the breakdown can be avoided and
borrower’s welfare will be improved because they will receive higher prices for selling
their claim to second period consumption.

       One solution for avoiding the social losses associated with the low trade
equilibrium is for securities to be insured by a public or private entity. The public entity
can be entirely self-financing, although it is also possible to use tax revenues in the
second period. For example, the simplest system would be to charge an up-front fee of
to provide complete insurance against default. This would cover the expected costs of
the system, but the system would earn excess profits in low default states and losses in
high default states. The profits could be returned to taxpayers and the losses could be
funded with taxes on investors (as a group) during the second period. Alternatively, if I
embedded this in a multi-period model, the agency could expect, like the Federal
Housing Administration (a real world analog to public insurance) to earn losses in bad
times and offset them with profits during good times.

       The public entity could also totally finance itself with a tax of ∆ . This higher
fee would cover losses in the high default state, and the profits could be returned to the
investors in the form of a 2∆ per security refund if the default rate proves to be low. In
either case, the period zero price of securities equals 1     , their expected value to
patient investors. If politicians are neither corrupt nor populist, then the public insurance
system creates no problems and achieves a liquid market and the first best outcome.

       Moreover, since the public insurance company earns no profits, it cannot corrupt
politicians. Just as in the discussion of monopoly and externalities above, if the political
system is corrupt, public insurance will continue to yield the first best outcome.
Populism however creates greater social costs.

       I assume that populist politicians are interested in benefitting borrowers, at the
expense of investors. This will lead populists to charge a desultory amount (effectively
zero) for default insurance and finance losses with general tax revenues imposed on
investors. This will represent redistribution from investors to borrowers. Since the



                                             29
security yields a return of one, for sure, in the second period, the period zero price will
also be one.

        But this high price also creates an efficiency loss because of the discretionary
borrowers. If the discretionary borrowers sell their claim for period two consumption
during period zero, they will receive one unit of consumption and will receive welfare of
one. But if they don’t borrow, they only receive period two consumption with probability
1     . As long as 1         1      , the populism will lead to inefficient over-borrowing
even by highly patient borrowers. Since they are trading an uncertain claim to future
consumption for the expected value of a sure claim, their borrowing is subsidized.

        Public insurance is not the only solution for this lemons breakdown problem. In
principle, private insurance can also homogenize the securities and allow them to be
traded without fear during period one. In this case, borrowers would pay a premium of
                                                                                            ∆
for insurance, and the insurance company would also raise equity of at least                        per
                                                                                                ∆

security insured. The insurance and investment fees would then be lent to borrowers, and
this would provide enough returns to cover investors’ losses in the bad state, and profits
                                     ∆     ∆
in the good state equal to                     , or twice the value of the initial investment.

Investors would be willing to buy equities since the expected return is one, and since
there is no asymmetric information about the insurance company risk, its securities could
be readily traded during period one.

        The great danger with a private insurance company is that it will issue too little
equity to cover its losses in the high default state of the world. For example, assume that
an insurance company that has raised EQ units of equity to cover an existing portfolio of
                                                            ∆
Q securities with potential defaults, where E equals                so that the first Q mortgages
                                                                ∆

were fully insured. The company now decides to insure an extra q mortgages, for which
it will raise eq units of equity.

        If “e” is not observable to investors who are insuring their mortgages, then the
                                                                           ∆
incentive to raise too little equity is obvious. If the firm sets e<               and is able to
                                                                               ∆

continue charging      for insurance, then existing shareholders stockholders will earn

                                                30
                                                                           ∆
nothing in the high default state (which was always true) and EQ                      ∗
∆
        in the good state, which is strictly decreasing in e. Existing shareholders will

benefit from issuing too little equity to cover losses in the bad state, since they stand to
earn more in the good state.

        The insurance company could continue to be able to charge         if consumers
incorrectly assess the lack of equity capital by the insurer, or if they believe that the
government will cover the shortfall in the high default state. Indeed, recent events do
suggest that in a high default state, nominally private mortgage insurers, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, will see their obligations paid by the government. This leads security
holders to continue to pay the full fee of , even if the insurance company has insufficient
capital to cover the shortfall.

        If the government doesn’t regulate equity and cannot commit not to cover losses
in the adverse state of the world, then competition among insurance companies will
reduce insurance costs to         ∆. This is enough to cover losses in the low default state,
and the government will cover extra costs in the bad state. Higher insurance costs would
lead to positive profits that would be competed away. Borrowers will be able to sell their
security for 1        ∆, and in this case, there is an implicit public subsidy that occurs to
lending, and this can lead the discretionary borrowers to borrow excessively.
Discretionary borrowers will also borrow if 1                 1        ∆ , or ∆     1
    1      .

        Yet even if the government were able to commit to letting the mortgage insurer
fail, there would still be a problem if equity was raised sequentially. If the initial capital
was sufficient to cover shortfalls, then those original shareholders would still have an
incentive to want the firm to issue too little capital to cover losses, even if the investors
buying mortgage insurance correctly anticipate that their mortgages will be insufficiently
covered. This effect continues to reflect the limited liability nature of the company:

        Proposition 4: A private insurer with an existing stock of Q insured securities,
                                                                                      ∆
that is trying to maximize the expected value of its raised equity, which equals                , will
                                                                                            ∆


                                                31
want to minimize the equity raised to cover losses from any further insurance contracts,
even if the buyers of those further insurance contracts recognize the risks of insufficient
equity, as long as those risks do not cause a market breakdown in period one.

        Any firm with an existing set of insured securities, for which it is has issued
sufficient capital to withstand all losses in good times and bad, has an incentive to raise
too little equity to cover the losses from any further insurance contracts. Even though the
fees paid by the new contracts will be lower, since the insurer recognize the downside of
insufficient equity, the fees paid by the old contracts will not change (they have already
been paid) and those old contracts will also pay the cost of too little equity. The benefit
of having too little equity is that the firms existing equity holders will earn more in the
good state of the world, because their profits in the good state do not get diluted by being
shared with new equity-holders.

        In the extreme, after the first share is issued, the company will never want to issue
any more equity and the insurance company becomes equity-free. With equity-less
                                                         ∆
insurance, individuals will pay a premium of                     and as long as the insurance firms
                                                             ∆

invests in the traded securities, this will provide enough to fully insure defaults during
low default states of the world. During high default states of the world, the insurance
company will be unable to fully cover its obligations, and individuals with borrowers
                                    ∆       ∆
who default will receive                        1 in the high default state, since that is all the
                                    ∆       ∆

funding that is available. With equity-less insurance, there can continue to be a period
one market breakdown.

        Proposition 5: With equity-less private insurance, if
                    ∆
1                                   , then an equilibrium exists where impatient investors and
                        ∆       ∆

patient investors with high risk securities sell their partially insured securities in both
states of the world and the initial security price is 1          . With equity-less private
                                ∆
insurance, if 1                             then an equilibrium exists where impatient investors
                            ∆           ∆

and patient investors with high risk securities sell their partially insured securities in the



                                                   32
low default state, but only investors with high risk securities sell in the high default state.
In this case, the initial security price is 1            .5 1        1              ∆    1        ∆ .

        The existence of incomplete insurance delivers lower welfare, in the case of the
market breakdown, than complete insurance which avoids such meltdowns. But
incomplete insurance is certainly better than no insurance at all, since without insurance
there can be a market breakdown in good and bad states, but with insurance the
breakdown only occurs in bad states of the world.

        I now consider two public interventions when there is private insurance: (1)
public backstop insurance with equity regulation, (2) public backstop insurance with an
insurance fee charged to asset issuers. The government will have the option whether to
extend the insurance scheme to some or all competitors in the industry.

        Both schemes can easily produce the first best if the public sector manages them
                                                                         ∆
appropriately. If firms are required to raise equity of at least                 per security insured,
                                                                             ∆

then the first best outcome result, and the government will never need to step in. If firms
                                            ∆
are charged a catastrophic risk fee of              , then this amount will cover losses in the bad
                                                ∆

state, and the excess can be refunded to security owners in the good state.

        What are the political risks of the two systems? Populist politicians attempt to
ensure that borrowers get the best deal, and that will result in government backstop
insurance without either fees or equity requirements. Just as in the case of no pre-
commitment, competition will ensure that insurance costs                 ∆, and securities will sell
for one minus that amount. Discretionary borrowers will again borrow if ∆                     1
    1      .

        In the case of equity requirements, the possibility for corruption occurs because
the state will be able to choose whether or not to grant backstop insurance to any
particular entity. This discretion is assumed to be automatic, as it is hard to imagine that
the state would not have the ability to decide that some firms or not operating with this
support. Despite the government’s difficulties in committing not to bail out Fannie Mae



                                                    33
and Freddie Mac, it certainly managed to let large numbers of investors take the hits for
defaults in the subprime market.

          A corrupt politician will choose a unique firm to receive the benefit of this
backstop insurance. It will impose neither equity requirements, nor a fee, on that firm.
That firm’s ability to extract profits will still be limited by competition with an uninsured
competitive fringe. In the good state, for each unit of insurance, if the insurance
                                                       ∆
company charges        , the company will earn                        ∆, and           in equilibrium will

equal 1        , which creates another reason for the company to want to boost insurance
costs. Higher costs mean lower security costs which mean higher profits.

          There are two constraints on     . The secure public insurance must be more
attractive than unsupported private insurance. If equity-less private insurance leads to no
market breakdown, then          will have to be less than or equal to         in order to insure that
investors will prefer the publicly backed insurance to equity-less private insurance. In
                                                           ∆
that case, the public company will earn profits of             in the good state per unit of

insurance. If equity-less insurance leads to a lemons breakdown in the bad state, then the
firm with publicly backed insurance can charge                 .5 1           1             ∆    1
∆ and earn commensurately higher profits.

          If the insurance price is denoted     , then the initial security price will equal
1     , and the extra profits from attracting sales to discretionary borrowers can induce
the publicly backed corrupt company from lowering the insurance cost. Discretionary
borrowers will sell the claim on their second period consumption if                    1             1       ,
which requires that 1       1       /         . This means that the price must be lower than .
I denote the ratio of non-discretionary borrowers to total borrowers as                    . The
following proposition illustrates the optimal behavior of the publicly supported company:

          Proposition 6: If equity-less private insurance does not lead to a lemons market
breakdown, then the public asset insurance firm charges 1                 1           / and sell to
discretionary and non-discretionary borrowers if           1          ∆           1              ∆ and
will charge     and sell only to non-discretionary borrowers otherwise. If equity-less

                                                 34
private insurance does lead to a lemons market breakdown, then the public asset
insurance firm charges 1        1       / if       1         ∆    1              ∆
 1         ∆              and        otherwise, where q denotes . 5 1                1

       ∆       1     ∆ .

This proposition shows that if equity-less private insurance competes with the publicly
supported insurance, the publicly-supported firm will charge a low enough price to attract
the discretionary borrowers if      is close to one and if       is small. In this case, there
will be welfare losses from excessive borrowing.

        If equity-less insurance does lead to a lemons-style breakdown, then the publicly
supported company has more market power with the non-discretionary borrowers and
this makes it less likely that the company will charge a lower price to attract the non-
discretionary borrowers. Even if        is arbitrarily close to one, it is possible that the
company will ignore those borrowers and continue to charge a higher fee.

        The following table summarizes the potential outcomes. In all cases, except for
laissez-faire, there are no social losses if the government is benign.




                                 Corrupt Politician                 Populist Politician
Laissez-Faire, No Insurance Possible Market Breakdown Possible Market Breakdown
                                 in Both States                     in Both States
Laissez-Faire, Equity-Less       Possible Market Breakdown Possible Market Breakdown
Insurance, government            if Defaults are High               if Defaults are High
commits to no bailouts.
Laissez-Faire, Equity-Less       No breakdown, subsidized           No breakdown, subsidized
Insurance, government bails lending, over-borrowing if              lending, over-borrowing if
out in high default state.          1          ∆        1                 1      ∆       1         .
Public Insurance                 First Best Outcome                 Free Default Insurance,
                                                                    overborrowing if           1
                                                                      .

                                                   35
Public Backstop Insurances     Preferred company faces no      No equity requirements or
with either equity             fees or no equity               fees—subsidized borrowing
regulation or default fee.     requirements. Company           and over-borrowing if
                               either matches equity-less         1        ∆      1        .
                               competitors or charges less
                               and creates over-borrowing.



These different systems all involve both redistribution and potential losses from either
market breakdowns or over-supplying credit. Market breakdowns can occur either if
there is no default insurance or if the government can commit not to bail out private
insurance. These systems, however, have the advantage of not creating social losses from
over-borrowing. There are also no transfers from investors to borrowers and borrowers
ultimately pay the cost for the market breakdowns.

       If the government cannot avoid bailing out insolvent insurance firms and ensuring
that defaults are still insured against, then the government will involve any social losses
from market breakdowns. However, there will be an implicit subsidy of borrowing,
which transfers from investors to borrowers. There will also be the risk of over-
borrowing.

       Public insurance also eliminates market breakdowns, and is free from the risks of
corruption. But it creates the most risks in the case of a populist politician. A public
insurance company with populist leadership will essentially deliver default insurance for
free, which creates the greatest transfer to borrowers from investors and makes over-
borrowing more likely than in any other scenario.

       Private insurance with backstop public insurance has risks from either corruption
or populism. In the case of populism, the public regulator will require neither fees nor
equity and this will create an implicit borrowing subsidy. This represents a transfer from
lenders to borrowers and creates a risk of overborrowing. The over-borrowing risk,



                                             36
however, in this case is less extreme than in the case of a populist public insurance entity
because the size of the subsidy will be smaller.

          If the public regulator is corrupt, rather than populist, then this will lead to
monopoly power by a single insurance entity (or perhaps by a cartel of such entities).
This will result either in transfers from investors to the shareholders of this entity and
potentially also to borrowers. Borrowers receive some of the benefits if the firms decides
to cut prices by enough to encourage over-borrowing results.

          The decision between the more hard-edged approaches and various public
interventions involves a tradeoff between the risk of market breakdowns and the social
costs of over-borrowing. If the government cannot commit not to bail out private lenders,
then public backstop insurance generally dominates an official system of no backstop
insurance, at least in terms of aggregate welfare, because the government will end up
bailing out the firms anyway. At least if the government functions well, backstop
insurance can produce the first best. If the government suffers from either corruption or
populism, the results will be no worse (again from the perspective of total social welfare)
than in the case of implicit insurance.

          The decision between public insurance and backstop insurance with fees or equity
regulation depends on the relative risks of populism and corruption. The public insurance
system is strong if corruption is more likely, but weakest in the case of populist
politicians. Backstop insurance is the better scheme when populism is the greater threat.

          The next proposition summarizes the welfare conclusion. To consider social
welfare, I will ignore any transfers across classes of citizens, and assume an additive
social welfare that simply sums up the ex ante expected utility across the three different
groups of investors. This creates two potential sources of social losses: over-borrowing
and illiquidity. If over-borrowing occurs then there is a social loss equal to the number of
discretionary borrowers times the amount that they are lent (and consume) in period zero
times 1       , which represents the welfare loss from consuming during the first period.

          If illiquidity occurs, the social loss equals the number of non-discretionary
borrowers times the amount of their endowment that is consumed by impatient borrowers

                                                 37
during the second period times 1                                  . I will not consider banning private insurance and
compare the other four options in the next proposition.

        If there is no market breakdown in the high default state with equity-less private
insurance, then laissez-faire without bailouts yields no social losses and is an optimal
outcome. I will therefore assume in the proposition that there is a market breakdown in
the high default state if the government pursues a pure laissez-faire option without
bailouts.

Proposition 7: If 1                          , then there is never over borrowing and laissez-faire with
bailouts, public backstop insurance or direct public insurance yields no social losses. If

1                          , then laissez-faire with bailouts or public backstop insurance, but not
                           ∆

direct public insurance, yield no social losses.

                   ∆                     .                              ∆            ∆       ∆
        If                                                                                                             , then public
                       ∆                          .                             ∆            ∆                       ∆

backstop insurance dominates either laissez-faire with bailouts or direct public insurance,
and it leads to lower social losses than laissez-faire without bailouts if and only if
            ∗                  ∗
                , where            is increasing with                        , , v,          and ∆ and falling with and .

                           ∆                          .                         ∆                ∆       ∆
        If                                                                                                   , the public backstop
                               ∆                              .                      ∆                   ∆

insurance always dominates laissez-faire with bailouts and dominates direct public
                                              ∆
insurance if and only if             <                            . Laissez-faire without bailouts dominates the
                                                                            ∗                        ∗
interventionist options if and only if                                              where                    is increasing with      , , and
                                                                   ∆                     ∗
v, and falling with and . If                              <                 , then               is also increasing with             and if
        ∆                      ∗
    >            , then            is also increasing with                          and ∆.

The proposition first emphasizes that if there is no lemons market breakdown in the high
default state, there is little reason to have public intervention in the market. The
interesting issues occur only when that market breakdown occurs.

        The appropriate policy response depends critically on , which captures both the
amount of loss from over-borrowing, and more critically the probability that
                                                                        38
overborrowing will occur. It essentially captures the tendency that cheap credit will
distort the borrowing market.

       If over-borrowing is unlikely because      is low, then any of the public
interventions can avoid social losses even with political risks. Even if a populist
politician makes credit very cheap, this will not distort the lending market and therefore
lead to no social losses. As    rises, the risk of over-borrowing increases and the tradeoffs
between different interventions becomes trickier.

       For moderate values of , backstop insurance or laissez-faire with bailouts both
produce no social losses. These interventions do not create any distortion to increase
over-borrowing, while the pure public model will lead to distort the credit market.

       At higher levels of , backstop insurance comes to dominate laissez-faire with
bailouts, essentially because backstop insurance only leads to over-borrowing when the
leaders are populist, but laissez-faire with bailouts always leads to over-borrowing. The
critical tradeoff becomes the decision between laissez-faire without bailouts (if that is
possible) and public backstop insurance. In that case, the critical parameter is the share
of the borrower population that is discretionary. As there are more discretionary
borrowers, the case for laissez-faire without bailouts becomes better.

       Finally, at the highest levels of   is possible for either the pure public model or
backstop insurance or laissez-faire without bailouts to be optimal. If the risk of
corruption is high relative to the risk of populism, then pure public insurance dominates
the backstop insurance model. If the number of discretionary borrowers is high, then
both models lead to higher losses than laissez-faire without bailouts. The backstop
insurance model dominates laissez-faire with bailouts in this range as well.




A Comparison with Credit Intermediaries

       Credit intermediaries, like banks, provide an alternative to the credit contracts and
default insurance described above. These intermediaries collect investments from the


                                             39
investors during period zero. Some of this money is lent to borrowers and some must be
held to allow impatient investors to withdraw their funds in period one.

         In the best case scenario, where there is not a bank run, the bank must set aside tD
units of consumption if it takes in D deposits. The remaining (1-t)D units will be lent to
non-discretionary borrowers. Since there is an abundant amount of investments, the
interest rate paid to depositors will equal zero for both periods. The interest rate charged

to borrowers is denoted      , and that will equal     . The bank must also issue equity equal
     ∆
to           if it is going to be able to cover its losses in both states of the world. In the
         ∆
                                           ∆
good state of the world, equity returns              , so the investors are exactly compensated
                                                 ∆

in expected value.

         A bank faces the same incentive to issue too little equity, just like the default
insurers in the previous section. The limited liability nature of securities means that the
bank wants to issue too little equity to cover its full losses in the high default state. This
will increase profits per shareholder in the low default, but lead to difficulties in the bad
state. Since the bank will not have enough capital to cover its obligations in the high
default state, depositors anticipating the problem will create a run in period one causing
the bank to sell of its securities. As the bank attempts to sell claims to investors, it may
also be subject to a lemons-market problem, since investors may believe that the claims
that are being sold are high risk assets. As Diamond and Dybvig discuss, deposit
insurance is one means of limiting the difficulties associated with a run and limitations on
withdrawals represent a second approach.

         Deposit insurance, however, creates some of the same issues associated with
default insurance on tradable securities. If there is a federal regulator who provides
deposit insurance, and imposes appropriate capital requirements (or insurance fees) on
banks, it is relatively easy to achieve the first best outcome. However, a populist
regulator will also allow banks to operate with minimum fees and insufficient capital
because this decrease the interest rates paid by borrowers. Since the banks shareholders




                                                40
want to make some returns in the good state, this will limit the size of the subsidy relative
to having a pure public lender.

        Corrupt politicians will similarly cut fees and capital requirements, but with the
aim of increasing the profits of a monopoly bank or banking cartel. The situation will
also be essentially identical to the situation where there is a corrupt politician providing
backstop default insurance to a purely public entity.




   V.      Interpreting the History of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises

        The Government-Sponsored Enterprises began in the 1930s, in an attempt to
strengthen a mortgage market that had been battered by the Great Depression. The
Federal Housing Act of 1934 enabled the creation of the Federal Housing Administration
and the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) which was established in
1938. The FHA has always been part of the government and it has long insured
mortgages, which meet certain clear criteria, against default. The government had
originally hoped that there would be private associations that would manage the resale of
these insured mortgages, but when, according to Jaffee and Quigley (2012) no private
association developed, they started Fannie Mae.

   Fannie Mae has operated as an insurance fund for banks, and it enabled new,
standardized, insured mortgages to be sold on a secondary market. The role that the FHA
and Fannie Mae played in essentially creating this market suggests that the lemons
problem was presumably fairly large, as banks don’t seem to have been able to resell
their mortgages without this public support. When the Veterans’ Administration began
insuring mortgages after World War II, Fannie Mae also got into the business of selling
these securities as well.

   While later events would underscore the risks associated with public default
insurance, the early years do suggest that there were real benefits associated with tradable
securities. As the model suggests, this insurance enhanced liquidity. Given that banks
and other savings institutions were capable of imposing large costs on taxpayers if they


                                             41
failed, for example during the Savings and Loan Crisis, their ability to acquire liquidity
and shift risks to a broader class of investors may have had significant social benefits.

    Moreover, there were also benefits that do seem to have benefitted borrowers. The
FHA and Fannie Mae were associated with the rise of relatively low rate, very long term,
fixed rate mortgages. Before the Great Depression mortgages were far more likely to
have maturities less than ten years. Fetter (2010) documents the substantial increase in
American home ownership between 1940 and 1960, and finds that loan availability
played some role in generating this shift.

         During the early years, when the FHA and Fannie Mae were entirely public
entities, the primary risk was populism, not corruption. That remains the risk associated
with the FHA, which remains as part of HUD. While Gyourko (2011) has documented
signficant risks associated with massive FHA insuring activity during the recent Great
Recession, over the course of its history, the FHA has not yet required an infusion of
taxpayer dollars. There was considerable concern over FHA solvency after the housing
downturn of the late 1980s, but the FHA has customarily been criticized for taking too
few risks, and discriminating against minority lenders, rather than for taking on too many
risks.

         Fannie Mae began the transition to private enterprise in 1954, when it started
selling shares to private investors, typically the banks that it insured. In 1968, the
government split the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) off from
Fannie Mae and privatized the remainder of the entity. Ginnie Mae guarantees only those
mortgages that are supported by some other government agency, like the Veterans
Administration, and like the FHA it has also remained solvent. While populism would
seem to create risks for Ginnie Mae, they do not seem to have yet evolved.

         In order to create competition in the mortgage insurance and resale business, the
government also created the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) in
1970. At this point, the government loosened the restrictions on Fannie Mae, allowing it,
for example, to trade in non-insured mortgages. After this point, there were two



                                              42
essentially private entities that were insuring mortgages and trading in them, which meant
that there were risks from both populism and corruption.

       During the 1970s, Fannie and Freddie cooperated with financial entrepreneurs,
primarily at Salomon Brothers, to create a global market for securitized mortgages. The
secondary mortgage market became a multi-trillion dollar business that further enabled
the flow of lending. A healthy literature now exists examining whether the able to
securitize mortgage led to a decrease in lending standards (see e.g. Mian and Sufi 2009).

       Despite repeated statements that Freddie and Fannie were allegedly operating
without a federal guarantee, investors typically treated Freddie and Fannie debt as if they
were almost treasury bonds. The interest rates that they paid were typically far lower
than any other AAA corporate securities and recent events have illustrated that the
government was indeed willing to take over their debts in the event of a default crisis.
The ability of Fannie and Freddie to borrow so cheaply meant that they had the
possibility of earning large profits simply by borrowing and investing in mortgage-
backed securities. By 2006, they had jointly acquired a 1.5 trillion dollar portfolio of
retained mortgages, which they claimed was appropriate for maintain market liquidity.

   Over the past forty years, Fannie and Freddie seem to have experienced the impact of
populist politicians eager to see them ease lending standards, and they seem to have
engaged in serious action to ensure political support for their profit-making activities.
One reports finds that Fannie and Freddie spent over $178 million on lobbying activities
since 1998 and $16.6 million on campaign contributions
(http://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2011/02/11/proposed-policies-to-end-fannie-freddie-
stem-from-lobbying-prohibition/). Repeated failures to control the risks associated with
their mortgage business were stymied by legislators, who may have been influenced
either by campaign contributions or by a desire to ensure easy terms for home borrowers.
In 1992, for example, the government-sponsored entities were charged with promoting
affordable housing in the Housing and Community Development Act.

   As the model suggests, Fannie and Freddie enjoyed large profits during boom years.
Between 1992 and 2003, “the GSEs’ reported annual return on equity (ROE) was


                                             43
generally higher than 20 percent and rose as high as 47.2 percent for Freddie Mac in
2002,” (http://www.huduser.org/periodicals/cityscpe/vol11num3/ch11.pdf). However,
during bad years, the companies relied on significant government assistance. During the
early 1980s, Fannie Mae also received assistance with significant tax breaks that helped
cover its losses. Yet despite the attempts at tightening the regulations on the companies,
their profitability and appeal to pro-lending legislators left them only lightly controlled.
The recent crash has seen the most substantial bailout, with taxpayers paying $169 billion
according to Jaffee and Quigley (2011).

    The history of Fannie and Freddie points to risks from both populism and corruption,
yet on net, the performance of government-controlled entities, like the FHA and Ginnie
Mae, appears to have been better than their profit-making competitors, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. This fact does not mean that a public entity is in any sense risk-free, but it
may suggest that the American taxpayer has less to fear from populism than from
corruption. If so, then keeping the enterprises under total public control may well reduce
the possible public losses.




   VI.      Conclusions: Reforming the Government-Sponsored Enterprises

         In the model, the rival threats of corruption and populism threaten any public
intervention related to default insurance. A populist politician wants to ensure that
borrowers get the best deal possible, even if they must be paid for with tax revenues. A
corrupt politician wants to ensure maximum profits for mortgage insurers, even if that
requires taxing. No system can be immune from these threats.

         In standard scenarios, where there are externalities or monopoly power, there are
difficult tradeoffs between forms of intervention. Public ownership of a monopoly, for
example, yields protection against corruption but creates the possibility for extreme waste
under populism. Pigouvian taxes, against a negative externality, may be relatively safe,
but Pigouvian subsidies also create a huge potential for waste.




                                              44
       Yet in the case of default insurance, there is relatively little protection provided by
continuing private ownership, as long as the public sector remains the insurer of last
resort. Either a populist or a corrupt politician will allow the private mortgage insurer to
set aside minimal reserve, either to maximize lending or to maximize profits. The net
result will be that the public insurance must be paid for with considerable taxation.

       The model suggests that a public entity can engage in far more extreme behavior
than a private entity with backstop insurance. It can reduce default insurance costs to
zero, which will do far more to encourage over-borrowing than reducing costs to a level
that maintains profitability in low default periods. Still, a public entity provides
protection against corruption. Since private enterprise creates no limit on the extent of
public spending, the advantages of public ownership seem higher than in other settings.
The case against public ownership must be that the scope for abuse with populism is
greater than in the case of public support for private insurance, or other welfare costs
associated with public insurance.

       The ultimate implication is that in many settings, private ownership at least
provides a bulwark against populism and spending to favored interest groups. It is not
obvious that this is true in the case of default insurance. The government can support
favored interest groups even with private insurance, by allowing enough public support
for private insurances. This result will be reduced if populism took the form of
particularly favoring sub-groups of the population, other than borrowers, as a whole, who
could be favored with a public insurer, but who would be harder to support with a private
insurer.

       It is impossible to leap from these highly theoretical musings to any concrete
recommendations concerning the Government-Sponsored Enterprises. Yet the model still
provides a degree of warning. Privatization is not protection against populism, and
corruption will create more risk if there is a private entity than a public insurance
provides. It may well be safer to keep the GSEs in public hands, as long as their
management can be subject to significant limits.




                                             45
Proofs of Propositions:

     Proof of Claim 1: The first order condition for the populist price regulator is:

                   N       C′′ N          or                      NC′′ N         and the first

order condition for the monopolist can be written                                       . The

function               is declining with q, so if NC    N              "       , then

      while if NC      N              "        , then              . Since quantities are all
below the social optimum, the higher level of consumption always leads to more welfare.




     Proof of Proposition 1: The expected welfare level under public ownership is
 1                                   . The expected welfare level under laissez-faire is
        . The expected welfare level under price controls is 1
                           . The expected welfare level under the subsidy is 1
                                     . Given that           is assumed to be less than either
           or      , the subsidy regime is always dominated by the price control regime.
The rest of the proposition follows by just comparing the three remaining expected
welfare levels.

     Proof of Proposition 2a: In the case of laissez-faire, expected welfare equals
           . In the case of public ownership, expected welfare equals
 1                                   . In the case of a quantity control, expected welfare
equals 1                                                               ,         . In the case
of a Pigouvian tax that is rebated to wealthier consumers, expected welfare is 1
                                                        ,         . In the case of a Pigouvian
tax that is rebated to poor consumers, expected welfare is 1
                                    . The comparison between Pigouvian taxes and quantity
controls depends entirely on the welfare in the case of a corrupt politician who creates



                                               46
monopoly conditions in the case of quantity controls and just guts the tax in the case of
Pigouvian taxes. The other results come from simple comparisons of the welfare levels.

        Proof of Proposition 2b: In the case of laissez-faire, expected welfare equals
              . In the case of public ownership, expected welfare equals
    1                                  . In the case of a Pigouvian subsidy, expected welfare
is 1                                                   . The Pigouvian subsidy dominates public

ownership if and only if                               and dominates laissez-faire if and only if

                                  . Public ownership dominates laissez-faire if and only if

                            .


         Proof of Proposition 3: Given these assumptions, the price paid by the consumer

will satisfy                                    , or                and                        .

Social welfare is defined as                         .5             . With a revenue-raising tax
and a populist politician, the tax is chosen to maximize
          , (as before, the tax is assumed to be paid directly by the producer) which implies

that the tax satisfies                         or                              , which is too high

relative to the first best of         . In this case, q equals            and welfare equals
.




        In the case of a populist politician, the revenue-less tax maximizes

                      , and no tax will be imposed if                     which I assume. In this
                                                          .
case, q equals             and overall welfare equals                      . Welfare with the

revenue-less tax will always be greater if                                 3
2                  , and which must hold if x is sufficiently small.




                                                47
    In the case of corruption, both taxes will yield the same outcome (no tax) and in the
case of benevolent politician, the revenue raising tax clearly dominates, since the taxes
are clearly better when they aren’t wasted.

    Proof of Proposition 4: If only high risk securities are sold, then the default
probability associated with each securities equals 1/v. In that case, the patient investors
will only be willing to buy these securities if the price is less than or equal to (v-1)/v. A
sufficient supply of patient investor income in period one, which I assume, ensure that
competition among patient will keep prices equal to (v-1)/v. At this price, impatient
investors with good securities will prefer not to sell their securities. In period zero, the
expected payoff to an investor from buying a security that pays one if there is no default
equals 1                    1       1       and that must equal the price in period zero.

    If high and low risk securities are resold in period one, then the default probability of
the resold securities depends on the state of the world. If the high default state, the
                                                                              ∆
probability of default, conditional upon being resold equals                          . In the low
                                                                                  ∆

default state, the probability of default, conditional upon being resold equals
       ∆
                . In the high default state, the price in period one of securities equals
           ∆

                   ∆
                       and in the low default state, the price in period one of securities will equal
            ∆
                   ∆
                       . The condition for low risk, impatient investors to resell in either state is
               ∆

that these prices are greater than . If the impatient investors all resell in either state,
then the period zero security price will equal 1             . If the impatient investors will no
risk securities resell only in the low default state, then the period zero security price will
equal 1                .5       1       ∆    1       .

        Investors are indifferent between all possible equilibria, since they are always
indifferent between buying the securities and autarky. The borrowers are worse off in the
low trade equilibria because they receive less in period zero in exchange for committing
their future returns.




                                                     48
                 Proof of Proposition 5: If the company is to issue an addition Q units of
mortgages, and raise only e units of equity per unit, then investors in new securities
should understand that they are not fully insured. If they pay a premium of                                                 (which may
be less than ), then the ratio of the company’s assets to the company’s liabilities in the
                                                                                 ∆                ∆
event of a high default state will equal                                                                      , so buyers of insurance
                                                                                          ∆

recognize that this will be the extent of their insurance in the high default state.
Assuming that this partial insurance does not cause a market breakdown in period one,
insurance will still be attractive to purchase as long as                                         is less then . 5         ∆
                                     ∆                ∆
.5               ∆                                                  , which is the expected benefit of the insurance.
                                              ∆
                                                                                              ∆           ∆
This puts an upper limit on the premium of                                       .5                                 , where the term
                                                                                                      .         ∆

                 ∆           ∆
.5                                           represents the reduction in willingness to pay because of the non-
                         .               ∆

payment of insurance. Yet still even with this unwillingness to pay.

                 Given this premium, the profits in the good state equal for the initial shareholders
equal:

                     ∆           ∆                    ∆                               ∆            ∆                       ∆
                                     ∆        ∆               ∆                                           ∆
                             ∆ ∆
                                              ∆


                 The derivative of this with respect to “e” equals
                                     ∆            ∆
                                                                  , which means that expected profits in the good state are
                             ∆           ∆            ∆

always declining in the level of e. They are no profits in the bad state unless e is over
     ∆
             , and in that case, total profits cannot be higher than in the case where e equals
         ∆
     ∆
             .
         ∆


                 Proof of Proposition 5: With equity-less private insurance and no market
breakdown, the price of uninsured securities in the first period will continue to be 1                                                 ,
                                                              ∆
so insurance premia of                                            that is invested in securities in period zero, will yield
                                                          ∆

         ∆ in period two in the low default state. This is enough to guarantee securities
                                                                            49
against any default risk in the low default state of the world. As such, insured securities
will be fully safe and will trade at face value period one.

                                                           ∆           ∆
           The same premium will yield                                     in the high default state. This will
                                                               ∆
                                                                   ∆        ∆
mean that defaulting securities are paid                                        in high default state. This means
                                                                   ∆        ∆

that the expected value of low risk securities in period one equals 1 and the expected
                                                                   ∆
value of high risk securities equals 1                                          . If everyone with high risk
                                                                   ∆        ∆

securities and all impatient investors sell their securities in period one, the expected value
                                                                                     ∆
(and price) of those securities will equal 1                                                             . This can only be an
                                                                                         ∆           ∆
                                                  ∆
equilibrium if 1                                               , which is the condition that ensures that the
                                                      ∆    ∆

low risk impatient investors will sell. The first period price will continue to equal 1                                        .

           A second equilibrium exists where even insurance does not eliminate the lemons
breakdown. In that case, the period zero price of securities can be written as                                       . The
                                              ∆
insurance premium will be                         , which will fully insure in the good state. In the high
                                              ∆
                                                          ∆            ∆
default state, the premium will yield                                      and defaulting securities will again be
                                                               ∆
               ∆         ∆
paid                         . The expected value of high risk securities will equal 1
               ∆         ∆
           ∆
                       , and the high risk individuals will not sell as long as 1
           ∆       ∆
           ∆
                       . In this case, a period zero price of 1                          .5 1               1
    ∆          ∆

∆      1               ∆ will make investors indifferent between lending or not, and since this is
below the price in the other equilibrium, social welfare is unambiguously lower.

           Proof of Proposition 6: If the equity-less private insurance does not lead to a
lemons problem, then an insurance cost of                      ensures that the price of period zero assets
                                          ∆
equals 1               and profits are        times the number of non-discretionary borrowers. If the

firm instead sets price equal to the lower cost of 1                             1           / , then the period zero
                                                                                                 /   ∆
asset price will equal 1                 / . Profits will equal                                          times the number of
                                                                                             /




                                                              50
discretionary and non-discretionary buyers. These profits will be higher if and only if
    1         ∆       1                ∆ .

If the equity-less private insurance does lead to a lemons problem then the publicly
backed insurance company can charge                  .5 1                   1               ∆       1               ∆ and
                          .                  ∆       ∆    ∆
profits will equal:                                               times the number of non-discretionary
                              .                  ∆        ∆

borrowers. The strategy of charging 1                1            / will be more profitable if and only if
and only if

                                                                        .                       ∆               ∆   ∆
    1         ∆       1                ∆         1            ∆                                                         .
                                                                                .                       ∆           ∆


        Proof of Proposition 7: I first calculate expected social losses in all four cases. If
the government commits not to bail out the insurers, then either there is no market
breakdown in the high default state, in which case, there are no social losses and this is
the first best. If there is a market breakdown in the high default state, then the expected
social losses equals the number of non-discretionary borrowers times .5 times                                       1
    1             ∆   1             ∆ .

        If government follows a “laissez-faire” policy but it still bails out private insurers
in the high default state, then there is no market breakdown, but if 1                                          1
∆ , then there will be overborrowing even with a benevolent government and the social
losses will equal the number of non-discretionary borrowers times 1                                         1               ∆ ,
which is the amount that they consume during the first period.

        If there is public insurance, then the only social losses occur if the government is
populist, and if 1                . In that case, with probability                  , the social loss will equal
1       times the number of discretionary borrowers.

        If there is public backstop insurance for the private insurers, then the first best
occurs if the politician is neither populist nor corrupt. If politician is populist then the
condition for over-borrowing again is 1                            1            ∆ , and the social loss is again
the number of discretionary borrowers times 1                          1              ∆ .


                                                         51
         If the politician is corrupt, then there will be no social loss if the company only
sells insurance to non-discretionary borrowers. If the strategy of selling insurance to
discretionary borrowers dominates, which requires, that                                     1       ∆             1
                                   .                           ∆                ∆   ∆
     ∆        1             ∆                                                           for example, if there is a lemons
                                               .                    ∆               ∆

market breakdown in the market for equity-less private insurance in the high default state,
then the social losses will equal the number of discretionary borrowers times 1                                                times
 1       / , which is the period zero asset price received by borrowers.

         If there is no lemons market breakdown in the high default state, then laissez-faire
with no bail-outs yields the first best. For the rest of the proposition, I assume that there
is a lemons market breakdown without public intervention in the high default state.

         If 1               , there is never over-borrowing. In that case, all strategies except for
laissez-faire with no bail outs yield the first best.

         If 1                              , then laissez-faire with bail outs and public backstop
                                           ∆

insurance both yield the first best, while public insurance and laissez-faire without
bailouts do not.

                    ∆                  .                       ∆                ∆   ∆
         If                                                                                                 and if there is a
                        ∆                          .                    ∆               ∆               ∆

lemons market breakdown in the high default state, then all systems lead to social losses,
but backstop insurance only leads to losses in the populist state, and those losses are less
than public insurance and equivalent to those in the case of the laissez-faire insurance
with bail-outs. But since laissez-faire with bail outs leads to losses in all states of the
world, backstop insurance dominates.

         In this case, public backstop default insurance dominates laissez-faire without
bailouts if and only if 1                                  1        1               ∆       .5        1               1

         ∆      1           ∆ or                                                            . As such, there exists a value
                                                       .                    ∆
                        ∗
of       , denoted          , between zero and one, at which public backstop insurance yields
                                                                                                              ∗
the same social losses as laissez-faire without bailouts and that value of                                            equals


                                                                   52
                                                                                                             ∗
                                                 . For values of                            , above                  , public backstop insurance
                .                           ∆
                                                                                                                                          ∗
dominates laissez-faire without bailouts and for values of                                                                 , below                , laissez-faire
                                                                                                                                                   ∗
without bailouts dominates backstop insurance. Differentiation yields that                                                                             is
increasing with                         , , v,       and ∆ and falling with and .

                                ∆                        .                              ∆            ∆       ∆
            If                                                                                                          , then public backstop
                                    ∆                            .                           ∆               ∆

insurance leads to overborrowing in both the corrupt and populist states. The expected
loss from the public backstop insurance equals the number of discretionary borrowers
times 1                                 1            ∆                  1               /    . The cost of laissez-faire with bailouts is

    1               1               ∆ times the number of borrowers, and as                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                    ∆

    1               ∆ which means that public backstop insurance always dominates laissez-faire
with bailouts.

This cost of public backstop insurance is less than the social cost of pure public default
                                                             ∆
insurance if and only if                         <                       . For laissez-faire without bailouts to dominate it

must be that . 5                            1                1                  ∆            1               ∆ is less than the minimum of
    1                   1                   (losses under pure public insurance) or 1                                                         1
            1                   ∆                1               /      , so that                    must be smaller than

                                                                     and
                .                           ∆                ∆

                                                 ∆                      /                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                                         . There will still exist a value of
                            ∆                /       .                              ∆                ∆

which determines whether laissez-faire without bailouts dominates the other options. If
            ∆
        <                   , so backstop insurance dominates pure public insurance, then the value of
        ∗                                                                       ∆                    /
.           equals                                                                                                                , and this is increasing
                                                     ∆                      /       .                            ∆            ∆

                                                                                                                       ∆
with            ,       ,       and v and decreasing with t and . If                                             >                , then pure public
                                                                                                         ∗
insurance dominates laissez-faire and the value of .                                                                 equals
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                     . In that case,                     is increasing with                   , , v,        and ∆
                .                           ∆                ∆

and falling with and .


                                                                                        53
References

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, & William Easterly. 1999. Public goods and ethnic
   divisions. 114 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1243-1284.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. Crime and punishment: An economic approach. 76 Journal of
   Political Economy 169-217.

Becker, Gary S., & George J. Stigler. 1974. Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and
   Compensation of Enforcers. 3 The Journal of Legal Studies 1-18.

Cutler, David M., & Edward L. Glaeser. 2009. Why do Europeans Smoke More than
   Americans? In David A. Wise, ed., A National Bureau of Economic Research
   Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Diamond, Douglas W., & Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
   Liquidity. 91 Journal of Political Economy 401-419.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, &
   Andrei Shleifer. 2003. The New Comparative Economics. 31 Journal of Comparative
   Economics 595-619.


Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, & Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
   Courts. 118 Quarterly Journal of Economics 453–517.


Ely, Richard T. 1901. Municipal Ownership of Natural Monopolies. 172 North American
   Review 445-450.


Federal Housing Finance Agency. 2011. FHFA Updates Projections of Potential Draws
   for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Press Release.
   http://www.fhfa.gov/webfiles/22738/GSEProjF.pdf




                                          54
Fishback, Price V., Shawn Kantor, & John Joseph Wallis. 2006. Politics, Relief, and
   Reform: Roosevelt's Efforts to Control Corruption and Political Manipulation During
   the New Deal. In Edward L. Glaeser & Claudia Goldin, eds., A National Bureau of
   Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fisman, Raymond, & Edward Miguel. 2007. Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement:
   Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets. 115 Journal of Political Economy 115
   1020-1048.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2009. Paternalism and Psychology. 73 University of Chicago Law
   Review 133-156.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Hedi D. Kallal. 1997. Thin Markets, Asymmetric Information, and
   Mortgage-backed Securities. 6 Journal of Financial Intermediation 64-86.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Erzo F. P. Luttmer. 2003. The Misallocation of Housing under
   Rent Control. 93 The American Economic Review 1027-1046.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Raven E. Saks. 2006. Corruption in America. 90 Journal of Public
   Economics 1053-1072.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Andrei Shleifer. 2003. The Rise of the Regulatory State. 41
   Journal of Economic Literature 401-425.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Andrei Shleifer. 2005. The Curley effect: The Economics of
   Shaping the Electorate. 21 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 1-19.

Gordon, Roger H., & Joel Slemrod. 1986. An Empirical Examination of Municipal
   Financial Policy. In Harvey S. Rosen, ed., National Bureau of Economic Research
   Project Report series. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gyourko, Joseph. 2011. Is FHA the Next Housing Bailout? AEI Working Paper #2011-
   06.



                                           55
Jaffee, Dwight M. 2006. Reining in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulation. Cato
   Institute.

Johnson, Simon & James Kwak. 2011. 13 Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the
   Next Financial Meltdown. New York: Pantheon Books.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques & Jean Tirole. 1991. Privatization and Incentives. Journal of Law,
   Economics, and Organization 84-105.

Mauro, Paolo. 1995. Corruption and Growth. 110 Quarterly Journal of Economics 681-
   712.

Pashigian, Peter. 1976. Consequences and Causes of Public Ownership of Urban Transit.
   84 Journal of Political Economy 1239-1259.

Peltzman, Sam. 1976. Toward a More General Theory of Regulation. 19 Journal of Law
   and Economics 211-240.

Stigler, George J. 1971.The Theory of Economic Regulation. 2 The Bell Journal of
   Economics and Management Science 3-21.

Sunstein, Cass R., & Richard H. Thaler. 2009. Libertarian Paternalism is Not an
   Oxymoron. In Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, ed., Economic Approaches to Law, vol. 23.
   Cheltenham, UK: Elgar.

Valletta, Robert G. 1989. The Impact of Unionism on Municipal Expenditures and
   Revenues. 42 Industrial and Labor Relations Review 430-442.

Viscusi, W. K. 1992. Smoking: Making the risky decision. New York: Oxford University
   Press.

Wolfers, Justin J. 2006. Are Voters Rational? Evidence From Gubernatorial Elections.
   Available at: http://works.bepress.com/justin_wolfers/1




                                           56
i
     Evidence of high spending levels is enough to prove corruption in Singapore even without explicit proof

of wrong-doing.
ii
     If a slightly higher number of high quality investors sell, then prices will rise and all high quality

impatient investors will want to sell. If a slightly lower number of high quality investors sell, then prices

will fall and no high quality impatient investors will want to sell.




                                                          57
