                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES DECENTRALIZATION FACILITATE ACCESS TO POVERTY-RELATED
                    SERVICES? EVIDENCE FROM BENIN

                                           Emilie Caldeira
                                           Martial Foucault
                                        Grégoire Rota-Graziosi

                                         Working Paper 18118
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18118


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012

We thank the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), which has funded this project since
2009. We are grateful to the Municipal Development Partnership (MDP) in Cotonou, with special
thanks to Hervé Agossou, for their warm welcome, and valuable assistance in collecting data, as well
as for their fruitful comments and discussions. We also thank the Benin National Institute of Statistics
and Economic Analysis, especially Cosmé Vodounou and Damien Mededji, for allowing us access
to EMICoV surveys. We thank Elias Potek (University of Montreal, Geography Dept.) for his outstanding
work in creating geographical maps in record time. We thank Simon Johnson (MIT) who acted not
only as a scientific mentor throughout this research e¤ort, but also as a valuable advisor. We warmly
thank Michael Hiscox (Harvard University) for the valuable comments that helped make the paper's
final version stronger and Antoinette Sayeh (IMF) for handling the paper's policy concerns when it
was presented at the NBER conference in Zanzibar. We thank Odd-Helge FjeldStad (International
Centre for Tax and Development) and François Vaillancourt (University of Montreal) for all of their
constructive suggestions. We are grateful to Leonard Wantchekon (Princeton University) and the participants
at the IREEP (Institut de Recherche Empirique en Economic Politique) conference, the CERDI (Centre
d'Etudes et de Recherche sur le Developpement International) seminar and the CIRANO workshop,
where a preliminary draft of this paper was presented in November 2011. Finally, we acknowledge
financial support from the NBER Program on African Successes, especially Elisa Pepe for her amazing
support throughout this project. Any remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Emilie Caldeira, Martial Foucault, and Grégoire Rota-Graziosi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Decentralization Facilitate Access to Poverty-Related Services? Evidence from Benin
Emilie Caldeira, Martial Foucault, and Grégoire Rota-Graziosi
NBER Working Paper No. 18118
June 2012
JEL No. D73,H41,H42,H52,H77,I38,O17

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the effect of decentralization on the access to some poverty-related public services in Benin.
Compiling panel data from local governments' accounts and from surveys on 18,000 Beninese households
performed in 2006 and 2007, our study suggests that decentralization has a positive overall effect on
access to basic services. However, this effect appears to be nonmonotone following an inverted U-shaped
curve. It varies according to local jurisdictions' wealth and to the nature of basic services. Decentralization
in Benin contributes positively to the reduction of poverty by improving the average access to poverty-related
services. However, the devil is in the details, as decentralization seems to increase inequality among
local governments in terms of access. Another result relying on the success of decentralization in Benin
is the prioritization of basic services, which differs among local governments according to their wealth.
While the poorest jurisdictions neglect primary education, focusing more on access to drinking water,
the richest ones get less attention to sewage services, since these are already provided at a sufficiently
high level.


Emilie Caldeira                                        Grégoire Rota-Graziosi
CERDI-CNRS, Auvergne University                        Fiscal Affairs Department
65 bd François Mitterrand                              International Monetary Fund
63000 Clermont-Ferrand                                 700 19th Street, NW
France                                                 Washington, DC 20431
emiliecaldeira@gmail.com                               and CERDI-CNRS, Auvergne University
                                                       grotagraziosi@imf.org
Martial Foucault
Political Science Department
University of Montreal
CP 6128, succ. Centre-ville
Montréal, QC, H3C3J7
Canada
martial.foucault@umontreal.ca
1        Introduction

Over the past two decades, decentralization has been implemented by many developing coun-
tries, becoming a key element of the public sector reform. By bringing decision makers closer
to citizens, decentralization should alleviate information asymmetries, improve accountability,
and increase the eﬃciency of public goods provision. In developing countries, decentralization

is one of the main institutional reforms on international organizations’ and donors’ agendas to
enhance public governance and ultimately reduce poverty. This strategy has been in place for
a number of years, but has not undergone a systematic evaluation of its impact on well-being

and local governance. Therefore, now that several years have elapsed, it seems an appropriate
time to examine the success of decentralization in the struggle against poverty in sub-Saharan
Africa.
        With this objective in mind, we analyze the eﬀect of decentralization in Benin on access to
some poverty-related services, namely water, sanitation, refuse and sewage disposal, and pri-
mary education. Poverty is a multidimensional issue and basic health and education services
are fundamental human rights.1 Decentralization is, by definition, a transfer of competencies
to local governments, especially in the education and health sectors. These services do not

exactly correspond to the Samuelsonian definition of pure public good (nonexcludability and
nonrivalry). However, local and central governments share the responsibility for meeting funda-
mental rights in education and health. Whatever the means of producing such basic services, or
nature of relationships with providers, local decision-makers remain, in the last analysis, polit-
ically responsible (World-Bank, 2004) for achieving improvements in access to drinking water,

sanitation, and primary education. In a sense, our argument rests on how decentralization
facilitates access to high-quality services rather than on an investigation of how well publicly
provided local goods are delivered.

        In regard to its democratization and decentralization processes, Benin is representative
of the African French-speaking countries. An ethnically fragmented country that has been
politically stable only since 2001, Benin began a transfer of competencies or authority to 77

local governments, called communes, in 1998. The decentralization process definitively took oﬀ
with local elections in 2002. Our analysis focuses on the 2006—2007 period, which corresponds
to a crucial time for democracy in Benin, with the 2006 national elections bringing Yayi Boni
    1
        Articles 25 and 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.




                                                         1
to power in place of Mathieu Kerekou, who had ruled the country for 29 years.2
      By analyzing panel data from 77 Beninese communes for 2006 and 2007, we aim to shed
light on the following issues: (1) To what extent does decentralization, measured as the share
of local own-revenue in total local revenue for each commune modify access to basic public
services? Is this eﬀect monotone with the degree of decentralization? (2) Does the decentral-

ization eﬀect vary between communes according to their wealth? To answer these questions,
we compiled several databases: original public finance panel data, which concerns all Beninese
local governments, and the 2006 and 2007 Integrated Modular Survey on Household Living
Conditions (EMICoV), which covers a sample of 18,000 Beninese households throughout the
entire national territory and is representative at the commune level. We develop a consistent
econometric method, taking into account the potential endogeneity in the degree of decentral-
ization, heterogeneity of local governments, and ineﬃciency in estimating the eﬀects of variables
having little within variance.
      Our analysis suggests that, on average, decentralization increases access to basic public ser-
vices. However, this eﬀect is not only nonmonotone, following an inverted U-shaped curve, but
its impact is also heterogeneous between poor and nonpoor communes. Decentralization’s eﬀect
on access to poverty-related services is positive for suﬃciently wealthy communes (measured
by higher quintiles of an asset-based measure of wealth), and becomes negative for the poorest
ones. Therefore, although decentralization succeeds in reducing nonmonetary poverty in Benin
by improving access to some basic services, the danger of higher inequalities between communes
remains.
      A second important result is that communes seem to prioritize basic services. Distinguishing
local jurisdictions by their wealth allows us to shed light on significant diﬀerences in local
governments’ behaviors. While the poorest jurisdictions neglect primary education, focusing
more on access to drinking water, the richest ones get less attention to sewage services, since
they are already provided at a suﬃciently high level. If the latter is not an issue, the former
casts some doubt on the eﬃciency of decentralization. A policy recommendation would be either

to recentralize primary education, or to provide additional conditional grants dedicated to this
specific sector.

      The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a review of the literature on the
impact of decentralization on service delivery and human development indicators in developing
  2
      In the spring of 2011, President Yayi Boni was reelected for his second and last mandate.



                                                        2
countries. Section 3 portrays the process of decentralization in Benin. Section 4 describes our
econometric framework. Section 5 presents our results. Section 6 concludes.



2    The impact of decentralization on services delivery and hu-

     man development indicators: A review of the literature

A huge portion of economic literature focuses on decentralization in developing countries. A

brief review of this literature addresses the strengths and weaknesses of decentralization to
reduce poverty, or at least to increase the eﬃciency of public goods provision. Many benefits of

decentralization are claimed in the fiscal federalism literature, most of them related to the fact
that decentralization brings decisions closer to citizens, alleviating information asymmetries, and
improving local governments’ accountability. The fiscal federalism literature has largely stressed

the economic eﬃciency of intergovernmental competition in providing local public goods. If
such a normative prescription seems to fit well with developed countries, this issue remains
more complex for developing countries where the “voting by feet” mechanism is not so relevant.
Thus, the logic of decentralization raises some intriguing issues in developing countries that we
can summarize around two perspectives: (a) Why does decentralization entail a better provision

of local public goods? (b) What are the limits of decentralization in such countries, given their
institutional and geographical constraints?3
    A demand-side argument in favor of decentralization is derived from the existence of infor-
mation asymmetries. Indeed, the seminal idea that decentralization may improve the provision
of public services when local governments have an informational advantage goes back at least
as far as Hayek (1948) and Oates (1972). Since local decision-makers have a better knowledge
of local preferences, decentralization is expected to improve the level and quality of public ser-
vices. This informational gain may induce a better targeting of the poorest populations in a
country, as indicated by the research conducted by Alderman (2002) in Albania, Bardhan and
Mookherjee (2005) in West Bengal, and Galasso and Ravallion (2005) in Bangladesh.
    On the supply side, decentralization should enhance the accountability of policymakers. De-

centralization allows for a better provision of public goods and a better matching between public
policies and local needs. Several authors have established such a link: Bird and Rodriguez (1999)
   3
     Important literature has been devoted to analyzing the benefits of decentralization on human development
indicators in the context of the Millennium Objectives. The final impact of decentralization on growth has been
studied, for instance, by Zhang and Zou (1998), Wollera and Phillips (1998), Xie, Zou, and Davoodi (1999), Lin
and Liu (2000), Akai and Sakata (2002), and Martinez-Vazquez and McNab (2003).


                                                      3
in the Philippines (health, primary education, housing, and infrastructure); Faguet (2004) in
Bolivia (education and social services); Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2008) in Argentina
(education); Robalino, Picazo, and Voetberg (2001) on a panel discussing low- and high-income

countries from 1970 to 1995 (mortality rate); and Enikolopov and Zhuravskaya (2007) on 75
developing and transition countries for 25 years (DPT immunization,4 infant mortality, illiter-

acy rate, and pupil-to-teacher ratio). Other studies mitigated the impact of decentralization.
For instance, Azfar and Livingston (2010) find little evidence of better provisions in govern-
ment services by local governments in Uganda; For Winkler and Rounds (1996), the transfer of

education competencies in Chile reduced the scores of cognitive tests.
       Beyond improving the matching of public policies with local preferences, decentralization
is also considered as an essential support of democratization. Thus, the governance of local
public goods is expected to strengthen accountability under the strong assumption of well-
informed voters, mobility of citizens, and participation into the political market. Seabright

(1996) considers allocations of power within local and central governments as alternative means
of motivating governments to act in the interests of citizens. This author shows that although
centralization entails benefits from policy coordination, it also induces some costs in terms of
diminishing accountability. Moreover, interjurisdictional competition may enhance accountabil-
ity: local citizens encourage incumbents to increase the eﬃciency of public spending through a
“vote with feet” (Tiebout, 1956) or a “yardstick competition” (Salmon, 1987, Besley and Case,
1995).5 Few studies have examined the relevance of this phenomenon in developing countries:
Arze, Martinez-Vasquez, and Puwanti (2008) suggest a process of yardstick competition be-

tween local governments in Indonesia; Caldeira, Foucault, and Rota-Graziosi (2008) establish
the existence of strategic complementarities of local public goods among Beninese communes.
       However, by expanding the decision space of local governments, decentralization may in-
crease corruption. Bardhan and Mookherjee (2000) point out the theoretical ambiguity of the
importance of relative capture at the local and national levels. Huther and Shah (1998), Baren-
stein and de Mello (2001), and Fisman and Gatti (2002) find a negative relationship between
   4
     Diphtheria, Pertussis and Tetanus.
   5
     Citizens can “vote with their feet,” that is, move to a nearby jurisdiction to obtain the public service-tax
package they prefer so that local governments compete to attract people and increase their tax bases. Even in the
absence of population mobility, in the context of informational asymmetries between voters and politicians, voters
can use the performance cues of other governments as benchmarks for judging whether or not their representative
wastes resources and, consequently, whether or not he/she deserves to remain in oﬃce. Thus, an action chosen by
a politician in one jurisdiction aﬀects the informational set of imperfectly informed voters in other jurisdictions,
forcing neighboring politicians to compete in order to avoid being signaled as bad incumbents, so that they might
remain in oﬃce.



                                                         4
fiscal decentralization and corruption for several panels of countries.6 In contrast, Reinikka
and Svensson (2004) highlight the capture of school grants by local oﬃcials in Uganda. At
the macroeconomic level, Treisman (2000) and Fan, Lin, and Treisman (2009) conclude that

federal states are more corrupt. Using data on 154 countries, Treisman (2000) also suggests
that more tiers of government induce higher perceived corruption, less eﬀective provision of
public health services, and lower adult literacy, especially in developing countries. Prud’homme
(1995) stresses several additional pitfalls of decentralization in developing countries, namely
the increase in interjurisdictional disparities, the jeopardizing of macroeconomic stability, the

ethnic bias of local elections, and low capacities of local bureaucracies.
       Another supply-side argument against decentralization concerns the risk of diseconomies
of scale, or at least a loss of scale economies. However, many of the public goods in ques-

tion are community- and site-specific, and it is often possible to exclude nonresidents. Rural
communities of poor countries, in particular, are often face-to-face, and social norms sharply

distinguish “outsiders” from ”insiders,” especially with respect to entitlement to community
services (Bardhan, 2002).
       Finally, decentralization is generally viewed as a trade-oﬀ between autonomy and ac-countability,
between costs of coordination and better provision of public goods, and be-tween preference
matching and externalities. Besley and Coate (2003) and Lockwood (2002) confirm Oates’
insights by showing that the relative performance of centralized and decentralized provisions
of public goods depends upon spillovers and diﬀerences in tastes for public spending between
jurisdictions.7

       To our knowledge, no attention has been paid to the consequences of decentralization on
well-being conditions in French-speaking African countries. Our paper fills this gap by focusing
on Benin where microdata (household survey) and macrodata (local public finance) have been

combined for the first time.
   6
     Fisman and Gatti (2002) use legal origin as an instrument for decentralization.
   7
     Competition among jurisdictions to attract mobile capital is a way to discipline governments, motivating
them to invest more in infrastructure, reduce waste and corruption, and spend less on nonproductive public
goods. But, Cai and Treisman (2005) emphasize that the required assumptions (perfect mobility, perfect local
autonomy, etc.) are often unrealistic, and capital mobility may even weaken the discipline of the poorly-endowed
units.




                                                       5
3     An overview of Benin

3.1   The democratization process

In regard to its democratization and decentralization processes, Benin belongs to the group of
French-speaking African countries, which count 20 countries and around 243 million inhabitants
in 2009. Benin is also a lower income country with an estimated per capita income of US$740

in 2011 and a ranking of 134 out of 169 countries in the Human Development Index (2010). Its
population (8.93 million inhabitants in 2009) is fragmented into 42 diﬀerent ethnic groups, the
most prominent being the Fon and the Adjas in the South, the Baribas and the Sombas in the

North, and the Yorubas in the Southeast.
    Since its independence on August 1, 1960, the political history of Benin has been chaotic. A

succession of military governments ended in 1972, with the last military coup–led by Mathieu
Kerekou–and the establishment of a government based on Marxist-Leninist principles. A move
to democracy began in 1989. Two years later, as a result of free elections, the former Prime

Minister, Nicephore Soglo, became president. Kerekou regained power in 1996 with some elec-
toral fraud. With the political support of the North of the country (Alibori, Atacora, Borgou,
and Donga), he won subsequent elections in 2001. Having served two terms, and being over

70 years old, he was ineligible to run in the presidential elections of 2006. He was succeeded
by Thomas Yayi Boni, an independent political outsider. In March 2007, President Yayi Boni
strengthened his position after the legislative elections in which his coalition, “Force Cauris pour
un Benin Emergent” (FCBE), won the largest number of seats (35 out of 83) and negotiated a
progovernment majoritarian coalition in Parliament with seven minor parties. With a strong
electoral basis from the northern communes he was reelected in 2011 with the pivotal support
of the southern part of the country (Atlantique, Collines, and Mono).


3.2   The decentralization process

The decentralization process in Benin began in 1998 through the transfer of several com-

petencies to local Beninese jurisdictions, called communes. While an elected local govern-ment
manages each commune, a representative of the central government is in charge of the départ-
ments to which the communes belong. Local elections were held in 2002 and 2007. Benin has 77




                                                 6
communes in 12 départements.8 As in many French-speaking African countries,9 the territorial
shape of Beninese communes results from colonial history and not from any economic consider-
ation with regard to eﬃciency in public goods provision. For instance, Tanguieta stretches out

across more than 5,460 square kilometers for a population of 62,321 inhabitants in 2008 (11.4
inhabitants per square kilometer), while Akro-Misserete contains 98,961 inhabitants on only 79
square kilometers (1,252 inhabitants per square kilometer).
       In January 1999, Law 97-029 has defined the competencies transferred from the central
government to the 77 communes. Their scope was large, ranging from elementary schooling to

economic development, and including transport infrastructure, environmental programs, health
services, social goods, tourism, security, and cultural activities. We may distinguish four kinds of
competencies: exclusive local competencies, shared competencies, delegated competencies, and

specific competencies. For delegated competencies, local jurisdictions act as representatives of
the central state. Specific competencies concern some communes that have particular statuses

(Cotonou, Porto-Novo, and Parakou). Table 1 summarizes these competencies.


 Table 1: Beninese communes’ competencies

 Type of competencies

 Exclusive local competencies
         Transport infrastructure: maintenance of local roads, public lightings.

 Shared competencies
         Hygiene conditions: sewage and refuse disposal (latrines, septic tanks...), drinking water.
         Education: construction and maintenance of public primary schools, adult literacy, cul-
 tural public infrastructures, sports, and leisure.
 Delegated competencies
         Public records oﬃce, security, publication and application of laws.
 Specific competencies
         Secondary schools, security, communication.

 Source: Law  ◦ 97 − 029 of Benin Republic, January 15th , 1999.



       The distinction between shared and exclusive local competencies is largely subjective, linked
   8
    Communes are themselves divided into 546 districts.
   9
    Burkina Faso counts 351 communes for 16.2 million inhabitants, while Mali has 703 communes for 15 million
inhabitants.



                                                     7
to our interpretation of the relevant law and of observed practices in this country. First, the
transfer of competencies is obviously progressive and may take some time. For instance, the
eﬀective role of communes in water and sanitation is limited. The SONEB (Societé Nationale

des Eaux du Benin) is a public enterprise still in charge of drinking water supply and sewage
disposal in urban areas. A deconcentrated service, the General Direction of Water, remains
essential in rural areas. Secondly, some competencies, such as primary education, require some
technical and financial support from the central government.
       Usually, a transfer of competencies implies a transfer of financial resources. Table 2 presents

Beninese communes’ revenues, distinguishing local own-revenue (tax and nontax) and other local
revenue (central conditional and unconditional grants, external transfers, loans, and advances),
over the period 2006—2007. A local representative of the central tax administration (Directions

Departementales des Impots) collects local taxes, mainly property and patent taxes.10 By
contrast, local governments support collection costs of nontax own-revenue, essentially revenue

related to occupations in the public domain (market stalls, parking tolls, kiosks, hoardings,
etc.), as well as to some administrative services. Central conditional grants represent about 25
percent of local revenue with some huge disparities: less than 3 percent for Atlantic and more
than 30 percent for Oueme. Unconditional transfer is another source of Beninese communes’
revenue. It corresponds to a retroceded tax, the road tax, collected by customs on exports
(0.85 percent of the value of exported goods).11 Generated revenue is shared among communes

following a fixed rule: 80 percent is allocated to three “special” communes (Cotonou, 60 percent;
Porto-Novo, 24 percent; and Parakou, 16 percent). The rest is distributed among the 74 other
communes according to their respective demographic weight.
  10
     Beninese local governments can also tax mining, advertisements, and taxi drivers, and they have the oppor-
tunity to collect a tax on local development (see Chambas, 2010 for a detailed analysis of local fiscal resources in
sub-Saharan Africa, in particular in Benin).
  11
     The authorities abolished this tax in 2009 for transit goods being exported to landlocked countries such as
Niger and Burkina Faso.




                                                         8
      Table 2: Average composition of Beninese communes per capita revenue (CFAF)

                                     Average level        Percentage of total resources

      Total local revenue                2,175                        100
      Own-revenue                       1,137                          52

      Local non-tax own-revenue           623                          29

      Local tax own-revenue               514                          23

      Other local revenue               1,038                          48
      Unconditional central grants        225                          11

      Conditional central grants          571                          26

      External transfers                  225                          10

      Loans and advances                  17                           1

      Source: Beninese Ministry of Finance and Economy.



   Beninese communes are characterized by a low average level of per capita revenue with
about 2,200 CFAF (US$4.7). Moreover, important inequalities exist among communes: the
revenue per capita of the 20 poorest communes represents only 50 per cent of the revenue of
the five richest ones. Local governments’ revenues also diﬀer in their composition. For instance,
Parakou and Porto-Novo, despite having similar per capita revenues (around 6,500 CFAF), have
50 and 35 percent of local own-revenue, respectively.




                                                 9
                                 2006                                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                              4                                                                                                                                                         4


                                                                                         5                                                                                                                                                                5


                                                                          Alibori
                                                               1
                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1        Alibori                 3


                       22                                                                                                                                             22
                                                 17                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                                                               6
                 19                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                     2
                      Atakora
                                                                                                                                                                Atakora
                        23
            16                                                                                                                                   16              23
                                       18                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                              9                                                                                                                                                               9
                 15                               21           14             7                                                                            15                                     21                14              7
                      20                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     No data
                                                                                        11                                                                                                                                                           11                                              0.06 - 0.25
                            25                                                                                                                                             25
                                                              10                                                                                                                                           10                                                                                        0.25 - 0.40
                                       26                            Borgou                                                                                                           26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Borgou
                                                                                  13                                                                                  27                                                                      13                                                     0.40 - 0.55
                       27

                            Donga                                        12                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                     0.55 - 0.75
                                                                                                                                                                      Donga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75 - 0.99
                                                                     8                                                                                                                                                    8
                                             24                                                                                                                                             24

                                                                                                                                    64

                                                                                                           73                                    61                                                                                                                                                 64
                                                                                                                               72
                                                                    66                                                               76                                                                                  66
                                                                                                                          75                                                                                                                                               73                                   61
                                                                                         37                  69 71                                                                                                                                                                             72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     76
                                            63                                                                                                                                             63                                                                                             75
                                                         65                                                                               74                                                               65
                                                                                                             70                                       60                                                                                              37                        69 71
                                                                                                  40                      77
                                                 Collines                                                                                       58                                      Collines                                                                             70                           74         60
                                                                     68                                                                                                                                                   68                                      40                      77
                                                                                                  42         41                           54
                                                                                        38                                32                                                                                                                                                                                    58
                                         67                                                                                                                                             67
                                                                                             39                                                       62                                                                                                          42                                      54
                                                                                                                                35                                                                                                                   38                      41           32
                                                          64                                                                               50                                                               64
                                                                                             48         44           29                                59                                                                                                 39                                                         62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35
                                                                                         43                                               55    52 53                                        73                                                                                                            50
                                       73                                61                        47                 33                                                                                                      61                      48                44           29                                 59
                                              Zou           72 76
                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                28    34 51 56 49                                     Zou                       72 76
                                                 75                                                     45                                                                                      75                                                    43                                                  55    52 53
                                                                                                                      31                    57                                                                                                                     47                   33
                                  37        69 71                   Plateau                       46
                                                                                                                                     36                                          37        69 71                    Plateau                                                                     28    34 51 56 49
                                        40 70                                                                                                                                          40 70                                                                                    30
                                                77                   74 60                                                                                                                     77                         74 60                                         45                                  57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        31           36
                                 Kouffo                             54 58                                                                                                  Kouffo 41                                     54 58                                    46
                                 38              41    32                                                                                                                       38                         32
                                      48 39                    35 50 62                                                                                                              48 39                          35 50          62

                                 Mono          Ouémé 59
                                                  44 29 28                                                                                                                 Mono          Ouémé 59
                                                                                                                                                                                             44       29
                                                                                                                                                                                                      53
                                  43 47 Atlantique 55 53                                                                                                                    43 47 Atlantique 28 55 52                                        0       25           50                 100 Kilometers
                                                                         51 49                                                                                                                        49                  51
                                              30 33 31                                                                                                                                           33                            57
                                        46                                 57                                                                                                          46        30
                                                         Littoral                                                                                                                                     Littoral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations




                                                      Map 1: Share of local own-revenue by commune



Regarding our criteria of financial autonomy, Benin is characterized by strong geographical

disparities (see Map 1) where South and North-East communes are able to collect more own-
revenue.


3.3   Local public goods provision and poverty

Since 1999, Benin is involved in a national strategy aimed at reducing poverty for a human sus-

tainable development through its successive Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS).
The main objective of the latest GPRS for the 2011—2015 period is the improvement of the
living conditions of the population with specific attention to water, basic sanitation, primary

education, and primary health care sectors in line with the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). Poverty, which is a general state of deprivation, is multidimensional. It is usually
associated with conditions under which people live. Poverty may be viewed in either absolute
or relative terms. Absolute poverty is a situation in which a person or group of persons is
unable to satisfy the most basic and elementary requirements of human survival in terms of

good nutrition, sanitation, transport, health, education, and recreation.



                                                                                                                                                      10
   Several approaches exist which enable us to appreciate the level of poverty in Benin. Based
on the monetary approach, the proportion of poor people in Benin in 2009 is estimated at 35.21
percent, which means that more than one of every three persons is living below the subsistence

level (2011—2015 GPRS). An alternative approach involves looking at the nonmonetary poverty,
based on a composite index including variables of household living conditions and property or
assets. This measure stated that 30.84 percent of the Beninese population is poor in terms of
subsistence and property in 2009. A geographical cleavage between rural and urban communes
seems to matter. Indeed, urban communes located in the Littoral, Collines, and Oueme de-

partments display a rate of poverty of 13, 17, and 19 percent respectively, namely two times
less that the Beninese average. A final and crucial dimension of poverty in developing countries
concerns the dynamic trend of poverty mobility. Availability of data does not allow for a robust

discussion regarding the extent to which the implementation of national and local public policies
has positively aﬀected the reduction of poverty. The current situation remains ambiguous. For

instance, between 2006 and 2007, income poverty fell by roughly 4 percentage points, versus
2.4 points in the case of nonincome poverty. On the other hand, between 2007 and 2009, in-
come poverty rose by 1.9 percentage points. This increase in income poverty between 2007 and
2009 is the result of the eﬀects of the economic and financial crises, which caused household
consumer spending to fall. Nonincome poverty registered a substantial decline of 9 percentage
points, falling from 39.6 percent in 2007 to 30.85 percent in 2009. This decline is the result of
various actions taken by the government, during the period 2007–2009, to improve access to
basic social services. In particular, these actions involved the construction of water points and

school infrastructure. Such policies have not only been implemented at the central level, but
are also the responsibility of local governments when they have legal competencies for providing
local poverty-related goods.

   In order to tackle the methodological problems resulting from an overly broad definition
of poverty, we have chosen an approach that confines poverty-related issues to five main basic
services: toilet facilities, drinking water, sewage, garbage, and primary education. In this way,

we are able to assess the impact of decentralization on major dimensions of poverty issues.




                                               11
4        Econometric framework

In this section, we present our empirical strategy. We first test the average eﬀect of de-
centralization on access to poverty-related services. We then assess its distributional eﬀect
between jurisdictions by distinguishing communes according to their wealth.


4.1      Data

We use several sources of information. The Beninese Ministry of Finances and Economy pro-
vided us with the communes’ accounts. The 2006 and 2007 Integrated Modular Surveys on
Household Living Conditions (EMICoV) contain information concerning individual education
level, household consumption and wealth, and access to several local public goods. They cover a

sample of 18,000 Beninese households across the entire national territory. The sample includes
7,440 urban households and 10,560 rural households.12 The major uniqueness of these surveys
lies in their representative character at the commune level, allowing us to measure aggregated

and distributional indicators at the study level as described below. Data concerning population,
urbanization rate, and ethnic fragmentation are drawn from the General Population and Hous-
ing Census in Benin (1992 and 2002) and 77 communes’ monographs provided by the European
Union (Programme d’Appui au Démarrage des Communes).


4.1.1     Testing the average eﬀect of decentralization on access to basic services

Our empirical analysis focuses on universal basic needs, setting aside any normative consider-

ations in terms of welfare. It appears more relevant to study actual access to public services
than ultimate eﬀects on individual well-being, which may depend on many factors outside lo-
cal governments’ control. We consider several basic services which have been assessed through
the EMICoV surveys: toilet facilities, water access, refuse and sewage disposal, and primary
education. Table 3 gives the detailed list of indicators, denoted by  , for each kind of service.
    12
    This sample is a stratified one, selected in two stages: stratification was achieved by separating every
commune into urban and rural areas.




                                                    12
 Table 3: Indicators of basic services access
 Basic services,    Indicators
 Toilet facilities
                       - Share of households having access to a toilet or latrine facility,   
                       - Type of toilet facility (no facility, bucket/pan, latrine with composting, suspension
                       latrine, non-flagged pit latrine, non-ventilated pit latrine, ventilated pit latrine, own
                       flush toilet, flush toilet),    
 Water access
                       - Share of households having access to drinking water,   
                       - Source of drinking water (rainwater, rainwater in tanker truck, river, pond, protected
                       spring, non-protected well, protected well, borehole with manual pump, borehole with
                       automatic pump, public tap, piped somewhere, piped into residence),    
 Refuse disposal
                       - Share of households having access to refuse disposal facilities,  
                       -Type of refuse disposal (nature, courtyard, burning, burying, rubbish dump, collec-
                       tion truck (NGO), collection truck (public)),   
 Sewage disposal
                       - Share of households having access to sewage disposal facilities,  
                       - Type of sewage disposal (nature, courtyard, well, grid/downstream, open pipe waste,
                       covered pipe waste, draining),   
 Primary education
                - Primary school enrollment for children aged 6 to 11,   .
 Source: EMICoV surveys, 2006 and 2007.


   These indicators are all measured at the household level except for education indicators,
which require individual data (level of education of the respondent). To assess public services

access we use two indicators: the first measures the share of households or individuals having
access to the service (quantity) and the second reflects the qualitative scale of the provided
service (quality). By using these two measures, we are able to capture, in a comprehensive way,

how the decentralization has or has not facilitated access to poverty-related services. Reasoning
only on the quantity will be fallacious, as such a measure does not reveal to what extent local

citizens have benefited from an improvement of the quality of local public goods.
   To better understand how quantitative and qualitative variables have been computed, let us
describe the first indicator, namely toilet facilities. The EMICoV survey provides the share of

households having access to a toilet. On average, 23.7 percent of Beninese households claim to
have a toilet facility (Table 4). The quality of the toilet measured by the scale in Table 3 takes
the value 1 for no facility to 9 for a flush toilet. Using responses from EMICoV respondents, we

                                                        13
compute an average index at the commune level which indicates that households in only one
commune (Toucountouna) have no toilet facilities, and 10 percent of the population has at least
nonflagged pit latrines. As depicted on Map 2, only 6 communes out of 77 converge towards the

best quality of toilets with a score superior to 6, i.e., those including either nonventilated pit
latrines, ventilated pit latrines, or flush toilets. As local governments are in charge of sanitation
facilities, decentralization should produce more eﬃcient and equitable service delivery by making
better use of knowledge of local needs. The same coding procedure applies for the four other
indicators. Sewage and garbage facilities are respectively depicted on Maps 3 and 4. We observe

a small variance for every basic service among jurisdictions, with the exception of Segbana,
which displays the highest level of sewage and garbage disposal and drinking water in the
region (Alibori). One explanation for this discrepancy is linked to the development of hydraulic

plans (DED and PADEAR-DANIDA projects). There exist 67 drillings and 54 modern shafts
that allow the center to be served by the water supply network (SONEB). Map 5 illustrates

the diversity of quality for sources of drinking water. Surprisingly, communes located on the
littoral with easy access to seawater are not necessarily those which benefit from high-quality
access to drinking water.



                                      [Insert Map 2, 3, 4, 5]



   In sum, combining consolidated household data on access to services, and the nature of
locally provided public good quality to local public finance oﬀers a new avenue for evaluating

the impact of decentralization in both dimensions.


4.2   Empirical models

The degree of decentralization, denoted by  , is the share of local own-revenue in a given
commune’s total revenue. This measure is used in the literature as an indicator of financial

autonomy, and also allows us to approximate the accountability of local governments. Indeed,
while central transfers are often opaque to taxpayers, who are then unable to judge the eﬃciency
of local policies, the link between local taxes and local public services provided is more immediate
and may provide an incentive for local oﬃcials to improve their eﬃciency.
   We add several control variables. Time dummies, denoted by  , serve as controls for omitted

explanatory variables that vary over time, but remain constant between communes, and can

                                                 14
influence the share of local governments’ own-revenue. We also control for explanatory variables
that may be correlated with the degree of decentralization, and that vary across both communes
and time. Since we consider the eﬀect of local revenues’ composition, and not the impact of

local public spending itself, we introduce communes’ per capita public spending, denoted by
 . We then are able to see if a higher degree of decentralization aﬀects the eﬃciency of

local policies, given the level of local public spending. This control variable is essential because
the communes’ public spending aﬀects the level of received transfers, the measured degree of
decentralization, and access to basic services.13 For similar reasons, we introduce per capita

consumption, (measured by an index of about 1,200 commodities and services).14 Studying
jurisdiction population size (  ) and population density ( ) allow us to capture respectively,
overrepresentation of smaller jurisdictions and some scale economies in the provision of studied
public goods. We also consider urbanization rate, denoted by  , since urban areas generally
oﬀer better access to basic services and have higher fiscal capacities, especially in terms of

property tax base. Finally, ethnic fragmentation, denoted by  ,15 may be correlated with
the degree of decentralization and aﬀects the provision of public goods in quantity and quality
(Alesina and Ferrara, 2005).

       Table 4 provides some descriptive statistics. The main independent variable (degree of
decentralization,  ) is quite normally distributed with a median value and a mean of 0.48.
Nevertheless, the mode of the distribution indicates that most communes (around 22 percent)

have collected about 15 to 22 percent of own-revenue. Conversely, only eight communes located
in the southern part of the country perform very well in taxes, having raised more than 85
percent of own-revenue. Among control variables, the average value of  is 142,598 CFCA;
the median is 123,042 CFCA; the ninety-fifth percentile is 299,798 CFCA. To put these numbers
in perspective, note that in strongly urbanized communes, the average per capita consumption

(197,645 CFCA) is higher than the national average due to the better situation of the first
quintile, which entails a higher median value (223,688 CFCA). Another wealth measure is
provided by  , a score based on the Demographic and Health Survey’s (DHS) wealth index,

which provides each household’s position on an index of asset wealth at the national level
  13
     Although the pursuit of an equitable allocation of resources would lead one to expect a propoor allocation
of transfers across jurisdictions, most empirical studies (Wallis, 1998, Meyer and Naka, 1999 or Alm and Boex,
2002) find that wealthier local governments receive greater intergovernmental transfers, indicating that political
considerations outweigh those of equity.
  14
     Provided by the EMICoV surveys.
  15
     Ethnic fragmentation in commune  on year  is defined as the probability that two individuals randomly
drawn from one commune are from diﬀerent ethnic groups.



                                                       15
using Principal Components Analysis (PCA) weights.16 This variable fluctuates between -
1.72 (poorest households) and 4.54 (wealthier households). Despite a significant correlation
between  and  , the latter is a good proxy for the permanent wealth, whereas the former

is more sensitive to the economic conjuncture. Finally, the ethnic fragmentation, measured by
the probability that two randomly selected individuals belong to the same ethnicity, indicates

that the Beninese are strongly fragmented with an average value of 0.36. Such a cultural
pattern is expected to aﬀect preferences for public goods provision in the sense that ethnically
heterogeneous communities may express contrasted needs or define diﬀerent priorities for basic

services delivery.
       We start with the following simplest regression, which assesses the average impact of decen-
tralization on access to basic services:17


                  =  +  +  +   +   +  +  +  +                    (1)


We also consider a nonmonotone eﬀect of the degree of decentralization by introducing its
              ¡ 2¢
quadratic term  :


                                2
              = 1  + 2  +  +  +   +   +  +  +  +             (2)


4.2.1      A heterogeneous eﬀect between communes

In addition to the average impact of decentralization on access to public services, we study its
eﬀect by distinguishing communes by their respective wealth. This analysis allows us to assess
the overall impact of decentralization on inter-commune inequalities in terms of access to basic
services. We obtain the following regression:


                =   1 ( ∗  ) + 2 ( ∗ (1 −  ))
                                                                                                        (3)
                       + +  +  +   +   +  +  +  +  

where  is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the commune  belongs to the first quintile
of poor communes and zero otherwise. Following Filmer and Pritchett (2001) we define an asset-
  16
     The general methodology used to calculate the wealth index is given in Filmer and Pritchett (2001). The
specific approach used in the DHS is described in Rutstein and Johnson (2004).
  17
     Population, per capita public spending, and per capita consumption are given in logarithmic terms.




                                                    16
based measure of wealth, denoted by   for each commune using the EMICoV.18 However, the
DHS index underestimates the wealth of rural areas since urban populations own many valuable
assets. Following Rutstein (2008), we compute a national-level composite index from wealth

indexes that have been separately constructed for urban and rural areas. We then consider the
average score by communes, and divide the latter into quintiles to distinguish the poor from
the nonpoor. The same procedure applies for the first quintile of wealthier communes in order
to control how decentralization may lead local governments to define priorities in delivering
poverty-related services. In so doing, we assume that all local public goods are not provided

according to the same economic and political determinants, i.e., poor communes are expected
to make greater eﬀorts in facilitating access to drinking water than in organizing high-quality
systems of waste disposal or sewage facilities.


4.2.2      Econometric issues and identification strategy

Given the small number of time series with respect to cross-sectional observations and the fact
that some variables have little within variance, we first estimate pooled OLS regressions with
year dummies. This estimation method increases the degree of freedom and allows for inquiring
into variables that have low variability. However, it assumes that control variables capture all
relevant communes’ characteristics.

       This estimate may be biased by unobserved heterogeneity between communes. Our panel
data allows for controlling a large number of unobserved explanatory variables by using the
fixed-eﬀects (FE) estimator. However, the traditional FE method fails in estimating the eﬀects
of variables that have little within variance, a problem worth considering when analyzing two
successive years of observations. To assess coeﬃcients of time-invariant variables and to control
for commune-specific eﬀects, we use the Fixed Eﬀects Vector Decomposition estimator (FEVD)
developed by Plümper and Troeger (2007).19 Through a three-step procedure, this estimator
  18
      Due to the abundance of household survey data on asset ownership and the considerable bias measurement
error associated with reported income or consumption, a substantial body of literature has developed an asset-
based measure of wealth. Filmer and Pritchett (2001) conclude that the DHS wealth index actually performed
better than the traditional consumption or expenditure index in explaining diﬀerences in economic statuses. From
the EMICoV, we built such a DHS measure based on a myriad of assets (cars, canoes, hi-fi systems, refrigerators,
, iron, beds, phones, motorcycles/scooters, radios, VCRs, DVD players, ovens/stoves, washing machines, chairs,
sewing machines, cell phones, bicycles, televisions, video recorders/VCRs, fans, foam mattresses, computers,
internet access, land, home ownership, types of fuel, building materials, etc.).
   19
      Based on Monte Carlo simulations, Plümper and Troeger (2007) compare the vector decomposition model
with the FE model, the random eﬀects (RE) model, pooled OLS, and the Hausman-Taylor procedure and find
that, while the FE model does not compute coeﬃcients for the time-invariant variables, the vector decomposition
model performs far better than other procedures.




                                                      17
allows for a decomposition of the unit fixed eﬀect into two parts: an explained part by time-
invariant variables and an unexplained part.20
         To correct for other potential endogeneity biases in the estimation of the causal eﬀect of

decentralization on access to basic services, we instrument the degree of decentralization through
a dummy variable, denoted by   , taking the value 1 if the commune  has the same political

aﬃliation as the president in oﬃce. This dummy variable diﬀers between 2006 and 2007 since
Yayi Boni was elected in April 2006, succeeding Mathieu Kerekou. Partisan aﬃliation is a good
instrument of decentralization in a regression involving access to public services. In the relevant

literature, a jurisdiction which has greater political support from the central government receives
more transfers from the latter (see, Cox, 1986, for a theoretical argument, Case, 2001, for the
Albanian case, Miguel and Zaidi, 2003, for the Ghanaian case).



5         Estimation results

This section presents our empirical results using panel data from 77 Beninese communes for
2006 and 2007.


5.1         The average eﬀect of decentralization on access to basic services

Figures 1 to 5 confirm our expectations that a higher degree of decentralization is positively
correlated to better access to poverty-related services.21 However, the most decentralized com-

munes are the richest, most populated, and most urbanized (Table 5). These variables are also
associated with easier access to basic public services (Table 6). This confirms the important
role of our control variables in avoiding endogeneity bias.
         To test the average eﬀect of decentralization on access to basic services (equation 1), we first
run the pooled OLS regressions with year dummies, introducing our control variables progres-

sively (columns 1 to 7). Considering potential unobserved heterogeneity between communes,
we then use the FEVD estimator (column 8). Finally, we instrument for the degree of decen-
tralization with the partisan aﬃliation (  ) in column 9. Table 7 reports the relevance of
    20
      First, the unit fixed eﬀect is estimated by running a fixed-eﬀect estimate of the model. Second, the latter
is split into its two parts by regressing it on the time-invariant variables of the model. The unexplained part
corresponds to the residuals of this equation,  . Third, the estimation of the full model is implemented by
including the time-invariant variables and the unexplained part of the fixed-eﬀect vector estimated in the second
step.
   21
      The relation is relatively weak for primary school enrollment (Figure 5).




                                                       18
our instrument.22 Moreover, the Sargan over-identifying restriction test                  23   indicates that we
cannot reject the hypothesis that there is no correlation between the instrument and the error
term in the regression stating that the partisan aﬃliation variable is a valid instrument. In

Tables 8 to 11, we highlight the fact that a higher degree of decentralization is consistently
associated with improved access to water sources and sanitation systems. Table 8 indicates
that the coeﬃcient associated with the degree of decentralization is significantly diﬀerent from
zero and could be interpreted as follows: the impact of a 10 percentage point increase in de-
centralization represents an extra 3.7 percent in people’s having access to toilets or latrines. In

other words, the standard deviation of the degree of decentralization (23.5 percent) implies an
8.69 percentage point increase for one-standard-deviation change. When we turn our attention
to the quality of basic services, for instance, we find, that once controlled for endogeneity bias,

such services undergo a 10 percent point increase in the share of own-revenue, entailing an extra
0.236 point on the quality index of water access in communes (Table 11). However, while the

eﬀect of decentralization on access to refuse disposal facilities is less robust (Tables 12 and 13),
decentralization is not found to have a significant average eﬀect on access to sewage disposal
facilities and communes’ primary school enrollment (Tables 14 to 16).
       In Table 17, we consider the nonmonotone eﬀect of the degree of decentralization by intro-
ducing its quadratic term (equation 2). We find a positive coeﬃcient associated with the degree
of decentralization and a negative sign for its squared value. The impact of decentralization is
then nonmonotone: the relationship between decentralization and access to basic services may
be described by an inverted U-shaped curve. Even if we cannot calculate the average optimal

decentralization degree due to a combination of diﬀerent scaled criteria for basic services, we are
able to determine it individually. Defined as the ratio of local own-revenue over total revenue
(given by −1 22 , equation 2), the optimal degree of decentralization reaches a 55 percent

value for the access to toilet facility, 65 percent for refuse disposal facilities (columns 1 to 3),
and a lower value for sewage disposal facilities (49 percent) and primary school enrollment
(52 percent, columns 4 and 5). We observe that the eﬀect of decentralization is monotone for

drinking water access since the optimal level is above 1 (exactly 103 percent).
  22
     As in most empirical studies, political considerations outweigh those of equity: wealthier, smaller, or ethni-
cally fragmented jurisdictions receive more intergovernmental transfers and are less autonomous.
  23
     We use the dummy variable indicating whether a commune has the same dominant ethnic aﬃliation as the
president in oﬃce, as another instrument to compute the Sargan test.




                                                        19
5.2      The non-linear eﬀect of decentralization between communes

We now consider the heterogeneous eﬀects of decentralization across communes according to

their wealth (equation 3). Table 18 reports that this eﬀect is generally lower for 20 percent
of the poorest communes. While toilet, garbage, and drinking water facilities are increasing

in quality with decentralization, there is no impact on average on sewage and primary school
enrollment. For the latter, it actually has a positive eﬀect on wealthier communes and a negative
one on the poorest communes.24 As a robustness check, we interact a continuous variable, the

DHS wealth index scores ( ), with the degree of decentralization (see Table 19). Estimated
results confirm that the positive eﬀect of decentralization is contingent on a minimum wealth
in communes. Only the eﬀect of decentralization on access to drinking water does not seem

to depend on wealth. The coeﬃcient associated with the degree of decentralization measures
the impact of decentralization in the absence of any wealth. Its negative sign indicates that a
commune with zero wealth would suﬀer from decentralization.
       Finally, we highlight the point that communes may prioritize basic services despite a uni-
form decentralization process. Such a hierarchy results from their autonomy, and should also
be considered by the central government and donors in the struggle against poverty. The ab-
sence of a normalized scale for every basic service prevents to conclude immediately on such
a prioritization. However, through Tables 18 and 19, we pinpoint some significant diﬀerences

among local governments’ behaviors in relation to their wealth. The poorest communes are
characterized by the negative impact of decentralization on access to primary education. This

suggests that these governments pay less attention to education than they do to both drinking
water access and toilet facilities (Table 18). Table 20 focuses on the top 20 percent wealthier
communes. For these communes the eﬀect of decentralization on sewage access is negative and

significant. In accordance with the reading of the 77 detailed communes’ monographs,25 we
may deduce that the richest local governments, having already reached a certain level of quality
in sanitation, choose to redirect their financial resources to other public facilities.
       The following table sums up our empirical results considering the eﬀect of decentralization
on the qualitative indicators:
  24
     We complete our analysis with Wald tests to ascertain that coeﬃcients for poor communes are significantly
diﬀerent from those in other communes.
  25
     Provided by the European Union through the Programme d’Appui au Démarrage des Communes.




                                                     20
     Table 21: Main empirical results

                       Average         Non monotone                         Between
                         eﬀect         average eﬀect                       communes
                                                   2
                                       D it      D it      Po or    N on -p o o r     R ich    N on -rich



     Toilet facility    0.692∗∗∗   2.190∗∗∗   -1.96∗∗∗   0.562∗     2.544∗∗∗        4.073∗∗∗   2.414∗∗∗

     Water access       2.361∗∗∗   3.234∗∗∗   -1.56∗∗∗   2.120∗∗∗   2.355∗∗∗        1.643∗∗∗   1.569∗∗∗

     Refuse disposal    1.345∗∗∗   1.700∗∗∗   -1.31∗∗∗   0.416∗∗    1.162∗∗∗        1.126∗∗∗   0.963∗∗∗

     Sewage disposal      NR       4.332∗∗∗   -4.44∗∗∗   0.231      0.139           -0.14∗∗∗   0.103∗∗∗

     Primary educ.        NR       6.866∗∗∗   -6.60∗∗∗   -0.24∗∗∗   0.656∗∗         0.680∗∗∗   0.261∗∗∗

     ***: coeﬃcient significant at 1 % level, .**: at 5 % level, *: at 10 % level, NR: Non Robust.


6    Conclusion

Benin is a young democracy that has experienced a decentralization process since the end of
the 1990s. The main objective of this institutional reform was to improve public policy gov-
ernance and reduce poverty. Our analysis focuses on the average and distributional eﬀects
of decentralization on access to poverty-related services. An original compilation of datasets
concerning the well-being of households and local public finance allows us to study the ultimate
eﬀects of decentralization on Beninese population. This study suggests that decentralization

has an unambiguous positive overall eﬀect on access to drinking water and sanitation systems.
    Beyond this average pattern, however, decentralization yields some distributional out-comes:
its impact is nonlinear and heterogeneous. First, the eﬀect of decentralization on access to basic

services follows an inverted U-shaped curve with an optimal degree of decentralization (at 67
percent on average), showing that a minimum level of central transfers is still beneficial. Second,

decentralization aﬀects service access diﬀerently according to the communes’ individual wealth,
having a positive eﬀect on any nonmonetary poverty indicators, and a negative eﬀect on the
poorest communes. These results are consistent with those of Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky
(2008), who conclude that decentralization improves public services only in wealthier areas
that have the ability to voice their preferences. Hence, if decentralization is a valid policy
for improving overall access to basic services, it is essential the central State to maintain a

minimum level of central transfers, in particular for the poorest communes, to avoid an increase
in interjurisdictional inequalities.



                                                   21
   The decentralization process in Benin was successful in reducing poverty by improving ac-
cess to some basic services. But this success remains threatened by an increase in inequalities
between communes. Decentralization gives control over decisions and resources to local govern-

ments, whose aim is to target the poorest households better. In so doing, the central government
treats the poor and local democratic institutions as assets and partners in the development
process. Our results suggest that the patterns of decentralization in Benin describe a better
access to primary services, but raise some issues about the design of transfers in both financial
resources and competences. Indeed, certain basic services, mostly in education, have not been

delivered to the expected degree. Controlling for diﬀerent geographical and socioeconomic vari-
ables, poor communes do not succeed in improving primary education. A potential explanation
rests on the idea that these local governments allocate available resources for other basic services

rather than education, which are considered more urgent, such as drinking water access and, to
a lesser extent, toilet facilities. If the promotion of primary education is a priority national goal,

then a re-centralization of this competence may be necessary to internalize inter-jurisdictions’
spillovers and insure the delivery of this basic public good at a minimum level in the poorest
communes.




                                                 22
 References
Akai, N., and M. Sakata (2002): “Fiscal decentralization contributes to economic growth:
      Evidence from state-level cross-section data for the United States,” Journal of Urban
      Economics, 52(1), 93—108.

Alderman, H. (2002): “Do local oﬃcials know something we don’t? Decentralization of targeted
     transfers in Albania,” Journal of Public Economics, 83(3), 375—404.

Alesina, A., and E. L. Ferrara (2005): “Ethnic diversity and economic performance,” Jour-
      nal of Economic Literature, 43(3), 762—800.

Alm, J., and J. Boex (2002): “An overview of intergovernmental fiscal relations and subna-
     tional public finance in Nigeria,” Discussion Paper 0201, International Studies Program,
     Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University.

Arze, J., J. Martinez-Vasquez, and R. Puwanti (2008): “Local government fiscal compe-
      tition in developing countries: The case of Indonesia,” Urban Public Economics Review,
      (8).

Azfar, O., and J. A. Livingston (2010): “Federalist disciplines or local capture? An empir-
     ical analysis of decentralization in Uganda,” Discussion Paper 00/12, IRIS, University of
     Maryand.

Bardhan, P. (2002): “Decentralization of governance and development,” Journal of Economic
     Perspectives, 16(4), 185—205.

Bardhan, P., and D. Mookherjee (2005): “Decentralizing antipoverty program delivery in
     developing countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(4), 675—704.

Bardhan, P. K., and D. Mookherjee (2000): “Capture and governance at local and national
     levels,” American Economic Review, 90(2), 135—139.

Barenstein, M., and L. de Mello (2001): “Fiscal decentralization and governance: A cross-
     country analysis,” IMF Working Papers 01/71, International Monetary Fund.

Besley, T., and A. Case (1995): “Incumbent behavior: Vote-seeking, tax-setting, and yard-
     stick competition,” American Economic Review, 85(1), 25—45.

Besley, T., and S. Coate (2003): “Centralized versus decentralized provision of local public
     goods: A political economy approach,” Journal of Public Economics, 87(12), 2611—2637.

Bird, R. M., and E. Rodriguez (1999): “Decentralization and poverty alleviation. Interna-
      tional experience and the case of the Philippines,” Public Administration and Develop-
      ment, 19, 299—319.

Cai, H., and D. Treisman (2005): “Does competition for capital discipline governments?
     Decentralization, globalization, and public policy,” American Economic Review, 95(3),
     817—830.

Caldeira, E., M. Foucault, and G. Rota-Graziosi (2008): “Decentralization in Africa
     and the nature of local governments’ competition: Evidence from Benin,” Working Paper
     1018, CERDI.

Case, A. (2001): “Election goals and income redistribution: Recent evidence from Albania,”
      European Economic Review, 45(3), 405—423.


                                              23
Chambas, G. (2010): Mobiliser des ressources locales en Afrique subsaharienne. Economica,
    Paris.

Cox, G., M. M. (1986): “Electoral politics as a redistributive game,” Journal of Politics, 48(2),
     370—389.

Enikolopov, R., and E. Zhuravskaya (2007): “Decentralization and political institutions,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12), 2261—2290.

Faguet, J.-P. (2004): “Does decentralization increase government responsiveness to local needs?
     Evidence from Bolivia,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(3-4), 867—893.

Fan, C. S., C. Lin, and D. Treisman (2009): “Political decentralization and corruption:
     Evidence from around the world,” Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2), 14—34.

Filmer, D., and L. H. Pritchett (2001): “Estimating wealth eﬀects without expenditure
     data or tears: An application to educational enrollments in states of India,” Demography,
     38(1), 115—132.

Fisman, R., and R. Gatti (2002): “Decentralization and corruption: Evidence across coun-
     tries,” Journal of Public Economics, 83(3), 325—345.

Galasso, E., and M. Ravallion (2005): “Decentralized targeting of an antipoverty program,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 89(4), 705—727.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky (2008): “School decentralization: Helping
     the good get better, but leaving the poor behind,” Journal of Public Economics, 92(10-11),
     2106—2120.

Hayek, F. A. v. (1948): Individualism and economic order. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Huther, J., and A. Shah (1998): “Applying a simple measure of good governance to the
     debate on fiscal decentralization,” Policy research working paper series, The World Bank.

Lin, J. Y., and Z. Liu (2000): “Fiscal decentralization and economic growth in China,” Eco-
      nomic Development and Cultural Change, 49(1), 1—21.

Lockwood, B. (2002): “Distributive politics and the costs of centralization,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, 69(2), 313—37.

Martinez-Vazquez, J., and R. M. McNab (2003): “Fiscal decentralization and economic
     growth,” World Development, 31(9), 1597—1616.

Meyer, S. A., and S. Naka (1999): “The determinants of Japanese local-benefit seeking,”
    Contemporary Economic Policy, 17(1), 87—96.

Miguel, E., and F. Zaidi (2003): “Do politicians reward their supporters? Regression discon-
     tinuity evidence from Ghana,” Discussion paper, University of California, Berkeley.

Oates, W. E. (1972): “Fiscal federalism,” New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Plümper, T., and V. E. Troeger (2007): “Eﬃcient estimation of time-invariant and rarely
     changing variables in finite sample panel analyses with unit fixed eﬀects,” Political Analy-
     sis, 15(2), 124—139.

Prud’homme, R. (1995): “The dangers of decentralization,” World Bank Research Observer,
     10(2), 201—20.


                                               24
Reinikka, R., and J. Svensson (2004): “Local capture: Evidence from a central government
      transfer program in Uganda,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 678—704.

Robalino, D. A., O. F. Picazo, and A. Voetberg (2001): “Does fiscal decentralization im-
     prove health outcomes? Evidence from a cross-country analysis,” Policy Research Working
     Paper Series 2565, The World Bank.

Rutstein, S. O. (2008): “The DHS wealth index: Approaches for rural and urban areas,” DHS
     Comparative Reports 60, Macro International Inc., Calverton, Maryland.

Rutstein, S. O., and K. Johnson (2004): “The DHS wealth index,” DHS Comparative
     Reports 6, Macro International Inc., Calverton, Maryland.

Salmon, P. (1987): “Decentralisation as an incentive scheme,” Oxford Review of Economic
     Policy, 3(2), 24—43.

Seabright, P. (1996): “Accountability and decentralisation in government: An incomplete
     contracts model,” European Economic Review, 40(1), 61—89.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956): “A pure theory of local expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy,
     64, 416.

Treisman, D. (2000): “The causes of corruption: A cross-national study,” Journal of Public
     Economics, 76(3), 399—457.

Wallis, J. J. (1998): “The political economy of New Deal spending revisited, again: With and
     without Nevada,” Explorations in Economic History, 35(2), 140—170.

Winkler, D. R., and T. Rounds (1996): “Municipal and private sector response to decen-
     tralization and school choice,” Economics of Education Review, 15(4), 365—376.

Wollera, G. M., and K. Phillips (1998): “Fiscal decentralisation and IDC economic growth:
    An empirical investigation,” Journal of Development Studies, 34(4), 139—148.

World-Bank (2004): World development report: Making services work for poor people. New
    York: Oxford University Press.

Xie, D., H.-f. Zou, and H. Davoodi (1999): “Fiscal decentralization and economic growth in
      the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics, 45(2), 228—239.

Zhang, T., and H.-F. Zou (1998): “Fiscal decentralization, public spending, and economic
     growth in China,” Journal of Public Economics, 67, 221—240.




                                             25
A            Appendix

A.1            Figures



                                       Type of toilet facility                                                                             Source of drinking water




                                                                                                           12
 8




                                                                                                           10
 6
 4




                                                                                                           8
 2




                                                                                                           6
 0




                                                                                                           4
         0                 .2              .4              .6                     .8                   1        0                  .2              .4              .6                   .8                 1
                                      Share of local own−resources                                                                            Share of local own−resources

                                  95% CI                                  Fitted values                                                 95% CI                                     Fitted values
                                  Type of toilet facility                                                                               Source of drinking water



       F ig u re 1 : S h a re o f lo c a l ow n -re so u rc es a n d a c cess to to ile t fa c ility                F ig u re 2 : S h a re o f lo c a l ow n -re so u rc es a n d a c cess to w a ter




                                   Type of sewage disposal                                                                       Type of garbage and refuse disposal
 1.8




                                                                                                           4
 1.6




                                                                                                           3
 1.4




                                                                                                           2
 1.2




                                                                                                           1
 1




         0                 .2              .4              .6                     .8                   1        0                  .2              .4              .6                   .8                 1
                                      Share of local own−resources                                                                            Share of local own−resources

                                95% CI                                      Fitted values                                      95% CI                                                     Fitted values
                                Type of sewage disposal                                                                        Type of garbage and refuse disposal



 F ig u re 3 : S h a re o f lo ca l ow n -reso u rce s a n d a cc ess to sew ag e d isp o sa l              F ig u re 4 : S h a re o f lo ca l ow n -reso u rce s a n d a cc ess to refu se d isp o sa l




                                                                                                 26
             Primary school enrollment for the 6−11 years olds




1
.8
.6
.4
.2
     0                .2              .4              .6                  .8                1
                                 Share of local own−resources

                           95% CI                                     Fitted values
                           Primary school enrollment



 F ig u re 5 : S h a re o f lo ca l ow n -reso u rce s a n d a cce ss to p rim a ry sch o o l

                                       e n ro llm ent




                                            27
A.2   Maps




                                                                                         4



                                                                                                            5



                                                                    1               Alibori
                                                                                              3
                       22
                                                 17
                                                                                                                          6
                  19
                                                                                     2
                       Atakora
                        23
             16
                                      18
                                                                                                                 9
                  15                                 21             14                   7
                       20


                                                                                                           11
                            25
                                                                10            Borgou
                                      26
                       27
                                                                                                  13                                                       1.0 - 1.5

                             Donga                                             12                                                                          1.5 - 2.5
                                                                                                                                                           2.5 - 3.5
                                                                          8
                                            24
                                                                                                                                                           3.5 - 5.0
                                                                                                                                                           5.0 - 8.0
                                                                          66
                                                                                                                                73                                      61
                                                                                                                                                 75         76
                                           63                                                                                                         72
                                                                                                                                     69    71
                                                           65                                                   37
                                                                                                                                     70                          74          60
                                           Collines                                                                       40                     77
                                                                          68                                                                                           58
                                       67                                                                                 42                                     54
                                                                                                                38                   41          32
                                                               64                                                    39                                                     62
                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                     48         44          29                                 59
                                                73                             61
                                                               72                                                43                                              55    52 53
                                                      Zou           76
                                                                               Plateau                                     47                   33
                                                69                                                                                                    28
                                  37                  75                                                                                                     34 51 56 49
                                                70 71                                                                           45
                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                         74         60                                                          31                 57
                             Kouffo 40               77
                                                                                                                          46
                                                                                                                                                            36
                                                                         54 58
                                    42 41
                                 38                       32
                                  39                                35          62
                                  48 44
                                                 Atlantique 50 59
                                  Mono            29      Ouémé                                        0        25         50              100 Kilometers
                                                          33    28 34 55 53
                                  43 47
                                           30
                                     46
                                        45    31                  36 51 57 49
                                                               Littoral                       Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations


                                                      Map 2: Toilet quality




                                                                                             28
                                                                                 4



                                                                                                 5



                                                         1                  Alibori
                                                                                       3

          22
                                     17
                                                                                                          6
     19
                                                                             2
          Atakora
               23
16
                          18
                                                                                                     9
     15                                  21              14                      7
          20



                                                                                                11
                25
                                                        10             Borgou
                          26
                                                                                           13
           27


                    Donga                                               12



                                                                  8
                                24




                                                                  66

                               63

                                               65

                               Collines
                                                                   68                                         1.00 - 1.05
                            67

                                                   64
                                                                                                              1.05 - 1.11

                                                   72
                                                                                                              1.11 - 1.25
                                    73                                 61
                                          Zou                76         Plateau                               1.25 - 1.50
                      37          69 71 75

                Kouffo          40
                                   70
                                       77
                                                                  74        60                                1.50 - 1.79
                                                              54 58
                           42       41
                     38                       32
                       39                                35             62
                                                                                                 0       25   50      100 Kilometers
                      48        44
                                     Atlantique 50 59
                      Mono            29      Ouémé
                                              33
                      43 47                             28 34 55 52 53
                               30                                56
                         46
                            45    31                      36 51 57 49
                                                   Littoral                          Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations


                                     Map 3: Sewage quality




                                                                                     29
                                                                              4



                                                                                                   5



                                                      1
                                                                         Alibori
                                                                                     3

          22
                                      17
                                                                                                               6
     19
                                                                          2
          Atakora
               23
16
                          18
                                                                                                       9
     15                                   21          14                      7
          20



                                                                                              11
                25
                                                     10             Borgou
                           26
                                                                                         13
          27


                    Donga                                            12



                                                               8
                                24




                                                               66

                               63

                                               65

                                Collines
                                                                68                                                   1.00 - 1.10
                               67

                                                64
                                                                                                                     1.10 - 1.25

                                                72
                                                                                                                     1.25 - 1.50
                                     73                             61
                                           Zou            76
                                                                     Plateau                                         1.50 - 2.50
                      37              69 71 75

                Kouffo              40
                                       70
                                           77
                                                               74        60                                          2.50 - 3.79
                                                           54 58
                           42        41
                     38                        32
                       39                             35             62
                      48        44
                                      Atlantique 50 59                                                     0       25 50     100 Kilometers
                     Mono              29      Ouémé
                                   33
                      43 47                          28 34 55 52 53
                               30                             56
                            45    31                       51 57 49
                         46                            36
                                                    Littoral                      Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations


                                Map 4: Garbage quality




                                                                              30
                                                                            4



                                                                                                5



                                                       1            Alibori
                                                                                  3
          22
                                    17
                                                                                                              6
     19
                                                                        2
          Atakora
           23
16
                         18
                                                                                                    9
     15                                 21             14                   7
          20


                                                                                           11
               25
                                                   10            Borgou
                         26                                                                                                           5.05 - 6.00
                                                                                      13
          27
                                                                                                                                      6.00 - 7.00
                Donga                                             12
                                                                                                                                      7.00 - 8.00

                               24
                                                             8                                                                        8.00 - 9.00
                                                                                                                                      9.00 - 10.56
                                                                                                                                            64
                                                             66
                                                                                                                  73                                    61
                                                                                                                                      72    76
                              63                                                                                                 75
                                                                                                37                  69
                                              65                                                                            71
                              Collines                                                                   40
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                                 77
                                                                                                                                                 74          60
                                                             68
                                                                                                                                                       58
                          67
                                                                                                         42         41                           54
                                                                                           38                                    32
                                                  64                                                39                                                       62
                                                                                                                                       35
                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                    48            44        29                                59
                                   73                             61                            43                                               55 52 53
                                                  72                                                      47                 33
                                         Zou           76
                                                                  Plateau
                                                                                                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                51 56 49
                     37             69                                                                                 30                    34
                                         75                                                                    45                                  57
                                   70 71                                                                                     31             36
                                                            74         60                                46
                Kouffo 40               77
                                                            54 58
                       42 41
                    38                       32
                     39                                35          62
                         Atlantique 50 59
                     48 44
                     Mono 29      Ouémé                                                    0             25         50                100 Kilometers
                                             33    28 34 55 53
                     43 47
                              30
                        46
                           45    31                  36 51 57 49
                                                  Littoral                       Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations


                    Map 5: Drinking water quality




                                                                                31
                                                                               4



                                                                                               5



                                                       1                  Alibori
                                                                                     3

          22
                                         17
                                                                                                       6
     19
                                                                           2
          Atakora
               23
16
                          18
                                                                                                   9
     15                                   21           14                      7
          20



                                                                                              11
                25
                                                      10             Borgou
                           26
                                                                                         13
          27


                    Donga                                             12



                                                                8
                                24




                                                                66

                               63

                                                65
                                Collines
                                                                 68                                             0.24 - 0.50
                               67

                                                 64                                                             0.50 - 0.70

                                     73          72                                                             0.70 - 0.80
                                                                     61
                                              Zou          76         Plateau                                   0.80 - 0.90
                      37             69 71 75
                                                                74
                    Kouffo          40
                                      70
                                          77
                                                                          60
                                                                                                                0.90 - 0.99
                                                            54 58
                           42        41
                     38                        32
                        39                             35             62
                       48       44
                                         Atlantique 50 59                                              0   25   50       100 Kilometers
                      Mono                29 33   Ouémé
                       43 47                          28 34 55 52 53
                                30                             56
                             45    31                   36 51 57 49
                          46
                                                    Littoral                       Source: http://www.gadm.org/country; Author's calculations


                                Map 6: School enrollment




                                                                                   32
A.3   List of communes (numbered)
               Communes Number      Region        Communes Number    Region
                Banikoara    1      ALIBORI      Klouekanme    40     COUFFO
                 Gogounou    2      ALIBORI            Lalo    41     COUFFO
                    Kandi    3      ALIBORI        Toviklin    42     COUFFO
                 Karimama    4      ALIBORI         Athieme    43       MONO
               Malanville    5      ALIBORI            Bopa    44       MONO
                  Segbana    6      ALIBORI            Come    45       MONO
                Bembereke    7       BORGOU      Grand-popo    46       MONO
                Tchaourou    8       BORGOU       Houeyogbe    47       MONO
                   Kalale    9       BORGOU         Lokossa    48       MONO
                   N'dali   10       BORGOU         Adjarra    49      OUEME
                    Nikki   11       BORGOU        Adjohoun    50      OUEME
                  Parakou   12       BORGOU        Aguegues    51      OUEME
                   Perere   13       BORGOU Akpro-Misserete    52      OUEME
                  Sinende   14       BORGOU        Avrankou    53      OUEME
                Boukoumbe   15      ATACORA           Bonou    54      OUEME
                    Cobly   16      ATACORA          Dangbo    55      OUEME
                    Kerou   17      ATACORA      Porto-Novo    56      OUEME
                  Kouande   18      ATACORA     Seme-Kpodji    57      OUEME
                   Materi   19      ATACORA      Adja-Ouere    58    PLATEAU
               Natitingou   20      ATACORA         Ifangni    59    PLATEAU
                  Pehunco   21      ATACORA            Pobe    60    PLATEAU
                Tanguieta   22      ATACORA           Ketou    61    PLATEAU
             Toucountouna   23      ATACORA          Sakete    62    PLATEAU
                  Bassila   24        DONGA           Bante    63   COLLINES
                  Copargo   25        DONGA     Dassa-Zoume    64   COLLINES
                  Djougou   26        DONGA         Glazoue    65   COLLINES
                    Ouake   27        DONGA          Ouesse    66   COLLINES
            Abomey-Calavi   28   ATLANTIQUE         Savalou    67   COLLINES
                   Allada   29   ATLANTIQUE            Save    68   COLLINES
                 Kpomasse   30   ATLANTIQUE          Abomey    69        ZOU
                   Ouidah   31   ATLANTIQUE    Agbangnizoun    70        ZOU
                    Toffo   32   ATLANTIQUE         Bohicon    71        ZOU
            Torri-Bossito   33   ATLANTIQUE            Cove    72        ZOU
                   So-Ava   34   ATLANTIQUE          Djidja    73        ZOU
                       Ze   35   ATLANTIQUE          Ouinhi    74        ZOU
                  Cotonou   36     LITTORAL        Za-Kpota    75        ZOU
                 Aplahoue   37       COUFFO       Zagnanado    76        ZOU
               Djakotomey   38       COUFFO      Zogbodomey    77        ZOU
                    Dogbo   39       COUFFO




                                         33
A.4   Tables
          Table 4: Descriptive statistics

          Basic services,                Mean      Std dev.   Min       Max

          Degree of decentralization,     0.484     0.235     0.066     0.986

          Public spending per capita,     7.218     0.778     4.521     9.436

          Per capita consumption,        11.754     0.464     10.513   12.970

          Population size,              11.356     0.529     10.250   13.500

          Population density,           338.084   1050.57    7.382    9235.63

          Urbanization rate,              0.278     0.232       0        1

          Ethnic fragmentation,           0.357     0.232     0.013     0.822

          Partisan aﬃliation,            0.305     0.461       0        1

          Toilet facility

                                      0.237     0.208       0       0.969

                                      2.836     1.541       1       7.958

          Water access

                                       0.306     0.249       0       0.994

                                       7.214     1.060     4.748    10.559

          Refuse disposal

                                      0.033     0.102       0       0.684

                                      1.255     0.466       1       3.785

          Sewage disposal

                                       0.009     0.026       0       0.184

                                       1.138     0.156       1       1.785

          Primary education              0.876     0.149     0.236      1




                                            34
Table 5: Correlations of our key variables

Variables                                                                                                                          

Degree of decentralization,                                         1

Public spending per capita,                                 0.3294*              1

Per capita consumption,                                     0.3128*           0.5646*         1

Population size,                                           0.3095*           0.5025*       0.5801*         1

Population density,                                        0.2431*           0.4656*       0.7571*       0.8080*          1

Urbanization rate,                                          0.2513*           0.4117*       0.5505*       0.5379*      0.4089*          1

Ethnic fragmentation,                                        0.0258           0.2696*       0.0817        0.2895*        0.0153       0.3330*        1

* : C o rrela tio n co e ﬃ cie nt sig n ifi c a nt a t 1 0 % leve l.




  Table 6: Correlations of our key variables

  Variables                                                                                                                     

  Type of toilet facility,                                        0.5155*    0.2760*       0.4030*       0.4274*        0.4108*         0.0018

  Source of drinking water,                                        0.5221*    0.3493*       0.3555*       0.3902*        0.2823*      0.1693*

  Type of sewage disposal,                                         0.3826*    0.1831*       0.4420*       0.4618*        0.3018*         0.0911

  Type of refuse disposal,                                        0.2321*    0.2987*       0.5511*       0.6045*        0.3771*         0.0533

  Primary school enrollment,                                         0.2286*    -0.0638          0.0461        0.1058         0.0962    -0.1412*

  * : C o rre latio n c o eﬃ c ient sig n ifi ca nt a t 1 0 % le ve l.




                                                                                    35
Table 7: Validity of our instrumental variable

Dependent variable: 

Partisan aﬃliation,                                                                          -0.026***                     (0 .0 0 0 )


Public spending per capita,                                                                     -0.027***                 (0 .0 0 2 )


Per capita consumption,                                                                         -0.053***                 (0 .0 0 4 )


Population size,                                                                                 0.130***                (0 .0 2 9 )


Population density,                                                                             0.002***                (0 .0 0 0 )


Urbanization rate,                                                                               0.155***                (0 .0 1 7 )


Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                           -0.104***                 (0 .0 2 9 )


Constant                                                                                            -0.182                   (0 .3 1 )


Number of observations                                                                                            145

Adjusted R2                                                                                                      0.68

F-Statistic                                                                                                     54680

Fixed-eﬀect                                                                                                       yes

Year dummies                                                                                                      yes

Sargan test (p-value)                                                                                           0.519

C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r term , a r1 C o c cra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd erro rs a re in b ra ckets.


                                   * * * : c o eﬃ c ient sig n ifi ca nt a t 1 % level, .* * : a t 5 % leve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l




                                                                                   36
     Table 8: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to toilet facility (quantity)
     Dep. var.:                  (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)                                                                                                                                    (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.370*** 0.249*** 0.184*** 0.116**               0.129**       0.140**      0.092*                                                                                                                             0.171***                 0.715***
                                                                   (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 6 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 5 )                 (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 2 5 )              (0 .0 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.126***                 0.101***                  0.109***                 0.090***                 0.066*                    0.071**                  0.030***                 0.009
                                                                                            (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 0 4 )              (0 .0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.133**                   0.094***                 0.086**                  0.086**                   0.099***                 -0.001                   -0.314*
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .2 1 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.102***                 0.064*                   0.021                     0.049                    0.021                    -0.057***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.003**                  0.003**                   0.002**                  0.005***                 0.004***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 )                (0 .0 0 1 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.191***                  0.234***                 0.301***                 0.242***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .0 8 )                 (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )




37
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.188***                -0.131***                -0.052*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )

     Constant                                                      0.049                    -0.779***                -2.165***                 -2.893***                -2.253***                -1.641***                 -2.090***                -0.397*                  -11.72***
                                                                   (0 .0 3 )                (0 .2 2 )                (0 .4 6 )                 (0 .5 2 )                (0 .7 1 )                (0 .5 8 )                 (0 .6 5 )                (0 .2 0 )                (1 .0 6 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.17                     0.35                     0.41                      0.46                     0.49                     0.96                      0.54                     0.92                     0.96
     F-Statistic                                                   20.55                    21.86                    20.71                     25.54                    34.43                    30.62                     46.74                    715.01                   622.75
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 9: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to toilet facility (quality)
     Dep. var.:               (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)                                                                                                                               (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  2.531*** 1.905*** 1.871*** 1.537*** 1.660*** 1.734*** 1.553***                                                                                                                                                 1.471***                 0.692***
                                                                   (0 .5 4 )                (0 .5 3 )                (0 .5 6 )                 (0 .5 6 )                (0 .5 4 )                (0 .5 5 )                 (0 .5 6 )                (0 .0 2 7 )              (0 .0 2 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.718***                 0.705***                  0.749***                 0.565***                 0.402*                    0.464**                  0.273***                 0.352***
                                                                                            (0 .1 9 )                (0 .2 0 )                 (0 .2 0 )                (0 .2 1 )                (0 .2 2 )                 (0 .2 1 )                (0 .0 1 9 )              (0 .0 2 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.071                     -0.119                   -0.197                   0.199                     -0.249                   0.189***                 0.189***
                                                                                                                     (0 .3 6 )                 (0 .3 4 )                (0 .3 4 )                (0 .3 5 )                 (0 .3 7 )                (0 .0 0 6 )              (0 .0 0 7 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.498*                   0.142                    -0.150                    -0.345                   -0.411***                -0.260***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .2 5 )                (0 .3 0 )                (0 .2 7 )                 (0 .3 1 )                (0 .0 0 8 )              (0 .0 0 8 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.003***                 0.003***                  0.004***                 0.004***                 0.003***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 1 )               (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 )                (0 .0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       1.284*                    1.123*                   1.298***                 1.264***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .6 8 )                 (0 .7 3 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )




38
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.031                   -0.229                   -0.342
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .5 1 )                (0 .3 9 )                (0 .4 1 )

     Constant                                                      1.542***                 -3.202**                 -3.940                    -7.483                   -1.405                   -2.706                    -5.178                   -0.397*                  0.043
                                                                   (0 .2 5 )                (1 .2 7 )                (3 .9 4 )                 (4 .9 7 )                (5 .5 4 )                (5 .2 8 )                 (5 .9 2 )                (0 .2 0 )                (0 .1 1 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.15                     0.26                     0.26                      0.46                     0.32                     0.35                      0.34                     0.89                     0.87
     F-Statistic                                                   11.88                    12.61                    29.43                     25.54                    57.82                    49.10                     64.70                    10608.02                 992.44
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 10: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on water access (quantity)
     Dep. var.:                (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)                                                                                                                      (7)                      (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.365*** 0.260*** 0.220*** 0.192*** 0.212*** 0.207**                                                                                                                                  0.173**                  0.230***                 0.654***
                                                                   (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 8 )                 (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 8 )                 (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 2 8 )              (0 .0 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.116***                 0.101***                  0.105***                 0.076***                 0.085***                  0.087***                 0.047***                 0.047***
                                                                                            (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 0 3 )              (0 .0 0 3 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.081**                   0.065                    0.053                    0.053                     0.072                    0.021                    0.021
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 1 4 )              (0 .1 5 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.041                    -0.148                   0.002                     0.022                    -0.032                   -0.064**
                                                                                                                                               (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 1 9 )              (0 .0 1 8 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.005***                 0.005***                  0.004***                 0.006***                 0.006***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 1 )               (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 )                (0 .0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       -0.076                    0.058                    0.002                    1.264***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .1 0 )                 (0 .1 1 )                (0 .0 0 3 )              (0 .0 1 )




39
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.145*                  -0.115***                -0.053***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 2 )

     Constant                                                      0.110***                 -0.660**                 -1.505***                 -1.801***                -0.836                   -1.080*                   -1.480         **        -0.378*                  0.110
                                                                   (0 .0 4 )                (0 .1 9 )                (0 .4 7 )                 (0 .5 1 )                (0 .6 2 )                (0 .6 5 )                 (0 .7 1 )                (0 .2 1 )                (0 .2 0 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.12                     0.24                     0.25                      0.26                     0.29                     0.30                      0.34                     0.88                     0.87
     F-Statistic                                                   13.51                    15.49                    13.44                     12.62                    30.13                    25.31                     64.70                    1537.87                  992.44
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 11: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on water access (quality)
     Dep. var.:                (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)                                                                                                                      (7)                      (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  1.935*** 1.685*** 1.490*** 1.360*** 1.441*** 1.454***                                                                                                                                 1.591***                 1.714***                 2.361***
                                                                   (0 .3 2 )                (0 .3 4 )                (0 .3 5 )                 (0 .3 7 )                (0 3 5 )                 (0 .3 6 )                 (0 .3 7 )                (0 .2 2 )                (0 .2 7 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.327***                 0.250**                   0.268**                  0.147                    0.117                     0.133                    -0.028                   -0.028
                                                                                            (0 .1 2 )                (0 .1 2 )                 (0 .1 2 )                (0 .1 2 )                (0 .1 4 )                 (0 .1 3 )                (0 .0 3 4 )              (0 .0 3 7 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.402*                    0.327                    0.276                    0.275                     0.143                    0.185*                   0.185*
                                                                                                                     (0 .2 1 )                 (0 .2 2 )                (0 .2 2 )                (0 .2 3 )                 (0 .2 4 )                (0 .1 1 )                (0 .1 0 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.194                    -0.040                   -0.092                    -0.340                   -0.434***                -0.528***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .2 0 )                (0 .2 1 )                (0 .2 1 )                 (0 .2 4 )                (0 .1 0 )                (0 .1 0 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.002***                 0.002***                  0.003***                 0.003***                 0.003***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 1 )               (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 )                (0 .0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.228                     0.001                    0.216*                   0.147
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .4 4 )                 (0 .4 4 )                (0 .1 3 )                (0 .1 4 )




40
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.934***                -0.933***                1.028***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .3 4 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 3 )

     Constant                                                      6.364***                 4.186***                 0.021                     -1.363                   2.649                    3.382                     7.297*                   8.872***                 9.616***
                                                                   (0 .1 8 )                (0 .8 3 )                (0 .6 0 )                 (3 .0 9 )                (3 .2 9 )                (3 .4 0 )                 (3 .8 4 )                (1 .2 9 )                (1 .3 3 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.18                     0.24                     0.26                      0.27                     0.30                     0.30                      0.32                     0.86                     0.84
     F-Statistic                                                   17.44                    14.71                    11.33                     10.42                    51.08                    45.16                     82.58                    142.652                  188.52
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 12: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to refuse disposal facility (quantity)
     Dep. var.:               (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)                                                                                                                                             (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.137*** 0.092*** 0.081**           0.018        0.035        0.040         0.048       0.038***                                                                                                                                        0.077***
                                                                   (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 0 7 )              (0 .0 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.049**                  0.044**                   0.053***                 0.027**                  0.017*                    0.019*                   0.013***                 -0.024***
                                                                                            (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.022                     -0.012                   -0.023                   -0.023                    -0.036                   -0.006*                  -0.006
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 0 3 )              (0 .0 0 4 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.019***                 0.044**                  0.025**                   0.002                    0.001                    -0.012**
                                                                                                                                               (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 0 3 )              (0 .0 0 5 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.005***                 0.005***                  0.005***                 0.005***                 0.005***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 1 )               (0 .0 0 1 )              (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.084**                   0.065*                   0.069***                 0.089***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 0 9 )




41
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              0.074***                 0.060***                 0.065***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 0 6 )              (0 .0 0 1 )

     Constant                                                      -0.033**                 -0.357**                 -0.595*                   -1.258***                -0.424                   -0.424                    0.205                    -0.081**                 0.161***
                                                                   (0 .0 1 )                (0 .1 4 )                (0 .3 7 )                 (0 .0 0 7 )              (0 .3 6 )                (0 .3 6 )                 (0 .2 9 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 5 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.10                     0.21                     0.22                      0.40                     0.55                     0.57                      0.58                     0.96                     0.95
     F-Statistic                                                   4.26                     4.26                     3.30                      4.50                     67.65                    56.65                     79.65                    89.10                    79.30
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 13: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to refuse disposal facility (quality)
     Dep. var.:               (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)                                                                                                                                            (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.510*** 0.313**       0.260        0.098        0.176        0.189         0.176        0.225***                                                                                                                                       1.345***
                                                                   (0 .1 8 )                (0 .1 5 )                (0 .1 7 )                 (0 .1 9 )                (0 .1 7 )                (0 .1 7 )                 (0 .1 7 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .1 2 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.218***                 0.198***                  0.219***                 0.104*                   0.074*                    0.089*                   0.044**                  -0.078***
                                                                                            (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 5 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 0 8 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.108*                    0.016                    -0.032                   -0.033                    -0.067                   -0.122***                -0.122**
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 9 )                 (0 .1 1 )                (0 .1 1 )                (0 .1 1 )                 (0 .1 1 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 5 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.241*                   0.018                    -0.034                    -0.122                   -0.144*                  -0.365***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .1 2 )                (0 .1 0 )                (0 .0 8 )                 (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 8 )                (0 .1 1 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.002***                 0.002***                  0.002***                 0.002***                 0.003***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )               (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.023**                   0.154                    0.213***                 0.276***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .2 1 )                 (0 .2 1 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 2 )




42
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              0.163                    0.196***                 0.359***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .1 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )

     Constant                                                      0.973***                 -0.466                   -1.590                    -3.308*                  0.509                    1.249                     2.499*                   3.568***                 6.354***
                                                                   (0 .0 7 )                (0 .5 6 )                (1 .5 8 )                 (2 .0 5 )                (1 .7 2 )                (1 ..3 0 )                (1 .3 7 )                (0 .9 2 )                (1 .3 0 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.07                     0.18                     0.19                      0.25                     0.41                     0.41                      0.42                     0.83                     0.81
     F-Statistic                                                   4.83                     4.41                     3.40                      3.90                     68.32                    56.66                     58.22                    119.60                   1317.32
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 14: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to sewage disposal (quantity)
     Dep. var.:                   (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)                                                                                                                                       (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.258*** 0.143**       0.105        -0.061       -0.018      -0.005      0.037                                                                                                                                 0.013                    0.024***
                                                                   (0 .0 9 )                (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 7 )                 (0 .1 0 )                (0 .0 9 )                (0 .0 9 )                 (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 0 9 )              (0 .0 0 2 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.125**                  0.110**                   0.132***                 0.068*                   0.038*                    0.034                    0.020***                 0.009***
                                                                                            (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 0 2 )               (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 0 2 )              (0 .0 0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.078                     -0.016                   -0.043                   -0.044                    -0.061                   0.006                    -0.001
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 6 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 5 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 0 8 )              (0 .0 0 1 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.248***                 0.125**                  0.072*                    0.054                    0.051***                 0.004***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 3 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 0 0 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.001***                 0.001***                  0.001***                 0.001***                 0.001***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )               (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.235*                    0.218*                   0.226***                 0.034***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .1 3 )                 (0 .1 3 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 1 )




43
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              0.157**                  0.124**                  0.012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .0 7 )                (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 0 8 )

     Constant                                                      -0.038                   -0.852**                 -1.675*                   -3.444***                -1.34                    -0.587                    -0.221                   -0.897***                -0.069***
                                                                   (0 .0 3 )                (0 .3 8 )                (0 .0 0 1 )               (1 .2 9 )                (1 .2 1 )                (0 .8 5 )                 (0 .9 8 )                (0 .1 7 )                (0 .0 0 3 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.05                     0.17                     0.18                      0.37                     0.52                     0.55                      0.57                     0.91                     0.91
     F-Statistic                                                   4.00                     3.17                     3.38                      3.25                     21.06                    18.75                     19.07                    235.90                   350.65
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 15: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to sewage disposal (quality)
     Dep. var.:                   (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)                                                                                                                                       (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  1.412**    1.101**     1.008*       0.390        0.578       0.613       0.680                                                                                                                                 0.142                    -2.81***
                                                                   (0 .5 7 )                (0 .5 1 )                (0 .6 1 )                 (0 .6 9 )                (0 .6 6 )                (0 .6 5 )                 (0 .6 7 )                (0 .3 5 )                (0 .3 0 6 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.388                    0.352                     0.433*                   0.152                    0.074                     0.079                    0.049**                  0.049***
                                                                                            (0 .2 6 )                (0 .2 5 )                 (0 .2 4 )                (0 .2 5 )                (0 .2 2 )                 (0 .2 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.190                     -0.163                   -0.282                   -0.283                    -0.357                   0.595**                  0.595***
                                                                                                                     (0 .4 1 )                 (0 .3 8 )                (0 .3 8 )                (0 .3 9 )                 (0 .4 0 )                (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 6 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      0.924**                  0.378                    0.238                     0.254                    0.348                    0.778**
                                                                                                                                               (0 .3 6 )                (0 .3 4 )                (0 .3 0 )                 (0 .3 4 )                (0 .3 6 )                (0 .3 8 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.005***                 0.005***                  0.005***                 0.004***                 0.004***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )               (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.312*                    0.656                    0.503*                   0.819***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .7 9 )                 (0 .7 9 )                (0 .2 9 )                (0 .3 0 )




44
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              0.274                    -0.204                   -0.637*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .5 5 )                (0 .3 3 )                (0 .3 7 )

     Constant                                                      -1.48***                 7.909***                 5.93                      -0.634                   8.682                    10.643**                  11.138*                  -1.089                   -4.494
                                                                   (0 .2 3 )                (1 .8 3 )                (5 .0 7 )                 (6 .1 6 )                (6 .1 9 )                (4 .9 2                   (5 .6 6 )                (4 .1 3 )                (0 .0 0 3 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.06                     0.10                     0.10                      0.18                     0.26                     0.26                      0.28                     0.64                     0.84
     F-Statistic                                                   6.22                     4.61                     3.47                      3.68                     47.77                    40.32                     49.20                    35.87                    140.55
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 16: Estimation results - The average e¤ect of decentralization on the access to primary education
     Dep. var.:                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)                                                                                                                                        (8)                      (9)
     Degree of decentralization,  0.019      -0.010      -0.016       -0.015       -0.011      -0.009     -0.039                                                                                                                                 0.003                    0.242**
                                                                   (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 3 )                (0 .1 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                                                         0.031**                  0.028*                    0.028*                   0.022                    0.017                     0.020                    0.063**                  0.031*
                                                                                            (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 9 )                 (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )                 (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                                                                      0.122                     0.013                    0.010                    0.010                     0.023                    0.134***                 0.072**
                                                                                                                     (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 4 )                (0 .0 2 )

     Population size,                                                                                                                      -0.002                   -0.013                   -0.022                    0.001                    0.013                    -0.036***
                                                                                                                                               (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 2 )                (0 .0 2 )                 (0 .0 3 )                (0 .0 1 )                (0 .0 0 7 )

     Population density,                                                                                                                                            0.001***                 0.001***                  0.002***                 0.001***                 0.001***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )               (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )              (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                                                                                                                                                       0.038*                    0.063                    0.030***                 0.040***
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0 .0 4 )                 (0 .0 5 )                (0 .0 0 9 )              (0 .0 1 )




45
     Ethnic fragmentation,                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.131**                 -0.056                   -0.049
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0 .0 6 )                (0 .0 8 )                (0 .0 8 )

     Constant                                                      0.777***                 0.573***                 0.446*                    0.464**                  0.652**                  0.776*                    0.3898*                  1.809***                 1.765***
                                                                   (0 .0 2 )                (0 .1 1 )                (0 .2 2 )                 (0 .2 5 )                (0 .3 5 )                (0 .4 0 )                 (0 .4 5 )                (0 .2 6 )                (0 .3 2 )

     Number of observations                                        150                      149                      149                       149                      149                      149                       145                      145                      145
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.35                     0.37                     0.10                      0.37                     0.38                     0.38                      0.41                     0.58                     0.52
     F-Statistic                                                   43.21                    30.10                    3.47                      20.60                    16.95                    14.45                     12.77                    17.26                    14.19
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                   no                       no                       no                        no                       no                       no                        no                       yes                      yes
     Year dummies                                                  yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes                       yes                      yes                      yes
        C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.* * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 17: Estimation results - A non monotone e¤ect of decentralization on the access to basic services
     Dep. var.:                      (1)    (2)    (3)   (4)        (5)  
     Degree of decentralization,  2.190*** 3.234***          1.700***     4.332*** 6.866***
                                                             (0 .0 5 )                  (0 .3 4 )                   (0 .2 6 )                    (0 .2 4 )                  (2 .2 1 )
      2
                                                          -1.96***                   -1.56***                    -1.31***                     -4.44***                   -6.60***
                                                             (0 .0 7 )                  (0 .4 7 )                   (0 .2 3 )                    (0 .2 4 )                  (2 .1 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                          0.030***                   -0.026                      -0.079***                    0.003*                     -0.009
                                                             (0 .0 0 4 )                (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .0 0 1 )                (0 .0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                              -0.008                     0.182*                      -0.121**                     0.062***                   0.138***
                                                             (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .1 2 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .0 0 6 )                (0 .0 4 )

     Population size,                                    -0.002                     -0.440***                   -0.237**                     0.088**                    -0.112***
                                                             (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .1 1 )                   (0 .0 9 )                    (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .0 2 )

     Population density,                                 0.005***                   0.003***                    0.003***                     0.003***                   0.004***
                                                             (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )                 (0 .0 0 0 )                  (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                   0.359***                   0.270*                      0.422***                     -0.077**                   0.329***




46
                                                             (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .1 6 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .1 0 )

     Ethnic fragmentation,                                -0.132**                   0.921***                    0.2131***                    -0.021                     -0.047
                                                             (0 .0 5 )                  (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 0 7 )                  (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .0 9 )

     Constant                                                -0.552**                   8.667***                    5.106***                     0.212                      2.302***
                                                             (0 .2 2 )                  (1 .3 2 )                   (1 .1 5 )                    (0 .4 3 )                  (0 .1 3 )

     Number of observations                                  145                        145                         145                          145                        145
     Adjusted R2                                             0.91                       0.84                        0.80                         0.59                       0.53
     F-Statistic                                             577.64                     96.49                       87.06                        149.11                     19.60
     Fixed-e¤ect                                             yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Year dummies                                            yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Instrumental variable                                   yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
                C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.

                                                    * * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 18: Estimation results - A di¤erentiated e¤ect of decentralization between communes (quintiles)
     Dep. var.:                      (1)    (2)    (3)   (4)        (5)  
                              0.562*        2.120***     0.416**        0.231      -0.24***
                                                                 (0 .2 8 )                  (0 .2 9 )                   (0 .1 9 )                    (1 .2 4 )                  (0 .0 3 )

      (1 ¬  )                                             2.544***                   2.355***                    1.162***                     0.139                      0.656**
                                                                 (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .2 7 )                   (0 .0 8 )                    (0 .4 1 )                  (0 .2 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                              -0.006                     -0.063                      0.088***                     0.013                      -0.010
                                                                 (0 .0 0 5 )                (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .1 4 )                  (0 .0 1 )

     Per capita consumption,                                  0.190***                   0.189*                      -0.121**                     0.598**                    -0.13***
                                                                 (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .1 0 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .2 4 )                  (0 .0 4 )

     Belong to the …rst quintile,                            -0.233**                   -0.278***                   -0.126***                    -0.124                     0.133***
                                                                 (0 .1 0 )                  (0 .0 8 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .5 3 )                  (0 .1 0 )

     Population size,                                        -0.755***                  -0.587***                   -0.369***                    0.313                      -0.106***
                                                                 (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .1 0 )                   (0 .1 2 )                    (0 .2 5 )                  (0 .0 3 )

     Population density,                                     0.004***                   0.003***                    0.003***                     0.004***                   0.002***




47
                                                                 (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )                 (0 .0 0 0 )                  (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                       1.400***                   0.147                       0.231***                     0.551*                     0.009**
                                                                 (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .1 3 )                   (0 .0 3 )                    (0 .4 6 )                  (0 .0 0 4 )

     Ethnic fragmentation,                                    -0.602                     0.843***                    0.115**                      -0.247                     -0.088
                                                                 (0 .4 8 )                  (0 .0 4 )                   (0 .0 4 )                    (0 .4 4 )                  (0 .1 1 )

     Constant                                                    7.575***                   10.64***                    6.719***                     -0.434                     3.465***
                                                                 (0 .3 5 )                  (1 .2 3 )                   (1 .3 9 )                    (4 .0 3 )                  (0 .3 1 )

     Number of observations                                      145                        145                         145                          145                        145
     Adjusted R2                                                 0.88                       0.84                        0.80                         0.63                       0.50
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                 yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Year dummies                                                yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Instrumental variable                                       yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Wald test: p-value                                          0.000                      0.494                       0.011                        -                          0.000
                C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.

                                                    * * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 19: Estimation results - A di¤erentiated e¤ect of decentralization between communes (wealth)
     Dep. var.:                     (1)    (2)    (3)   (4)       (5)  
                                 -1.70***      1.365***     -0.94***      -3.99***    -0.64***
                                                              (0 .0 7 )                  (0 .2 4 )                   (0 .1 6 )                    (0 .7 3 )                  (0 .1 8 )

                                                        1.597***                   -0.01                       0.762***                     2.312***                   0.399***
                                                              (0 .0 4 )                  (0 .0 6 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .2 5 )                  (0 .1 1 )

     Public spending per capita,                           0.017**                    -0.065*                     -0.084***                    0.096***                   -0.010*
                                                              (0 .0 0 8 )                (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .0 0 5 )

     Per capita consumption,                               0.407***                   0.052                       -0.187***                    0.652***                   -0.148***
                                                              (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .1 2 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .0 6 )                  (0 .0 4 )

     DHS wealth index scores,                              0.274***                   0.247***                    0.114**                      0.722***                   0.064***
                                                              (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .0 6 )                   (0 .0 2 )                    (0 .1 6 )                  (0 .0 2 )

     Population size,                                     -0.482***                  -0.451***                   -0.177**                     0.621                      -0.001
                                                              (0 .0 4 )                  (0 .1 3 )                   (0 .0 8 )                    (0 .3 9 )                  (0 .0 0 6 )

     Population density,                                  0.001***                   0.003***                    0.001***                     0.004                      0.006**




48
                                                              (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )                 (0 .0 0 0 )                  (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 2 )

     Urbanization rate,                                    -0.048                     -0.069                      0.034                        -0.158                     -0.066
                                                              (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .1 5 )                   (0 .0 4 )                    (0 .1 2 )                  (0 .0 4 )

     Ethnic fragmentation,                                 -1.265***                  0.780***                    -0.013                       -0.784***                  -0.176
                                                              (0 .2 9 )                  (0 .0 6 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .2 8 )                  (0 .1 4 )

     Constant                                                 2.889***                   10.93***                    6.024***                     -3.350                     2.898***
                                                              (0 .6 4 )                  (1 .5 8 )                   (1 .0 5 )                    (4 .3 8 )                  (0 .0 7 )

     Number of observations                                   145                        145                         145                          145                        145
     Adjusted R2                                              0.88                       0.85                        0.81                         0.57                       0.50
     Fixed-e¤ect                                              yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Year dummies                                             yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Instrumental variable                                    yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Wald test: p-value                                       0.000                      -                           0.000                        0.000                      0.000
             C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.

                                                 * * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
     Table 20: Estimation results - A di¤erentiated e¤ect of decentralization between communes (quintiles)
     Dep. var.:                       (1)    (2)    (3)   (4)       (5)  
                               4.073*** 1.643***          1.126***      -0.149*** 0.680***
                                                                  (0 .0 8 )                  (0 .2 3 )                   (0 .0 9 )                    (0 .1 3 )                  (0 .2 4 )

      (1 ¬  )                                              2.414***                   1.569***                    0.963***                     0.103*                     0.261**
                                                                  (0 .0 5 )                  (0 .2 5 )                   (0 .0 8 )                    (0 .0 5 )                  (0 .1 0 )

     Public spending per capita,                               -0.019**                   -0.051                      0.088***                     0.001                      -0.010
                                                                  (0 .0 0 7 )                (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .0 0 3 )                (0 .0 0 6 )

     Per capita consumption,                                   0.184***                   0.164*                      -0.133**                     0.054**                    -0.133***
                                                                  (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .1 2 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .0 0 8 )                (0 .0 4 )

     Belong to the …fth quintile,                             0.185***                   0.498***                    0.218***                     0.088***                   -0.017***
                                                                  (0 .0 6 )                  (0 .0 5 )                   (0 .0 5 )                    (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .0 3 )

     Population size,                                         -0.643***                  -0.387***                   -0.296**                     0.021                      -0.052***
                                                                  (0 .0 2 )                  (0 .1 2 )                   (0 .1 1 )                    (0 .0 4 )                  (0 .0 1 )

     Population density,                                      0.003***                   0.003***                    0.002***                     0.005***                   0.002***




49
                                                                  (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )                 (0 .0 0 0 )                  (0 .0 0 0 )                (0 .0 0 0 )

     Urbanization rate,                                        0.823***                   0.141                       0.100***                     0.081***                   0.042*
                                                                  (0 .0 6 )                  (0 .1 5 )                   (0 .0 2 )                    (0 .0 1 )                  (0 .0 2 )

     Ethnic fragmentation,                                     -0.145                     0.877***                    0.285***                     -0.007                     -0.027
                                                                  (0 .3 9 )                  (0 .0 3 )                   (0 .0 1 )                    (0 .0 3 )                  (0 .0 8 )

     Constant                                                     6.143***                   8.865***                    5.974***                     0.079                      2.936***
                                                                  (0 .3 5 )                  (1 .4 4 )                   (1 .2 8 )                    (0 .4 9 )                  (0 .0 9 )

     Number of observations                                       145                        145                         145                          145                        145
     Adjusted R2                                                  0.87                       0.84                        0.80                         0.58                       0.49
     Fixed-e¤ect                                                  yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Year dummies                                                 yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Instrumental variable                                        yes                        yes                         yes                          yes                        yes
     Wald test: p-value                                           0.000                      0.255                       0.000                        0.000                      0.005
                C o ntro ls fo r se ria l c o rre la tio n o f th e e rro r te rm , a r1 C o c c ra n e -O rc u tt tra n sfo rm a tio n . R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs a re in b ra cke ts.

                                                    * * * : c o e ¢ c ie nt sig n i…c a nt a t 1 % le ve l, .* * : a t 5 % le ve l, * : a t 1 0 % le ve l
