                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EDUCATION AND THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT

                                             Juan Botero
                                           Alejandro Ponce
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 18119
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18119


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We are grateful to Larry Katz, Sendhil Mullainathan, Emily Oster, Benjamin Schoefer, Josh Schwartzstein,
Jesse Shapiro, and Daniel Treisman for helpful comments. We thank Transparency International for
sharing the TI Global Barometer 2009 data. Ponce and Botero thank the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation for their support of the WJP. Shleifer thanks the Kauffman
Foundation for the support of his research. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Justice Project, its board of directors, or its
honorary chairs. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Juan Botero, Alejandro Ponce, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Education and the Quality of Government
Juan Botero, Alejandro Ponce, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 18119
June 2012
JEL No. D73,D78,O43

                                            ABSTRACT

Generally speaking, better educated countries have better governments, an empirical regularity that
holds in both dictatorships and democracies. We suggest that a possible reason for this fact is that
educated people are more likely to complain about misconduct by government officials, so that, even
when each complaint is unlikely to succeed, more frequent complaints encourage better behavior from
officials. Newly assembled individual-level survey data from the World Justice Project show that,
within countries, better educated people are more likely to report official misconduct. The results are
confirmed using other survey data on reporting crime and corruption. Citizen complaints might thus
be an operative mechanism that explains the link between education and the quality of government.


Juan Botero                                        Andrei Shleifer
The World Justice Project                          Department of Economics
740 15th Street NW, Suite 200                      Harvard University
Washington D.C. 20005                              Littauer Center M-9
boteroj@wjpnet.org                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                   and NBER
Alejandro Ponce                                    ashleifer@harvard.edu
The World Justice Project
740 15th Street NW, Suite 200
Washington D.C. 20005
aponcer@gmail.com
I. Introduction

       Just about every measure that might be used to define the quality of government, such as

the degree of democracy, political freedom, respect for property rights, absence of corruption, or

efficiency in the provision of public services, is higher in richer and more educated countries

(see, e.g., La Porta et al 1999, Barro 1999, Treisman 2000, Svensson 2005). Figure 1 illustrates

some well-known correlations between education and the quality of government. The positive

correlation between education (or per capita income) and the quality of government holds in both

dictatorships and democracies (Figure 2).        It also holds in countries with different legal

traditions, ethnic heterogeneity, and inequality (La Porta et al. 1999).     Most studies find that

education and development lead to improved government (e.g., Barro 1999, Glaeser et al. 2004,

Bobba and Coviello 2007, Castello-Climent 2008, Murtin and Wacziarg 2011), although some

disagree (Acemoglu et al. 2005). In this paper, we ask why the quality of government improves

with education and development, assuming that it does.

       The answer to the question is not entirely obvious. Take the case of corruption. The

decline in corruption as countries get richer and more educated is nearly universal (Treisman

2000, Svensson 2005; Figure 1). It occurs in both dictatorships and democracies (Figure 2), so it

is implausible that corruption falls only because voters turn out the corrupt politicians.

Corruption falls regardless of whether a country has an anti-corruption campaign, pays efficiency

wages to bureaucrats, is ethnically divided, or has free press. Theoretically, as a country grows,

both government regulation and the scale of economic activity rise, which if anything should

stimulate corruption.     The mechanisms of improvement in the quality of government as

countries develop appear to be too universal to attribute them to the particular policies.




                                                 2
       We propose and test empirically a new explanation of such improvement in the process

of development, one based on educational attainment as the driving mechanism. In our view,

one reason why government improves is citizen complaints against public officials who mistreat

them: policemen who beat them up, officials who demand bribes, teachers who do not show up.

All countries have some laws against police abuse, corruption, and public employee absenteeism,

which include penalties for official misconduct. Of course, in many countries these rules are

enforced with only a small probability. But a public official choosing to break rules must trade

off the risk of being disciplined, no matter how small for each individual complaint, against the

benefits of misconduct. As citizen complaints proliferate and become more effective, the risk of

an investigation and disciplinary action rises. We propose that educated people are more likely

to complain against official misconduct, and to complain more effectively. As education levels

in a country rise, so do complaints when officials misbehave, raising the expected costs of

misconduct and thus encouraging officials to follow the rules – to ask for fewer bribes, to avoid

abusing people, to show up to work. Through this entirely decentralized process, only roughly

dependent on the prevailing political mechanisms, government improves.

       The idea that citizen “voice” can improve government performance is Hirschman’s

(1970). Hirschman focuses on voting rather than complaints as the expression of voice, and does

not link voice to education. Verba and Nie (1972) and Verba, Schlozman and Brady (1995) are

among the first prominent studies in political science linking education to political participation.

These studies consider both voting and other form of participating, such as volunteering. Dee

(2004) and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulus (2004) provide evidence of causal links between

education and voting. Voting is surely important, but the fact that the quality of government

improves with education in dictatorships as well as in democracies is an indication that voting is



                                                 3
not the only mechanism linking the two. With respect to the complaining mechanism, Soares

(2004a, b) finds that richer and more educated countries report a higher fraction of crimes.

Related findings are presented in DiTella et al. (2010). Yet, to the best of our knowledge, the

idea that citizen complaints about government are the route to its improvement is new here.

       This discussion raises the question of why the more educated people are more likely to

complain, and to complain more effectively.         There are at least three possibilities.   First,

educated people might merely know better how to complain effectively: they are more literate,

more articulate, more knowledgeable where to go and how to complain. This is a pure human

capital channel: complaining is like any other activity for which productivity rises with

education. Verba and Nie (1972), Verba, Scholzman, and Berry (1995), and Nie, Junn, and

Stehlik-Berry (1996) take this point of view with respect to political participation. A second

channel is that educated people are more pro-social, share common values, and are less tolerant

of injustice (Dewey 1944, Hayek 1960, Putnam 1993, Campbell 2006, Glaeser, Ponzetto, and

Shleifer 2007, Algan et al. 2011). Because better educated people are better socialized, they are

more willing to complain against public misconduct even when the odds of private success are

low. A third channel, intimately related to the first, sees educated people as less fearful of

official reprisals. This might be in part because they know the law and the rules, and hence can

stand up to officials, but it might also be because they are themselves “legal” -- work formally,

occupy their residence formally – and hence do not feel at risk.

       An alternative but related view holds that it is the levels of income per se, rather than

education, that drive complaints and through them governmental improvement. For example,

richer people might be able to hire lawyers, or even to find time, to make their complaints more

effective (on the other hand, their time is more valuable, so they might not bother). Wolfinger



                                                4
and Rosenstone (1980) show empirically that education is more important than income as a

determinant of political participation. One can perhaps also argue that it is not the complaining

process, but rather the improvement in the education and the general quality of bureaucrats that

leads to better government in richer countries. In our empirical work, we seek to distinguish

between income and education as drivers of complaints.

       To organize the discussion, in the next section we present a simple model of equilibrium

quality of government driven by citizen complaints.       The following sections test the main

assumption of the model, namely that better education citizens are more likely to complain. Our

main data source is the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index [Agrast et. al. 2011]. Over the

last three years, the WJP has conducted extensive surveys of both citizens and legal professionals

in 61 countries about individuals’ experiences with the law (Appendix A presents the list of

countries covered by the WJP).         The countries were selected to ensure diversity and

representation of all regions, income levels, population sizes, and legal traditions of the world.

One part of the data contains surveys of the general population (1,000 respondents per country)

eliciting both their opinions about the legal system and personal experience with it. Care was

taken to assure broad representation by gender, education level, and socio-economic status. The

data contain information about the demographic characteristics of the respondents, including

their education. In this paper, we only use experience-based questions.

       The principal questions from the WJP survey we focus on deal with official misconduct

and whether it was reported by the victim. There are two main questions in the survey. The first

asks whether people have complained about some aspect of government services in general

during the previous year. The second question asks whether respondents experienced police

abuse, and if so whether they reported it. In addition, the WJP survey contains information about



                                                5
respondents reporting crime, specifically break-ins and armed robberies.            Although these

questions do not pertain to complaints about public misconduct per se, they do give us

information about the propensity to report problems to the government, and thus shed light on

the relationship between education and voice.

        We supplement WJP data with some questions from the International Crime Victims

Survey (ICVS), which contains information about households’ experiences with crime, including

reporting to the police for thousands of respondents in 78 countries. The ICVS contains a

number of questions concerning the reporting of crime, which enable us to assess the robustness

of our WJP findings on reporting using different data. In addition, on a few questions, the ICVS

asks the respondents the reasons for reporting or not reporting the incidents of crime and

corruption, and we can use these data.           We also use the Corruption Barometer from

Transparency International to examine the incidence of corruption, its reporting, and the reasons

for reporting or not reporting, in a number of countries.

       Our main findings can be easily summarized.           First, the cross-country relationship

between education and institutional quality holds in our data as well. Second, we find consistent

support for the proposition that, within countries, the more educated people complain more both

about government misconduct when it occurs, and crime in general.              This relationship is

particularly strong in developing countries, consistent with the view that, in the developed

countries, even the less educated have the knowledge and lack of fear to complain. Third, the

results are particularly strong in autocracies, suggesting that voting might not be the only

important exercise of voice in the political process. Fourth, the results are robust to the inclusion

of respondent-level measures of trust, income, and social status. Fifth, the analysis of additional

data sets confirms our main findings, but also suggests that fear of police reprisals and the lack of



                                                 6
knowledge of how to complaint are important factors behind silence.            Sixth, we find that

educated countries have a lower incidence of public and private misconduct. These results are

consistent with the central assumption of the theory, as well as with its aggregate implications.



II. A Simple Model

        The players in the model are a citizen, an official, the official’s superior, and possibly

also the superior’s manager. The citizen has an interaction, or a possible interaction, with the

official, who chooses whether to do his job. The official can be a doctor deciding whether to pay

attention to the patient’s complaint, a teacher deciding whether to go to work that day, a

policeman considering whether to beat up a citizen he does not like, or a bureaucrat deciding

whether to ask for a bribe. We assume that the benefit to the official of misbehaving is b, which

is distributed as F(b) in the population of officials.

        In case the official misbehaves, the citizen can complain to the official’s superior.   Let

the probability of complaint be p(e,s), where e is the citizen’s education, and s is the probability

of success. We assume for simplicity that e is known to the official, which can be interpreted

either as citizen’s education known to the official or as average education in the country (so the

official does not know whom he is dealing with).         We assume that p1 > 0 and p2 > 0.      The

probability of success will be determined in equilibrium.

        Begin with the simplest version of the model. The official’s superior is honest with an

exogenous probability h, and punishes the official upon receiving the complaint if and only if he

is honest. The punishment is exogenously given by D. In this case, the equilibrium probability

that the complaint succeeds is s = h, and the overall probability of punishment is p(e,h)h. In this

case, the official misbehaves provided that b > p(e,h)hD. Letting b* be the cutoff benefit level



                                                   7
for misbehavior, we can think of F(b*) as the share of officials who behave, and therefore the

quality of government in the country. It is trivial to show that this quality rises with the

probability that the superior is honest but also with e, the level of education of the citizen(s).

Intuitively, citizen complaints discourage misbehavior, and thus improve institutional quality. If

one makes the additional assumption that h – the “quality” of officials -- rises with e, there is a

further reason why the quality of government rises with e as well.

       We can extend the model slightly and assume that if the superior ignores the complaint,

the citizen can complain about him to his manager, who responds with the same exogenous

probability h upon receiving a complaint. This means that even a dishonest superior with a low

enough cost of acting might punish the official, so the total probability of success of a complaint

s is now given by h + (1-h)P(e,h), where P(e,h) is the equilibrium probability that the dishonest

superior punishes the official in fear of his own punishment. Higher citizen education thus

provides an extra incentive for the official to behave, because he knows that even a dishonest

superior might punish him in fear of continuing complaints, and possible action, up the chain.

Solving backwards, we can compute the equilibrium b** > b* such that the officials with b <

b** now behave. The quality of institutions, F(b**) is even higher in this case, and it remains

the case, with an extra kick, that the quality of institutions rises with education.

       In summary, even this very simple analysis suggests three potential channels through

which the complaint mechanism works. Government officials are more likely to do their job

when citizens are better educated because 1) such citizens are more likely to complain, leading to

a higher probability of punishment for misconduct, 2) the officials’ superiors are more likely to

act and punish misbehaving officials because they themselves are more vulnerable to citizen

complaints up the chain of command and therefore to punishment for inaction in response to



                                                   8
complaints, and 3) better educated officials might perhaps be more honest.          In our micro

regressions, we do not disentangle these mechanisms, but test the fundamental assumption of the

model, namely that better educated citizens are more likely to complain about official

misconduct. We also examine the aggregate implications of the theory across countries.



III. Data

       We use data on citizen complaints and reporting from the general population polls of the

World Justice Project Rule of Law Index. Over the last three years, WJP has conducted extensive

surveys in 61 countries of the perceptions and experiences of ordinary people concerning their

dealings with the government, the police, and the courts; the extent of corruption; as well as the

magnitude of common crimes to which the general public is exposed. The surveys were carried

in two waves, 2009 and 2011, on probability samples of 1,000 respondents drawn from the three

largest cities in each country, and were conducted by professional polling organizations using

face-to-face, telephone, and online interviews. All questions we use deal with personal

experiences of individuals or their families.

       Our basic measures of citizen complaints against public officials come from two

questions. The first question, available only in the 2011 wave, is worded as follows: “During the

last year, did you submit any complaint about the services provided by the different government

agencies in your country (including registration office; customs office; public health services;

tax office; land allocation office, etc.)?” The second question asks whether respondents

experienced police abuse, and if so whether they reported it. The question reads “In the last 3

years, have you or someone in your household, been subjected to physical abuse by the police or




                                                9
the military?” and is followed by the question “Did you or anyone else report the crime to the

police or other authority?”

       The WJP polls also ask respondents whether they were victim of crime during the last

three years and whether they reported it to the police. We use two of these questions. The first

question is: “In the past 3 years, did anyone actually break into your home/residence without

permission, and steal or try to steal something?” and “Did you or anyone else report the crime to

the police”. The second question asks: “In the past 3 years, were you a victim of an armed

robbery (with a weapon such as a knife or a gun)?” and “Did you or anyone else report the

crime to the police?” This question was only asked in the 2011 wave.

       The WJP data also contain demographic information, including education and income.

We construct two indicators of education level: College and High/Middle school. The first

indicator equals 1 if the respondent answered “Bachelor's degree” or “Graduate degree (Masters,

Ph.D.)” to the question “What is the highest degree you received?” The second indicator is coded

1 if the respondent answered “Middle school diploma” or “High school diploma or equivalent”.

       We supplement the WJP data with information from the International Crime Victims

Survey (ICVS) and the 2009 TI Global Corruption Barometer. The ICVS is an international poll

designed to provide comparable data on people’s recent experience with common crime around

the world. By 2005, over 140 surveys had been completed in 75 different countries, totaling

over 320,000 individual respondents. We construct a sample using the most recent data for each

country and focus on two groups of questions. The first group asks respondents whether they

have experienced burglary, attempted burglary, robbery, fraud, and personal theft; and whether

the crime was reported to the police. The second group asks whether respondents have been

solicited for bribes in the previous year, whether they reported the incident, as well as the reasons



                                                 10
for reporting or not reporting it. The ICVS includes demographic characteristics, but education

is not consistently asked throughout the different waves. Accordingly, we define college by the

highest degree attained, the years of schooling (more than 15) or if the respondent completed

school when he/she was older than 21 years. Similarly, we define High/Middle school if the

respondent finished Middle or High school, have between 9 and 15 years of schooling, or

completed school when he/she was between 15 and 21 years old.

       The TI Global Corruption Barometer is a worldwide public opinion survey on the general

public’s views and experiences of corruption. Each country sample is probabilistic and is

weighted to provide a representative sample of the national population. We use three questions

from the 2009 wave, which covers 69 countries: “On the past 12 months, have you or anyone

living in your household paid a bribe in any form?” and the follow up questions “Did you

present a formal complaint in this regard?” and “Why you did not present the complaint?”

       Table 1 presents the definitions of the variables from WJP and the supplementary sources

used in the analysis. Figure 3 confirms that the cross-country relationship between education

and institutional quality holds in the WJP data as well. Figure 3 shows that the value of WJP’s

aggregate rule of law index rises sharply with a country’s level of educational attainment.



IV. Evidence

       In this section, we focus on the relationship between education and the reporting of

government misconduct or crime at the individual level, holding country fixed effects constant.

Table 2 contains results for 7 questions from the WJP database.             Four questions were

administered in 61 countries, for a total of about 61,000 observations. The remaining questions

were asked in only 31 countries. The first three questions deal with reporting government



                                                11
misconduct; the last four deal with reporting crime. For each individual in the survey we have

information of whether he or she is a college graduate, a high school graduate, or has less than

high school education. All the results are estimated using OLS with country fixed effects and

standard errors clustered at the country level. The dependent variables are dummies equal to

zero or one depending on whether a particular event occurred.

       The first question asks whether the respondent submitted a complaint about services

provided by any government agency during the past year. Compared to individuals with less

than a high school degree, college graduates are 4.5 percentage points more likely to have

submitted a complaint (t = 3.47), while high school graduates are 2.2 percentage points more

likely to have submitted a complaint (t = 1.61).       These are large effects compared to the

worldwide complaining mean of 13.6 percent. The second question asks whether, during the last

three years, the respondent or someone in their household has been unfairly subjected to physical

abuse by the police or the military. There is a reduction in the likelihood of abuse for college

and high-school graduates, but the effects are not statistically significant. Critically for our

study, the next question asks the 3,614 individuals in the WJP survey who had been victimized

whether they had reported the abuse. Here we find a sharply higher and statistically significant

probability of reporting (compared to the 44 percentage point world mean) among college and

high school graduates. Compared to respondents with less than high school education, college

graduates are 13.0 percentage points more likely to report abuse, and high school graduates are

5.1 percentage points more likely. The data on reporting government misconduct from WJP

suggest that education is associated with a sharply higher probability of complaining.

       The remaining four questions in Table 2 deal with reporting crime. The evidence shows

that the more educated people are, if anything, more likely to experience break-ins and armed



                                               12
robberies than the less educated ones. At the same time, better educated crime victims were

much more likely to report the crime. Relative to the world-wide mean of 61 percent of

reporting break-ins, college graduates were 9.6 percentage points more likely, and high school

graduates 4.7 percentage points more likely to report than those without a high school degree.

Relative to the world-wide mean of 58 percent reporting armed robberies, college graduates were

9.8 percentage points more likely, but high school graduates no more likely, to report than those

without a high school degree.       The effect of education, particularly college education, on

reporting crime is huge.

       Table 3 examines the robustness of these results for educated and uneducated countries in

the sample. The results are extremely strong in uneducated countries. In these countries, for

example, a person with a college education is 6 percentage points more likely (compared to a

mean of 13.2) to complain about government services, and 14.2 percentage points more likely

(compared to a mean of 44.1) to report police abuse, than a person without a high school degree.

The results are not as strong for the educated countries. There is no effect of education at all for

complaints about government services, although there is a positive but insignificant effect of

education on reporting police abuse. This evidence is consistent with our expectations.         The

uneducated people in uneducated countries might indeed not know how to complain, or be

fearful of the authorities (see the evidence described below). In educated countries, in contrast,

the knowledge of how to address government misconduct is more widespread, and there is less

fear of reprisal. As a consequence, the relationship between education and complaints is not

nearly as clear cut, either theoretically or empirically, as that in uneducated countries.

       The next series of tables examines the robustness of the results. Table 4 distinguishes

autocracies and democracies.        The results hold very strongly in both autocracies and



                                                 13
democracies, consistently for complaining about government officials, reporting police abuse, as

well as reporting crime. The fact that the results hold strongly in autocracies is important. It

suggests that it might not be only the voting mechanism stressed by Hirschman and Verba, but

also the decentralized process of individuals complaining against government misconduct, that

serves to discipline government officials and improve institutional quality as countries develop.

       An important question about our finding is whether education is a proxy for something

else that may encourage complaining. The leading possibilities are 1) trust or social capital, 2)

income, and 3) social status. More trusting people may have greater confidence that their

complaints would be addressed fairly, richer people may have greater resources to complain and

perhaps greater sums to complain about, and higher status people may feel more empowered to

complain. Fortunately, WJP data contain some information on each of these matters, so the

concerns can be addressed empirically.

       Several of the respondent-level questions asked in the WJP survey concern the level of

trust in institutions, and we aggregate them into an index. The results in Table 5 do not offer

consistent evidence that trust matters for complaining, while education coefficients remain both

sizable and statistically significant. Education is not merely a proxy for trust in these data.

Table 6 uses a proxy for respondent’s income to assess whether it is income rather than

education that influences complaining. Higher income individuals are more likely to report

burglary, but not to complain more in other respects. We find no significant changes in the

estimated effects of education from including income proxies (we have tried other specifications

to check robustness). Education is not merely a proxy for income in these data.

       As a rough proxy for social status as distinct from income, we included an indicator of

whether the respondent owns a car. As Table 7 shows, car ownership increases the probability of



                                                14
reporting crime, but not of complaining about the government (we have also checked the effects

of ownership of a second home, which are not significant). The effects of education remain large

and significant. An alternative view is that social status is related to gender. In WJP data, men

report a higher probability of complaining about officials, and higher probabilities of being

victimized, but not higher incidence of reporting crime.       These effects of gender do not,

however, reduce the coefficients on education (results not reported).     We have also checked

whether religion influences the probability of complaining, and found no evidence that it does.

       Another concern is that the propensity to complain is shaped by access to the complaint

technology, such as a cell phone or a computer, rather than by education per se.     Fortunately,

WJP data contain information on whether the respondent has a cell phone or a computer. Table

8 shows that, indeed, having a cell phone sharply raises the probability of reporting a crime,

though not of complaining about government generally. At the same time, having a cell phone

does not have much of an effect on education coefficients. (There is also no evidence of

complementarities between education and cell phones.) We do not find that having a computer

affects the probability of complaining or reporting a crime (results not reported). The evidence

suggests that cell phones do indeed facilitate crime reporting, but education is by no means a

proxy for having a cell phone.



IV. Other Data Sources.

       The next series of tables examine the robustness of our results in other data sources, and

probe the reasons for reporting on not reporting government misconduct and crime. Table 9

reports, for a sample of 125,000 observations from 71 countries, that the incidence of reporting




                                               15
burglary, attempted burglary, robbery, consumer fraud, and theft was sharply higher for better

educated individuals. Across specifications, the results confirm the findings in the WJP data.

        Table 10 focuses on ICVS data on corruption, and the reasons for reporting and not

reporting requests for bribes. The first column shows, not surprisingly, that better educated

people are more likely to be asked for a bribe. The next two columns show that educated people

are not more likely to report the request for a bribe to the police, but more likely to report it to a

public or private agency. In explaining the reasons for not reporting, the educated people are less

likely to report that the matter was inappropriate for police, but also less likely to worry that the

police will not do anything or to fear/dislike police. There is evidence here that the less educated

people are more concerned with police reprisals, and hence fail to use their voice. In the final

panel of Table 10, we examine affirmative reasons in ICVS for reporting corruption, but do not

find any interesting and statistically significant effects.

        Table 11 deals with the data from the TI Global Corruption Barometer 2009 produced by

Transparency International. The sample is over 60,000 people from 62 countries. As with

ICVS, educated people report much higher probabilities of being asked for a bribe: 4.3

percentage points higher for a college graduate than for a person with no high school education

(compared to a mean of 17.7 percent). There is also strong evidence of college graduates being

more likely to present a formal complaint against being asked for a bribe: with a world-wide

average probability of a complaint of 19.8 percent, college graduates are 2.4 percentage points

more likely to file a complaint. With respect to reasons for not reporting corruption requests, the

evidence here is again considerably stronger than with ICVS. College graduates were 6.1

percentage points less likely to report that they did not know how to file a complaint as the

reason for not doing so than individuals without a high school education (the mean of this



                                                   16
variable is 16 percent). They are also more likely to report that it would not have helped. Last,

they are 3.2 percentage points less likely to report a fear of reprisals (the mean of this variable is

21.8 percent). The evidence points to a combination of the pure human capital story whereby the

more educated people know how to complain, and a related story that these people do not fear

the police. The Corruption Barometer evidence is broadly consistent with our basic theory.

       Yiqing Xu (2012) re-examines our hypotheses using the data set of complaints against

provincial and local government officials in China, using the China Public Governance Survey.

He finds that in the Chinese data as well, better educated citizens are more likely to complain

about both government misconduct and public services.             Xu finds even larger effects of

education than we do. He also finds that the reasons for higher complaints by the better educated

include greater knowledge, greater civicness, and lower fear of reprisals. Xu’s evidence strongly

reinforces our hypothesis that the complaint mechanism of institutional improvement is of

particular importance in non-democratic countries.

       As a final step, we check whether higher education countries have lower rates of

victimization of citizens by criminals and government officials. Figure 4 summarizes these

findings, and confirms this basic aggregate prediction of the theory, namely that higher education

countries have lower crime and better government performance. This particular prediction, of

course is not new: it is the within-country mechanism that represents this paper’s innovation.



V. Conclusion

       We have proposed a new explanation of the universal positive association between a

country’s educational level and the quality of its government, namely citizen complaints. We

argued that educated citizens complain more, and that these complaints lead to better conduct by



                                                 17
officials fearful of being punished, and therefore a higher quality government. One attractive

feature of this mechanism is that it is entirely decentralized, and does not rely on any particular

institution, such as democracy. The evidence from a newly collected data set and two additional

ones indeed suggests that within countries better educated citizens are more likely to complain

both about crime and about government misconduct, such as corruption and police abuse.



                                           References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, P. Yared. 2005. “From Education to Democracy?”
     American Economic Review 95(2): 44-49.

Agrast, M., J. Botero, and A. Ponce. 2011. WJP Rule of Law Index 2011. Washington, D.C., The
       World Justice Project.

Algan, Y., P. Cahuc, and A. Shleifer. 2011. “Teaching Practices and Social Capital,” Harvard
       University Working Paper.

Barro, R. 1999. “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy 107(S6):158-183.

Bobba, M., and D. Coviello. 2007. “Weak Instruments and Weak Identification in Estimating the
       Effects of Education on Democracy,” Economics Letters 96(3): 301-306.

Campbell, D. E. 2006. Why We Vote: How Schools and Communities Shape Our Civic Life.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Castelló-Climent, A. 2008. “On the Distribution of Education and Democracy,” Journal of
        Development Economics 87(2): 179-190.

Dee, T. S. 2004. “Are There Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public Economics 88(9-
       10): 1697-1720.

Dewey, J. 1944. Democracy and Education. New York: The Free Press.

Di Tella, R., S. Galiani, and E. Schargrodsky. 2010. The Economics of Crime: Lessons for and
       from Latin America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Glaeser, E., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2004. “Do Institutions Cause
       Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9(3): 271-303.




                                                18
Glaeser, E., G. Ponzetto, and A. Shleifer. 2007. “Why Does Democracy Need Education?”
       Journal of Economic Growth 12(2): 77-99.

Hayek, F. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Hirschman, A. O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations,
      and States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1999. “The Quality of
      Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15(1):222-279.

Milligan, K., E. Moretti, and P. Oreopoulus. 2004. “Does Education Improve Citizenship?
       Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom,” Journal of Public Economics
       88(9-10): 1667-1695.

Murtin, F. and R. Wacziarg. 2011. “The Democratic Transition,” NBER Working Paper 17432.

Nie, N. H., J. Junn, and K. Stehlik-Barry. 1996. Education and Democratic Citizenship in
      America. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Putnam, R. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civil Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press.

Soares, R. 2004a. “Development, Crime, and Punishment: Accounting for the International
       Differences in Crime Rates,” Journal of Development Economics 73(1):155-184.

Soares, R. 2004b. “Crime Reporting as a Measure of Institutional Development,” Economic
       Development and Cultural Change 52(4): 851-871.

Svensson, J. 2005. “Eight Questions about Corruption,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(3):
      19-42.

Treisman, D. 2000. “The Causes of Corruption: a Cross-National Study,” Journal of Public
        Economics 76(3): 399-457.

Verba, S. and N. H. Nie. 1972. Participation in America: Political Democracy and Social
       Equality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Verba, S., K. L. Schlozman, and H. Brady. 1995. Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in
       American Politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wolfinger, R. and S. Rosenstone. 1980. Who Votes? New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Xu, Y. 2012. “Why Do More Educated People Complain More? Evidence from Chinese
       Provincial Capitals,” Mimeo, Department of Political Science, MIT.



                                              19
Figure 1: The quality of government and education (TI, WB and Freedom House)
            10




                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SWEFIN  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUT DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN GBR    IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                   SWEDNK
                                                                                                       FIN           NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     USA FRA
                                                                                               NLD CAN
                                                                                                   CHE     NOR       AUS                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHL JPN
                                                                                                      IRL                                                                                                                        CYP EST ESP
            8




                                                                                           AUT




                                                                                                                            WB Governance Indicators
                                                                                           JPN                                                                                                                                       PRT KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SVN




                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                     QAT       GBR                                                                                                                       QAT MUSLVA CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ISR
                                                                                       CHL USA BEL                                                                                                                                   HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     URY
 TI Corruption Index




                                                                                           URYFRA                                                                                                                    OMNBWA      SVK     GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CRI KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                   ARE CYP EST SVN                                                                                                                   CPV     BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARE         ITA
                                                                                           ISR
                                                                                           PRT ESP
               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NAM     JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HRV
                                                                           BTN BWA                                                                                                                                   BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TUR     SAU TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ROU
                                                                                   MUS     POL KOR                                                                                                               IND EGYLKA BRA




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                           CRI
                                                                           OMN
                                                                           CPV                                                                                                                                   GHA         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAN
                                                                                   BHR         LTU                                                                                               BFA     MWI     MAR     THA GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LSO             MKD
                                                                               KWTSAU
                                                                           NAMMYS
                                                                           TUR
                                                                                   JOR     HUN
                                                                                           CZE                                                                                                       SEN MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UGAMDA      COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SER MNG
                                                                       GHARWA      HRV
                                                                                   MKD
                                                                                       LVA
                                                                                       SVK
                                                                                       TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                         NER                 GMBVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TZA     PHL ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SWZGUY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SYR     JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PER MEX     ARG     CUB
      4




                                                                                   GEO         ITA CUB                                                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LBN     KAZ
                                                                           CHNTTO
                                                                               SLV BRA
                                                                                   COL ROU
                                                                               PER PAN
                                                                                   BGR                                                                                                       DJI PAK     BGDSLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ETH BEN     DOMSLV      RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UKR
                                                               MWILSO IND
                                                                       MARLBR  THA SER
                                                                                   JAM
                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SLE MRT LAO NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TGO MDGHND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AZE IRN FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRY
                                                   DJI BFA         GMBSWZ
                                                                       GTMEGY
                                                                           DOMLKA MEX




                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NPL KHMKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CMRLBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GTM                     LBY
                                                           SEN MLI BEN VNMMDA
                                                                   SLB             BOL MNGKAZ
                                                                                           ARG                                                                                                           YEM     COM         BOL BLR
                                               NER
                                               ERI             ETH TZA
                                                                   MOZ MDG GUYARMIDN
                                                                                   GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CIV     NGAAGOBDI TJK KGZ ECU
                                                       PAK     BGDTGOUGA
                                                           SLE YEM
                                                               NGA
                                                               MRT     NIC SYR
                                                                           AZE PRY
                                                                           HND
                                                                           PHL     ECU UKR
                                                                                   LBN BLR                                                                                               ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                         SDN     CAF GNQ     GIN     UZB
                                                       CIV
                                                       CAF     NPL     CMR
                                                                   KHMKEN
                                                                   GIN
                                                                   LAO
                                                               GNBAGO          IRN
                                                                       COMTJK KGZ      RUS
                                                                                       VEN     LBY
            2




                                                           GNQ         BDI                                                                                                                           TCD GNBMMR
                                               SDN         TCD     IRQ     UZB                                                                                                                               IRQ                 VEN
                                                                   MMR
                                      SOM




                                                                                                                                               -2
            0




                                                                                                                                                                                SOM

                          0                       5                    10                        15                 20                                              0                       5                    10                        15                 20
                                                                    Education                                                                                                                                 Education
                          N = 157; coef = 0.420, (robust) se = 0.042; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.447                                                                N = 158; coef = 0.212, (robust) se = 0.018; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.494
                          Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                                   Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                          Source: TI and UNESCO                                                                                                                     Source: WB and UNESCO
            100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE

                                                                                                                            WGI Government Effectiveness Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN                       NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD     HKGNOR                AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CYP USA FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JPN        IRL
                                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                                     NZL                                                                                                             ISR KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST
 Economic Freedom Index




                                                                                          CHE                                                                                                                                    CHL
                    80




                                                                                          CAN                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                  BHR CHL USA DNK    IRL                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CZE SVN
                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QAT             ESP
                                                                                  MUS     EST GBR                                                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                      NLD     FIN                                                                                                                            ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MUSLVA POL
                                                                                      CYP JPN
                                                                                          AUT LTU NOR
                                                                                          SWE                                                                                                                        BTN BWAHRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OMN     BHR     URYLTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HUN
                                                                          OMNQAT
                                                                              ARM GEOSVK URY
                                                                              BWAARE
                                                                              SLV JOR
                                                                                          CZE BEL
                                                                                              ESP
                                                                                              KOR                                                                                                                                        GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                          CRI PER
                                                                              TTO
                                                                              MYS
                                                                                  COL
                                                                                  MEX     ISR
                                                                                      LVA HUNSVN                                                                                                                     TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CRI TTO GEO
                                                                          TUR KWTSAU
                                                                          CPV THA JAM
                                                                                  BGRROU
                                                                                  PAN     PRT FRA
                                                                                          POL                                                                                                                                JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MEX TUN
                                                                      GTMRWA
                                                                      UGA NAMPRY HRV      KAZ                                                                                                                        CHNTHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NAM     COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KWTPAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                      MDG
           60




                                                      BFA                 DOMKGZ LBN
                                                                                  FJI MNG     GRC
                                                                                              ITA                                                                                                                GHARWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IND         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SLV SAU
                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                      MAR
                                                                      GHA
                                                                      SWZ
                                                                      NIC AZE
                                                                          EGY                                                                                                                                        CPV
                                                              NGA
                                                              MLI TZA
                                                                  MOZ
                                                                          HND
                                                                  KHMKEN BTN LKA SER
                                                                  GMB     PHL     GAB
                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                      TUN                                                                                                                        MARPHL  ARMSER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GUYPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LKA MKDROUARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IDN             CUB
                                                      CIV SEN MWI BEN     MDA     IDN                                                                                                                                        LBN RUSKAZ
                                               NERDJI PAK     YEM
                                                              BGD     IND TJK                                                                                                                            ETH LSO VNMEGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MWI
                                                              MRT
                                                              GNBLAO VNM
                                                              ETH         CHN
                                                                      CMRSYR
                                                                                  BOL RUS ARG                                                                                                    BFA SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TZA SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             BEN UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KEN SYR IRN BOL
                                                      CAF SLE     TGO BDI GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                         NER                         DOMKGZ ECU MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GMBGTMMDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HND
                                                          GNQ     LSO
                                                                  GIN
                                                                  AGO
                                                                  SLB     LBR
                                                                          UZB     ECU BLR
                                                                                      UKR                                                                                                        PAK     NPL     MDGUZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGDKHMCMR   AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FJI UKR
                                                          TCD         COM                                                                                                                                MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MRTSLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LAO     TJK PRY GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                         YEMAGONIC
                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                                              IRN                                                                                                            DJI         GNB                     VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BDI
 40




                                                                                                                                                                                                     SLE NGAGIN                  BLR     LBY
                                                                                      VEN     LBY                                                                                                            IRQ     LBR
                                               ERI                                                                                                                                       ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                         SDN     CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAF         TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GNQ     MMR COM
                                                                                                             CUB
                                                                                                                            -2
            20




                                                                                                                                                                                SOM

                          0                       5                    10                        15                 20                                              0                       5                    10                        15                 20
                                                                    Education                                                                                                                                 Education
                          N = 152; coef = 1.808, (robust) se = 0.263; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.292                                                                N = 159; coef = 0.227, (robust) se = 0.016; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.570
                          Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                                   Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                          Source: Heritage Foundation and UNESCO                                                                                                    Source: WB and UNESCO




                                                                                                                           20
Figure 2: The quality of government and education in autocratic and democratic regimes
                  10




                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                        WB Governance Indicators (Autocracies)
 TI Corruption Index (Autocracies)
                              8




                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARE
                                                                                                      ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JOR
                      6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAU      TUN




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                           OMN
                                                                                             BHR                                                                                                                  BFA               MAREGY
                                                                                             SAU
                                                                                             JOR                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                          KWT                                                                                                                                       UGACHN
                                                                                                 TUN                                                                                                                            GMBVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TZA SWZSYR                                 CUB
                                                                                      RWA                                                                                                                                                                      KAZ
             4




                                                                                                             CUB
                                                                                   MARCHN                                                                                                                                    LAO MDGAZE IRN FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MRTTGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBY




                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                    BFA        GMB SWZEGY                                                                                                                                 YEM    CMR            BLR
                                                                               TZA VNM               KAZ                                                                                                          CIV               TJK
                                                           ERI                     MDG
                                                                                   UGASYR        BLR                                                                                                    ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SDN       CAF GNQ    AGO
                                                                    CIV     MRTTGOCMRAZE IRN                                                                                                                                        UZB
                                                                    CAF GNQYEMAGO
                                                                               LAO    TJK        VEN     LBY                                                                                                          TCD    MMR
    2




                                                           SDN          TCD           UZB                                                                                                                                                       VEN
                                                                               MMR
                                                     SOM




                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                               SOM
                  0




                                     0                       5                    10                        15                  20                                                 0                       5                    10                        15                     20
                                                                               Education                                                                                                                                     Education
                                     N = 46; coef = 0.194, (robust) se = 0.052; P>|t| = 0.001; Adj. R2 = 0.190                                                                     N = 47; coef = 0.105, (robust) se = 0.032; P>|t| = 0.002; Adj. R2 = 0.217
                                     Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                                       Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                     Source: TI and UNESCO                                                                                                                         Source: WB and UNESCO
                  10




                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SWE FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK NOR                          NZL




                                                                                                                                        WB Governance Indicators (Democracies)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NLD CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHE GBR     IRL                      AUS
                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                       SWE FIN                   NZL
                                                                                                   NLD CAN                                                                                                                                   USA FRA
 TI Corruption Index (Democracies)




                                                                                                       CHE     NOR               AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHL JPN
                                                                                                                          IRL                                                                                                            CYP EST ESP
                             8




                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                         JPN
                                                                                                               GBR                                                                                                                           PRT SVN
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                   CHL USA                                                                                                                                   CZE KOR
                                                                                                               BEL                                                                                                                   MUS LVA ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HUN
                                                                                                       URY     FRA                                                                                                                           POL LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BWA             GRC
                                                                                                   CYP EST     SVN                                                                                                           CRI MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SVK
                                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                                       PRT     ESP                                                                                                           CPV
                      6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                 BTN BWA                                                                                                                                     NAM
                                                                                 CRI     MUS         POL KOR                                                                                                                         HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                 CPV                     LTU                                                                                                                         BRA ROU
                                                                                                                                                         0



                                                                                                     HUN                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GHA         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LKA PAN
                                                                                                     CZE                                                                                                   MWI                   THA
                                                                                 NAM MYS
                                                                                 TUR             LVA
                                                                                                 SVK                                                                                                           LSO               TTO GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MKD
                                                                           GHA               MKD
                                                                                             HRV                                                                                                       SEN MLI               MDA     COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SER
             4




                                                                                             GEO         ITA                                                                                                   MOZ           GUY ARM JAM MNG
                                                                                             BRA                                                                                                                                     GAB
                                                              MWI LSO IND LBR SLV
                                                                              TTO
                                                                              PER
                                                                              THA            COL ROU
                                                                                             BGR
                                                                                             PAN
                                                                                             SER         GRC                                                                           NER                                   PHL PER MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARG
                                                                                             JAM
                                               DJI
                                                          SEN ETH
                                                                      GTM DOM LKA
                                                                          MDA
                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                             DJI   PAK     BGD SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETH BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NIC DOM         RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UKR
                                                              MLI SLB
                                                                  BEN
                                                                  MOZ     GUY ARM            BOL MNG
                                                                                             GAB
                                                                                             IDN                                                                                                       SLE                   HND PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLV
                                         NER
                                                                                                                                               -1




                                                      PAK SLE NGA
                                                              BGD     NIC PHL
                                                                          HND PRY            ECU UKR
                                                                                             LBN                                                                                                           NPL KHM       KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COM LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GTM         BOL
                                                              NPL
                                                              GNB GIN
                                                                  KHM COM
                                                                      KEN     KGZ                RUS                                                                                                       NGA                       ECU
    2




                                                                      BDI                                                                                                                                                BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GIN               KGZ
                                                                  IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                                                                             -2
                  0




                                           5                            10                            15                        20                                                       5                              10                          15                           20
                                                                               Education                                                                                                                                     Education
                                     N = 111; coef = 0.494, (robust) se = 0.051; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.490                                                                    N = 111; coef = 0.241, (robust) se = 0.022; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.544
                                     Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                                       Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                     Source: TI and UNESCO                                                                                                                         Source: WB and UNESCO




                                                                                                                                       21
Figure 3: The quality of government and education (WJP rule of law index)
               .9

                                                                                                            NOR          NZL
                         .8




                                                                                               EST GBR
                                                                                                   HKG
   WJP Rule of Law Index




                                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                               USA
                                                                                   ARE
                 .7




                                                                                         CHL CZE
                                                                                                      ITA
         .6




                                                                                   BRA ROU
                                                                      CHN MYS
                                                                VNM                JAM     KAZ
                                             SEN                                   LBN RUS
   .5




                                                                GTM         IRN
                                                   BGD
                                                                UGA         KGZ
                                                   ETH                                   UKR
                                                                CMR
               .4




                                                                                         VEN
                                                         KHM

                              5                              10                              15                         20
                                                                        Education
                              N = 32; coef = 0.036, (robust) se = 0.005; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.563
                              Education is measured as school life expectancy (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                              Source: WJP and UNESCO




                                                                                  22
Figure 4: Incidence of mistreatment, bribing, and crime and education (WJP, Barometer and
ICVS data sets)
                .25




                                                                                                                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                        DOM                                                                                                             LBR
                                                    ETH

                                                          NGA
                          .2




                                                                  KEN
  Incidence of police abuse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                   SLE




                                                                                                                           Incidence of bribing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Incidence of bribing
                                                                              ZAF
                                                                              IRN                                                                                                 UGA
                                                                                                                                                                               KHM
                  .15




                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                 UGA                                                                                                                  AZE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                              GHA




                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                    SLV             COL                                                                                        IRQ GHA
                                                                    TUR                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UGA
                                               PAK                                  PER                                                                                            MAR                                                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                                                                                                   SEN                                                                                                                 NGA MOZ
          .1




                                                                                    MEX
                                                                  GTMPHL                                                                                                                         BOL VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUS                                                                                                    BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MNG     LTU                                                                             KHMIND AZE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
                                                                               JAM     GBR                                                                                                       IDN                                                                                         LSO SWZ    KGZ     MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLR
                                                              CMR                      DEU
                                                                                       ARG                                                                                               MDA                                                                                                                GEO ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COL RUS
                                                                        THA    BRA




                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                       USA                                                                                                   KWTSRB                                                                                                             UKR
 .05




                                                    SEN                        LBN POL ITA
                                                                               VEN                                                                                                           PER     UKR                                                                                                PER MEX SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PRY     LVA     GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LTU
                                                                        KGZ            BEL
                                                                                       ESP                                                                   PAK         NGA                             HUN GRC                                                                                    CRI     PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HRV
                                                                                   CHL FRA                                                                                                       LBN                                                                                                        BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MKD     CZE
                                                              MAR              RUS UKR                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                       EST NOR                    AUS                                                                    PHL THA     ROMCZE                                                                                         NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PHL             ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL KOR
                                                                               HRV AUT
                                                                                   KAZ     CAN
                                                                                           KOR                                                                                       IND     MYS COL                                                                                                                PRT SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                           IDN BGR         NLD                                                                                                                                                                                                          BWA         AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NLD USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWE GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIN NOR IRL                 NZL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                    BGD       KHM
                                                              IND       CHNARE
                                                                           MYS         HKG               NZL
                                                                                   ROU
                                                                                   CZE SWE                                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                 HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAN     ARG GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL
                                                                                   JPN                                                                                                                   PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUT ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                         TUR SLV         CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN DNK NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NLD




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ITA

                                    5                      10                 15                           20                                         5                         10                  15                            20                                  5                       10                  15                             20
                                                                School attainment                                                                                                 School attainment                                                                                             School attainment
                                    Linear regression                                                                                                 Linear regression                                                                                               Linear regression
                                    N = 61; coef =-0.009, (robust) se = 0.003; P>|t| = 0.002; Adj. R2 = 0.182                                         N = 58; coef =-0.041, (robust) se = 0.009; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.357                                       N = 61; coef =-0.027, (robust) se = 0.004; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.460
                                    Education is measured as school attainment (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                               Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                    Source: WJP and UNESCO                                                                                            Source: TI Barometer and UNESCO                                                                                 Source: ICVS and UNESCO
                .4




                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                       GTM

                                                                       IRN
                                                                                                                         Incidence of armed robbery




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                 UGA
                                                              CMR
                      .3




                                                                                                                                               .3
  Incidence of burglary




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Incidence of burglary
                                                                    DOM
                                                    SEN
                                                              GHA                                                                                                                                     VEN
                                                                              ZAF                                                                                                                                                                                                            TZA SWZ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KHM         NAM PRY     MNG
                                                                             PER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOL
           .2




                                                                                                                                      .2




                                               PAKETH NGA         KEN            CZE ITA
                                                                                     ARG                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BWA     TUN CZE
                                                                             BGR                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN                                                                                          LSO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                  GTM                EST
                                                                             COLCHL
                                                                                 AUT BEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI         COL
                                                              KHM            MEX
                                                                             VEN         KOR
                                                                     PHL
                                                                     KGZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUR
                                                                     TUR             GBRNOR
                                                                                     FRA                                                                                                              BRA                                                                                                EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IDN         KOR                      NZL
                                                              MAR                    DEU                          AUS                                                                                                                                                                  NGA                 KGZ PAN
 .1




                                                                                                                           .1




                                                                     SLV
                                                                     THA     LBN
                                                                             BRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARG BEL                      AUS
                                                    BGD                              USA NLD                                                                                     CMR                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                     ESP CAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BGR SVK     GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ITA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LTU     IRL
                                                                         MYS JAM
                                                                             HRV UKR
                                                                                 KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                               JAM CHL GBR                                                                                                     GEO UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUS     GRC
                                                              IND        IDN RUS                                                                                      ETH                                                                                                                                          BLR CAN FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MKD NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LVA     FRA
                                                                                 POL SWE                                                                              SEN           UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                       USA                                                                                         IND CHN     BRA ROU USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HRV     AUT SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SWE ESP NOR
                                                                     CHN                                 NZL                                                          BGD                                                                                                                              AZE             JPN
                                                                         ARE     JPN HKG
                                                                                 ROU                                                                                             KHM       MYS LBN         NOR                                                                                         PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHNARE RUS UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                       KGZ         CZEEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HKG                 NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ROU
                0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                    5                      10                 15                           20                                         5                        10                  15                        20                                       5                       10                  15                             20
                                                                School attainment                                                                                                    School attainment                                                                                          School attainment
                                    Linear regression                                                                                                 Linear regression                                                                                               Linear regression
                                    N = 61; coef =-0.011, (robust) se = 0.003; P>|t| = 0.001; Adj. R2 = 0.142                                         N = 31; coef =-0.006, (robust) se = 0.004; P>|t| = 0.199; Adj. R2 = 0.005                                       N = 67; coef =-0.015, (robust) se = 0.005; P>|t| = 0.004; Adj. R2 = 0.189
                                    Education is measured as school attainment (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                Education is measured as school attainment (years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                              Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                    Source: WJP and UNESCO                                                                                            Source: WJP and UNESCO                                                                                          Source: ICVS and UNESCO
                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ARG
                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                               MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TZA
 Incidence of attempt of burglary




                                                          MOZSWZ
                                                                                                                         Incidence of armed robbery




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8

                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL
                          .3




                                                          TZA               PER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Incidence of fraud




                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                  BOL                                                                                          TZA      CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .6




                                                                UGA               COL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TUN
                                                                      CRI                                                                                                                            BOL TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BRA                                                                                           UGA                     UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                               PER                                                                                                                         BLR
                .2




                                                                                        TUN                                                                                          UGA NAM                                                                                                             EGY
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA         SWZ                                                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                               PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .4




                                                          KHM        PRY     MNG                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AZE  SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROU
                                                                 TUR BWA                                                                                                                                   MNG                                                                               MOZIND
                                                                                 ARG                                                                                                                                                                                                         KHM          COL MNG     LTU
                                                                                                                               .1




                                                     NGA LSO     EGY KGZ         CZE                                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                  RUS                                                                                  NGA        CHN     MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HRV LVA
                                                                         PAN                                                                                                   LSO                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  UKR
      .1




                                                             IND         MEX UKR
                                                                             LVA     GRC
                                                                                     GBR
                                                                                     BEL                          NZL
                                                                                                                  AUS                                                                                                                                                                          SWZ    PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BWABGR          GRC
                                                                         IDN NLD
                                                                             RUS     LTU                                                                                                  BWAPAN          ESP                                                                              LSO
                                                                         GEO BLR     ITA    IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                     KOR                                                                                              EGY KGZ GEO     PRT GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LTU                                                                                     NAM     BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IDN     CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ARG
                                                                             SVK
                                                                                 CAN FRA
                                                                             ROU USA DNK
                                                                                 AUT ESP                                                                                       KHMIND TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROU CZE BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BLR POL                                                                                         CRI PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PHL             POL DNK
                                                                         BGR
                                                                         BRA
                                                                         MKD                                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD USA FRA     IRL                                                                                             SWEKOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  USA ESP
                                                                         HRV     PRT SVN
                                                                                 POL                                                                                                          HRV         DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SVN                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NZL                                                                   PAN         FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                 PHL             SWEFIN NOR
                                                                                 JPN                                                                                                  AZE     MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                              BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SVK SWE ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAN FIN                                                                                     TUR             CAN BEL NOR IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUT ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MEX NLD PRT                               NZL
                                                                 AZE
                                                                 CHN                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                      PHL     IDN     AUT KOR NOR                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      JPN                                                                                                         JPN
                0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                    5                        10                  15                             20                                    5                         10                  15                            20                                  5                       10                  15                             20
                                                               School attainment                                                                                                  School attainment                                                                                             School attainment
                                    Linear regression                                                                                                 Linear regression                                                                                               Linear regression
                                    N = 67; coef =-0.015, (robust) se = 0.004; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.225                                         N = 67; coef =-0.011, (robust) se = 0.003; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.157                                       N = 65; coef =-0.035, (robust) se = 0.008; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.211
                                    Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                                 Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)                               Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                    Source: ICVS and UNESCO                                                                                           Source: ICVS and UNESCO                                                                                         Source: ICVS and UNESCO
                .6




                                                                                        MNG



                                                          TZA UGA
                                                              IND
                                                                                  COL
 Incidence of theft
                .4




                                                                SWZ               BOL
                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                  TUN
                                                     NGA MOZ          EGY         ROU
                                                          LSO             KGZ     RUS CZE
                                                                          PER     LVA
                                                                      NAM PRY
                                                                          BWA     BLR
                                                                                  SVK
                                                                      CRI     GEO
                                                          KHM                         AUT GRC
  .2




                                                                              IDN     ARG
                                                                      CHN     MKD         GBR
                                                                              PAN NLD SWEESP
                                                                                          BEL NOR IRL
                                                                                      USA LTU
                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                          FRA
                                                                      PHL
                                                                      TUR     MEX     CAN ITA
                                                                                      POL                         NZL
                                                                                                                  AUS
                                                                      AZE     BGR
                                                                              HRV
                                                                              BRA     PRT FIN
                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                          SVN

                                                                                              JPN
                0




                                    5                        10                  15                             20
                                                               School attainment
                                    Linear regression
                                    N = 67; coef =-0.022, (robust) se = 0.004; P>|t| = 0.000; Adj. R2 = 0.236
                                    Education is measured as school attainment(years) from primary to tertiary (2009)
                                    Source: ICVS and UNESCO




                                                                                                                                                                                          23
Table 1: Description of the variables
Variable            Description
                                                                         1. Cross-country variables

Education           The expected number of years of schooling, or school life expectancy (SLE). It is defined as the total number of years of schooling which a child can
                    expect to receive, assuming that the probability of his or her being enrolled in school at any particular future age is equal to the current enrolment ratio at
                    that age. It is a synthetic summary indicator of the overall pattern of enrolment ratios at one particular point in time, and has no predictive value except in
                    so far as it is believed that enrolment patterns will remain unchanged into the future. Source: http://unstats.un.org

Transparency        The score of the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index in 2010. The index provides a measure of the extent to which corruption is
International       perceived to exist in the public and political sectors. The index focuses on corruption in the public sector and defines corruption as the abuse of public
Corruption          office for private gain. It is based on assessments by experts and opinion surveys. The index ranges between 0 (highly corrupt) and 10 (highly clean).
Perceptions Index   Source: www.transparency.org.

World Bank          The averaged score of the Worldwide Governance Indicators 2010 (WGI). The WGI 2010 reports aggregate and individual governance indicators for 213
Governance          economies for six dimensions of governance: Voice and Accountability, Political Stability and Absence of Violence, Government Effectiveness,
Indicators          Regulatory Quality, Rule of Law, and Control of Corruption. The individual data sources underlying the aggregate indicators are drawn from a diverse
                    variety of survey institutes, think tanks, NGOs, and international organizations. Source: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/

Heritage Economic   The score of the Heritage Foundation Index of Economic Freedom in 2011. The index measures ten components of economic freedom, assigning a grade
Freedom Index       in each using a scale from 0 to 100, where 100 represents the maximum freedom. The ten component scores are then averaged to give an overall
                    economic freedom score for each country. The ten components of economic freedom are: Business Freedom, Trade Freedom, Fiscal Freedom,
                    Government Spending, Monetary Freedom, Investment Freedom, Financial Freedom, Property rights, Freedom from Corruption, and Labor Freedom
                    Source: www.heritage.org.

Democracy           An indicator variable coded 1 if the Polity 2 score from the 2010 Polity IV data set is below 0. The Polity2 score is computed by subtracting a county's
                    autocracy score from its democracy score. The resulting unified polity scale ranges from +10 (strongly democratic) to -10 (strongly autocratic).
                    Source: http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4

Autocracy           An indicator variable coded 1 if the Polity 2 score from the 2010 Polity IV data set is equal or larger than 0. The Polity2 score is computed by subtracting
                    a county's autocracy score from its democracy score. The resulting unified polity scale ranges from +10 (strongly democratic) to -10 (strongly autocratic).
                    Source: http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4

WGI- Government     The score of the Worldwide Governance Indicator 'Government Effectiveness' 2010, which captures perceptions of the quality of public services, the
Effectiveness       quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political pressures, the quality of policy formulation and implementation, and the
Estimate            credibility of the government's commitment to such policies. Source: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/

WJP Rule of Law     The WJP Rule of Law Index is the average of the eight factors of the Rule of Law Index measured in 2011: Limited Government Powers, Corruption,
Index               Order and Security, Fundamental Rights, Open Government, Effective Regulatory enforcement, Access to Civil Justice, Effective Criminal Justice. Scores
                    range between 0 and 1, with 1 representing a higher adherence to the rule of law. Source: http://www.worldjusticeproject.org




                                                                                     24
Variable              Description
                                                        2. Within-country variables(World Justice Project database)

College (WJP)         Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered “Bachelor's degree” or “Graduate degree (Masters, Ph.D.)” to the question “What is the highest
                      degree you received?” Source: World Justice Project database

High/Middle school    Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered “Middle school diploma” or “High school diploma or equivalent” to the question “What is the
(WJP)                 highest degree you received?” Source: World Justice Project database

Complained about      Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “During the last year, did you submit any complaint about the services
government services   provided by the different government agencies in your country (including registration office; customs office; public health services; tax office; land
                      allocation office, etc.)?” Source: World Justice Project database

Police abuse          Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “In the last 3 years, have you or someone in your household, been subjected to
                      physical abuse by the police or the military?” Source: World Justice Project database

Report police abuse   Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(For those who have been victimized) Was the crime reported to the police or
                      other authority?” Source: World Justice Project database

Burglary (WJP)        Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “In the past 3 YEARS, did anyone actually BREAK into your home/residence
                      without permission, and steal or try to steal something?” Source: World Justice Project database

Report burglary       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(For those who answered Yes to Burglary) Did you or anyone else report the
(WJP)                 crime to the police?” Source: World Justice Project database

Assault               Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “In the past 3 YEARS, were you a victim of an ARMED ROBBERY (with a
                      weapon such as a knife or a gun)?” Source: World Justice Project database

Report Assault        Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(For those who answered Yes to Assault) Did you or anyone else report the
                      crime to the police?” Source: World Justice Project database

Trust Index           Index between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates more trust. The index is the average of four questions: How much TRUST do you have in each of the following
                      categories of people, groups of people, and institutions? (1) Officers working in the local government; (2) Officers working in the national government;
                      (3) The police; (4) The courts (On a 4-point scale from 0 (No trust) to 1 (A lot of trust)). Source: World Justice Project database




                                                                                      25
Variable              Description
Income above median   Indicator variable equal to 1 if the income or socio-economic level of the respondent is above the median in the country. Source: WJP database
High Income           Indicator variable coded 1 if the income or socio-economic level of the respondent is in the highest tertile in the country. Source: WJP database
Middle Income         Indicator variable coded 1 if the income or socio-economic level of the respondent is in the middle tertile in the country. Source: WJP database
Car                   Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Do you or any member of your household living in this house have: a car?”
                      Source WJP database
Cell phone            Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Do you or any member of your household living in this house have: a mobile
                      phone?” Source WJP database

                                                                      3. Within-country variables(ICVS)
College (ICVS)        Indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent answered: (1) “High/university” to the question “How would you define your level of education?” (43
                      countries in our sample); or (2) if the respondent reported more than 15 years of formal education (24 countries in our sample); or (3) if the respondent
                      had completed school when he/she was older than 21 years (8 countries in our sample). Source: ICVS

High/Middle school    Indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent answered: (1) “Secondary” or “College” to the question “How would you define your level of education?”
(ICVS)                (43 countries in our sample); or (2) if the respondent reported between 9 and than 15 years of formal education (24 countries in our sample); or (3) if the
                      respondent had completed school when he/she was between 15 and 21 years old (8 countries in our sample). Source: ICVS

Burglary (ICVS)       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Over the past five years, did anyone actually get into your home/residence
                      without permission, and steal or try to steal something? I am not including here thefts from garages, sheds or lock-ups.” (C06A000) Source: ICVS
Report burglary       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Did you or anyone else report the last burglary/housebreaking to the police?”
(ICVS)                (C06B400) Source: ICVS

Attempt               Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Apart from this, over the past five years, do you have any evidence that
                      someone tried to get into your home/residence unsuccessfully. For example, damage to locks, doors or windows or scratches around the lock?”
                      (C07A000) Source: ICVS
Report Attempt        Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time this happened) did you or anyone else report the attempted
                      burglary/housebreaking to the police?” (C07B400) Source: ICVS
Robbery               Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Over the past five years has anyone stolen something from you by using force
                      or threatening you, or did anybody try to steal something from you by using force or threatening force.” (C09A000) Source ICVS
Report Robbery        Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time this happened) did you or anyone else report the robbery to the
                      police?” (C09B400) Source: ICVS

Fraud                 Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Last year, in 2004 were you the victim of a consumer fraud. In other words,
                      has someone--when selling something to you or delivering a service-- cheated you in terms of quantity or quality of the goods or services?” (C13A100)
                      Source: ICVS

Report Fraud          Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time this happened) did you or anyone else report the robbery to the
                      police?” (C13B400) Source: ICVS




                                                                                      26
Variable                Description
Theft                   Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “Apart from theft involving force there are many other types of theft of
                        personal property, such as pick-pocketing or theft of a purse, wallet, clothing, jewelry, sports equipment, This can happen at one's work, at school, in a
                        pub, on public transport, on the beach, or in the street. Over the past five years have you personally been the victim of any of these thefts?” (C10A000)
                        Source: ICVS

Report Theft            Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time this happened) did you or anyone else report the robbery to the
                        police?” (C10B400) Source: ICVS

Corruption (ICVS)       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “During 2004, has any government official, for instance a customs officer, a
                        police officer or inspector in your country asked you, or expected you to pay a bribe for his or her services?” (C14A100) Source: ICVS

Report Corruption       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time) did you or anyone else report this problem of corruption to the
Police (ICVS)           police?” (C14B400) Source: ICVS

Report Corruption       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “(The last time) did you or anyone else report it to any public or private
Other (ICVS)            agency?” (C14B600) Source: ICVS

Reasons for not         Indicator variables coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the options of the question “If not, why didn't you report it?” (A) not serious enough; (B)
reporting (ICVS)        solved it myself; (C) inappropriate for police; (D) other authorities; (E) my family solved it; (F) no insurance; (G) police could do nothing; (H) police
                        won’t do anything; (I) fear/dislike of police; (J) did no dare; (K) other reasons (C14B411 to C14B421) Source: ICVS

Reasons for reporting   Indicator variables coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the options of the question “If yes, why did you report it?” (A) recover property; (B)
(ICVS)                  insurance reasons; (C) should be reported; (D) want offender caught; (E) to stop it; (F) to get help; (G) compensation; (H) other reasons (C14B401 to
                        C14B408) Source: ICVS

                                                               4. Within-country variables(Corruption Barometer)
College (Barometer)     Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered “High level education (e.g. university)” to the question “What is the highest education attained?”
                        (educ) Source: TI Corruption Barometer 2009

High/Middle school      Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered “Secondary school” to the question “What is the highest education attained?” (educ) Source: TI
(Barometer)             Corruption Barometer 2009

Corruption              Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “On the past 12 months, have you or anyone living in your household paid a
(Barometer)             bribe in any form?” (ti5) Source: TI Corruption Barometer 2009

Report Corruption       Indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the question “If in the past 12 months you or any member of your household were asked to
(Barometer)             pay a bribe to obtain a service or to resolve a problem, did you present a formal complaint in this regard?” (ti6a) Source: TI Corruption Barometer 2009

Reasons for not         Indicator variables coded 1 if the respondent answered YES to the options of the question “Why you did not present the complaint?” (A) Did not know
reporting (Barometer)   how to do it; (B) It would have taken too much time; (C) It would not have helped at all; (D) Tried but couldn’t; (E) Fear of reprisals; (F) Other reasons (t
                        ti6bm1- ti6bm6) Source: TI Corruption Barometer 2009



                                                                                        27
Table 2: Complaints and education

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                               Complained
                                                                                                               Report
                                  about                             Report police         Burglary
                                                  Police abuse                                                burglary            Assault        Report Assault
                               government                              abuse               (WJP)
                                                                                                               (WJP)
                                 services
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)

 College                        0.045***              -0.004           0.130***           0.020***           0.096***            0.022**            0.098**
                                 [0.013]             [0.004]            [0.032]            [0.006]            [0.020]            [0.011]            [0.036]
 High/Middle school               0.022               -0.004            0.051*              0.009            0.047***             0.017              0.007
                                 [0.013]             [0.004]            [0.026]            [0.007]            [0.016]            [0.011]            [0.030]

 Observations                    29,820              59,984              3,614             60,199              7,822              30,338              1,759
 R-squared                       0.001               0.000               0.009             0.000               0.005              0.001               0.008
 Mean Dep Var                    0.136               0.0638              0.442             0.132               0.611              0.0586              0.581
 Number of countries               31                  61                 61                 61                 61                  31                 31
 Fixed effects                    YES                 YES                YES                YES                YES                 YES                YES

Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                 28
Table 3: Complaints and education (Educated vs. Uneducated countries)
This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. Panel A shows the results for educated countries (educational attainment is greater than 14 years). Panel B shows the results
for educated countries (educational attainment is less than or equal to 14 years). All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are
shown in brackets.
                               Complained
                                                                                                                  Report
                                  about                               Report police          Burglary
                                                   Police abuse                                                  burglary            Assault         Report Assault
                               government                                abuse                (WJP)
                                                                                                                  (WJP)
                                 services
                                    (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)
                                                                  Panel A: Uneducated countries
 College                         0.060***              0.004             0.142***           0.025***            0.104***             0.034**            0.109***
                                  [0.014]             [0.005]             [0.034]            [0.008]             [0.025]             [0.014]             [0.034]
 High/Middle school              0.034**               0.001             0.067**              0.012             0.042**              0.027**              -0.013
                                  [0.014]             [0.004]             [0.027]            [0.008]             [0.018]             [0.012]             [0.030]

 Observations                     16,726              34,826               2,846              34,913              5,313              16,827               1,358
 R-squared                        0.003                  0                  0.01              0.001               0.006              0.002                0.012
 Mean Dep Var                     0.132               0.0868               0.441              0.154               0.541              0.0808               0.549
 Number of countries                17                  35                   35                 35                 35                  17                  17
 Fixed effects                     YES                 YES                 YES                 YES                YES                 YES                 YES
                                                                   Panel B: Educated countries
 College                           -0.007           -0.030***             0.042          0.004                   0.090**              -0.017              0.089
                                  [0.026]             [0.008]            [0.090]        [0.012]                  [0.037]             [0.019]             [0.124]
 High/Middle school                -0.027           -0.027***             -0.05          -0.005                   0.063*               -0.02              0.091
                                  [0.029]             [0.008]            [0.082]        [0.012]                  [0.037]             [0.021]             [0.100]

 Observations                  13,094             24,179              760            24,301             2,488            13,511             401
 R-squared                      0.001              0.001             0.007              0               0.003             0.001            0.003
 Mean Dep Var                   0.143              0.033             0.442            0.104             0.761            0.0309            0.688
 Number of countries              14                 25                25               25                25               14                14
 Fixed effects                   YES               YES               YES              YES               YES               YES               YES
All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1


                                                                                   29
Table 4: Complaints and education (Autocracies vs. Democracies)

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. Panel A shows the results for autocracies. Panel B shows the results for democracies. All regressions include fixed effects for
countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                               Complained
                                                                                                                Report
                                  about                              Report police         Burglary
                                                  Police abuse                                                 burglary            Assault         Report Assault
                               government                               abuse               (WJP)
                                                                                                                (WJP)
                                 services
                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)
                                                                      Panel A: Autocracies
 College                         0.080**              0.006             0.186**             0.033**             0.119*             0.057*              0.068*
                                 [0.026]             [0.009]            [0.062]             [0.011]             [0.064]            [0.024]             [0.033]
 High/Middle school               0.045               0.005              0.099               0.034*              0.062             0.049*                0.02
                                 [0.032]             [0.008]            [0.065]             [0.018]             [0.044]            [0.022]             [0.034]

 Observations                      7,908              9,952                522               9,990               1,379              8,000                629
 R-squared                         0.004                0                 0.018              0.001               0.006              0.004               0.003
 Mean Dep Var                      0.148              0.054               0.525              0.139               0.558              0.0788              0.558
 Number of countries                 8                 10                   10                10                  10                   8                  8
 Fixed effects                     YES                YES                 YES                YES                 YES                 YES                YES
                                                                     Panel B: Democracies
 College                         0.031**              -0.006          0.122***        0.017**                  0.092***             0.009             0.117**
                                 [0.012]             [0.005]           [0.036]         [0.007]                  [0.020]            [0.010]            [0.049]
 High/Middle school               0.013               -0.005            0.045           0.004                  0.044**              0.006              -0.001
                                 [0.012]             [0.004]           [0.028]         [0.007]                  [0.017]            [0.011]            [0.038]

 Observations                  21,912             50,032             3,092           50,209             6,443            22,338            1,130
 R-squared                      0.001                0               0.008              0               0.004               0              0.011
 Mean Dep Var                   0.132             0.0658             0.428             0.13             0.622            0.0514            0.594
 Number of countries              23                 51                51               51                51               23                23
 Fixed effects                   YES               YES               YES              YES               YES               YES               YES
All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1


                                                                                  30
Table 5: Complaints and education controlling for the level of trust on public institutions

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                               Complained
                                                                                                               Report
                                  about                             Report police         Burglary
                                                  Police abuse                                                burglary            Assault        Report Assault
                               government                              abuse               (WJP)
                                                                                                               (WJP)
                                 services
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)

 College                        0.045***            -0.013*            0.157***           0.026**             0.098**             0.022*            0.098**
                                 [0.013]             [0.007]            [0.052]            [0.010]            [0.040]             [0.011]           [0.036]
 High/Middle school               0.022             -0.012*             0.085*             0.019*             0.069**              0.017             0.006
                                 [0.013]             [0.007]            [0.045]            [0.011]            [0.030]             [0.011]           [0.030]
 Trust Index                     -0.052*           -0.058***             0.075            -0.039**             0.003               -0.028            -0.044
                                 [0.029]             [0.018]            [0.065]            [0.017]            [0.048]             [0.018]           [0.064]

 Observations                    29,510              29,764              1,545             29,924              3,967              29,957              1,752
 R-squared                       0.003               0.004               0.012             0.001               0.004              0.001               0.008
 Mean Dep Var                    0.137               0.0539              0.465             0.134                0.61              0.0591               0.58
 Number of countries               31                  31                  31                31                  31                 31                  31
 Fixed effects                    YES                 YES                YES                YES                YES                 YES                YES

Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                 31
Table 6: Complaints and education controlling for the income of the respondent
This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the education status and
the income of the respondents. Panel A shows the results using an indicator coded 1 if the income of the respondent is above the median. Panel B uses two indicators for high and
middle-income respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                                  Complained                                                                              Report
                                                                           Report police            Burglary
                                   about gov           Police abuse                                                      burglary              Assault          Report Assault
                                                                              abuse                  (WJP)
                                    services                                                                              (WJP)
                                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)                    (6)                  (7)
                                                                                    Panel A
 College                           0.040***                -0.004             0.135***              0.018**              0.077***              0.019*               0.064*
                                    [0.012]               [0.005]              [0.033]              [0.007]               [0.022]              [0.010]              [0.034]
 High/Middle school                 0.021*                 -0.003             0.071***               0.008                0.034*                0.015                -0.032
                                    [0.012]               [0.004]              [0.025]              [0.007]               [0.017]              [0.010]              [0.048]
 Income above median                 0.011                 -0.002               0.012                0.004               0.052***              0.007*                -0.009
                                    [0.008]               [0.004]              [0.023]              [0.005]               [0.013]              [0.004]              [0.020]

 Observations                        25,541               53,292                3,227                53,463                7,008               25,950                1,520
 R-squared                           0.002                   0                  0.009                  0                   0.008               0.001                 0.008
 Mean Dep Var                        0.141                0.0644                0.454                0.133                 0.618               0.0592                0.596
 Number of countries                   31                   61                   61                    61                   61                   31                   31
 Fixed effects                        YES                  YES                  YES                   YES                  YES                  YES                  YES
                                                                                   Panel B
 College                           0.040***                -0.004             0.122***              0.015**              0.076***              0.018*                0.049
                                    [0.012]               [0.005]              [0.031]              [0.007]               [0.023]              [0.010]              [0.039]
 High/Middle school                   0.02                 -0.003             0.062**                0.006                0.036*                0.015                -0.039
                                    [0.012]               [0.004]              [0.025]              [0.007]               [0.018]              [0.010]              [0.052]
 Middle income                       0.016                 -0.006               0.028                0.007               0.060***               0.009                 0.03
                                    [0.011]               [0.006]              [0.025]              [0.005]               [0.017]              [0.005]              [0.025]
 High income                         0.012                 -0.005               0.057                0.015*              0.108***               0.008                0.009
                                    [0.010]               [0.006]              [0.036]              [0.008]               [0.024]              [0.007]              [0.052]

 Observations                  25,498             48,646             3,070           48,814             6,519            25,906            1,518
 R-squared                      0.002                0                0.01              0                0.01             0.001            0.008
 Mean Dep Var                   0.141             0.0671             0.459            0.135             0.607            0.0592            0.597
 Number of countries              31                 55                55               55                55               31                31
 Fixed effects                   YES               YES               YES              YES               YES               YES               YES
All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1

                                                                                        32
Table 7: Complaints and education controlling for socio-economic status
This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the education status and
indicator variables coded one if the respondent has a car. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                                  Complained                                                                               Report
                                                                            Report police           Burglary
                                   about gov           Police abuse                                                       burglary              Assault          Report Assault
                                                                               abuse                 (WJP)
                                    services                                                                               (WJP)
                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                 (5)                    (6)                  (7)

 College                            0.048***                -0.01              0.149**              0.032***               0.087*               0.027**              0.083**
                                     [0.013]              [0.007]              [0.055]               [0.010]               [0.043]              [0.010]              [0.038]
 High/Middle school                  0.024*                -0.009               0.078               0.024**                0.062*               0.021**               -0.005
                                     [0.013]              [0.006]              [0.048]               [0.010]               [0.032]              [0.010]              [0.030]
 Car                                  -0.018               -0.019               0.024                 -0.033               0.062*               -0.027*               0.073*
                                     [0.024]              [0.014]              [0.033]               [0.023]               [0.035]              [0.014]              [0.036]

 Observations                        29,820                30,131                1,552                30,295                3,981               30,338                 1,759
 R-squared                            0.002                0.001                 0.011                0.001                 0.005                0.002                 0.01
 Mean Dep Var                         0.136                0.053                 0.466                0.132                 0.61                 0.057                 0.581
 Number of countries                   31                   31                    31                   31                    31                   31                    31
 Fixed effects                        YES                  YES                   YES                  YES                   YES                  YES                   YES

All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1




                                                                                         33
Table 8: Complaints and education controlling for access to complaint technology
This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the WJP data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the education status and
indicator variables coded one if the respondent has a mobile phone. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.
                                  Complained                                                                               Report
                                                                            Report police           Burglary
                                   about gov           Police abuse                                                       burglary              Assault          Report Assault
                                                                               abuse                 (WJP)
                                    services                                                                               (WJP)
                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                 (5)                    (6)                  (7)

 College                            0.048***                -0.01              0.149**              0.032***               0.087*               0.027**              0.083**
                                     [0.013]              [0.007]              [0.055]               [0.010]               [0.043]              [0.010]              [0.038]
 High/Middle school                  0.024*                -0.009               0.078               0.024**                0.062*               0.021**               -0.005
                                     [0.013]              [0.006]              [0.048]               [0.010]               [0.032]              [0.010]              [0.030]
 Cell phone                           -0.018               -0.019               0.024                 -0.033               0.062*               -0.027*               0.073*
                                     [0.024]              [0.014]              [0.033]               [0.023]               [0.035]              [0.014]              [0.036]

 Observations                        29,820                30,131                1,552                30,295                3,981               30,338                 1,759
 R-squared                           0.002                    0                  0.011                  0                   0.006               0.001                   0.01
 Mean Dep Var                        0.136                 0.0534                0.466                0.132                  0.61               0.0586                 0.581
 Number of countries                   31                    31                   31                    31                    31                  31                     31
 Fixed effects                        YES                   YES                  YES                   YES                  YES                  YES                   YES

All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1




                                                                                         34
Table 9: Crime victimization and reporting using the International Crime Victim Survey

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the ICVS data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.


                          Burglary      Report burglary                  Report                      Report                    Report                    Report
                                                           Attempt                    Robbery                      Fraud                     Theft
                          (ICVS)           (ICVS)                        Attempt                    Robbery                    Fraud                     Theft
                             (1)              (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)

 College                  0.021***         0.105***       0.034***      0.044***      0.023***     0.091***      0.104***     0.012***     0.084***     0.036***
                           [0.003]          [0.011]        [0.003]       [0.012]       [0.002]      [0.016]       [0.003]      [0.005]      [0.003]      [0.009]
 High/Middle school       0.011***         0.056***       0.028***      0.024**       0.019***      0.029**      0.052***     0.014***     0.044***      0.014*
                           [0.002]          [0.010]        [0.002]       [0.010]       [0.002]      [0.013]       [0.003]      [0.004]      [0.003]      [0.007]

 Observations             126,318           15,289         125,596       13,382       126,367        8,546       115,860       24,906      126,162       24,475
 R-squared                   0              0.006           0.001         0.001        0.001         0.004        0.008           0         0.005        0.001
 Mean Dep Var              0.128            0.571           0.114         0.305       0.0782         0.356        0.218        0.0505       0.206        0.276
 Number of countries        71                71             71            71           71            71           69            67          71            71
 Fixed effects             YES               YES            YES           YES          YES           YES          YES           YES         YES           YES

Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                 35
   Table 10: Corruption victimization and reporting using the International Crime Victim Survey

   This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the ICVS data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
   education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.


                                                                                                                If not, why didn't you report it?
                                Report       Report
                              corruption   corruption
                 Corruption
                                Police       other                                                                                      G)
                  (ICVS)                                A) not    B)          C)                             E) my                                  H) police   I)
                               (ICVS)       (ICVS)                                             D) other                  F) no          police                                 J) did no   K) other
                                                        serious   solved it   inappropria                    family                                 won’t do    fear/dislike
                                                                                               authorities               insurance      could do                               dare        reasons
                                                        enough    myself      te for police                  solved it                              anything    of police
                                                                                                                                        nothing
                    (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)               (7)        (8)           (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)          (13)         (14)

College         0.096***        0.007      0.011**      0.038*     -0.025     -0.030**          -0.005        -0.004       0.025         -0.004     -0.014*     -0.023**         0.01      0.037***
                 [0.005]      [0.007]      [0.005]      [0.022]   [0.019]      [0.015]         [0.019]       [0.010]      [0.017]       [0.014]     [0.007]      [0.011]       [0.013]      [0.012]
High/Middle     0.058***       -0.002       0.002        0.028     -0.013      -0.014           -0.014        -0.008       0.013          0.011      -0.006      -0.003         -0.006       0.012
school           [0.004]      [0.006]      [0.005]      [0.019]   [0.016]      [0.013]         [0.016]       [0.008]      [0.015]       [0.012]     [0.006]      [0.009]       [0.011]      [0.010]

Observations      46,022       5,324        4,432        5,239     5,231        5,082              5,221      5,082        5,082         5,082        5,233      5,221          5,082       5,260
R-squared          0.01        0.001        0.001        0.001       0          0.001                0          0            0           0.001        0.001      0.001          0.001       0.002
Mean D.V.         0.118       0.0195       0.0111        0.344     0.215        0.112              0.208      0.046        0.16         0.0927       0.0294      0.0575        0.0803       0.0741
Countries           23          23           22           23        23           22                 23         22           22            22           23          23            22           23
Fixed effects      YES         YES          YES          YES       YES          YES                YES        YES          YES           YES          YES         YES           YES          YES

   Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                              36
Table 10 (Cont): Corruption victimization and reporting using the International Crime Victim Survey

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the ICVS data set (shown in the first row) on indicator variables for the
education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in brackets.


                                                                            If yes, why did you report it?

                                              B)                               D) want
                          A) recover                      C) should be                         E) to stop       F) to get           G)               H) other
                                          insurance                            offender
                           property                         reported                               it             help          compensation         reasons
                                           reasons                              caught
                               (1)           (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)                (8)

College                     -0.277*         -0.097           -0.044              0.207           -0.038           0.045             -0.045            0.152*
                            [0.159]         [0.170]          [0.147]            [0.184]         [0.142]          [0.103]            [0.061]           [0.079]
High/Middle                  -0.094          -0.06           -0.014              0.14            0.022            0.092             -0.025             0.057
school                      [0.132]         [0.135]          [0.122]            [0.154]         [0.119]          [0.086]            [0.051]           [0.064]

Observations                  105             86               110                107             108              106                105               82
R-squared                    0.044           0.005            0.001              0.016           0.005            0.017              0.007             0.058
Mean D.V.                    0.343           0.291            0.236              0.364           0.222           0.0755             0.0286            0.0366
Countries                      23             22                23                 23             23                23                 23               14
Fixed effects                YES             YES              YES                YES             YES              YES                YES               YES

Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                               37
Table 11: Corruption victimization and reporting using the TI Global Corruption Barometer

This table summarizes the results of OLS regressions of the dependent variable from the TI Global Corruption Barometer 2009 data set (shown in the first row)
on indicator variables for the education status of the respondents. All regressions include fixed effects for countries. Clustered standard errors are shown in
brackets.



                                               Report                                   Why you did not present the complaint?
                            Corruption
                                              Corruption
                           (Barometer)                           A) Did not       B) It would       C) It would       D) Tried
                                             (Barometer)        know how to      have taken too      not have           but
                                                                                                                                   E) Fear of        F) Other
                                                                                                                                    reprisals        reasons
                                                                    do it          much time        helped at all     couldn’t
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)

 College                     0.043***           0.024**         -0.061***            0.006           0.072***         -0.001       -0.032**           -0.002
                              [0.004]           [0.011]          [0.012]            [0.013]           [0.016]         [0.008]       [0.013]          [0.008]
 High/Middle                 0.022***            0.013            -0.015             0.005           0.049***         -0.005      -0.030***           0.003
 school                       [0.004]           [0.010]          [0.011]            [0.012]           [0.014]         [0.007]       [0.012]          [0.008]

 Observations                 60,184            10,179             8,160             8,160             8,160           8,160         8,160            8,160
 R-squared                     0.00              0.00               0.00              0.00              0.00           0.00           0.00             0.00
 Mean Dep Var                  0.177             0.198             0.163              0.24             0.494          0.0558         0.218            0.075
 Number of
                                 62                62                62                62                62              62            62               62
 countries
 Fixed effects                  YES               YES               YES               YES               YES            YES            YES              YES

Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                               38
Appendix A: Countries covered by the WJP Rule of Law Index

Country                         Year               Country          Year
Argentina                       2009               Mexico           2009
Australia                       2009               Morocco          2009
Austria                         2009               Netherlands      2009
Bangladesh                      2011               New Zealand      2011
Belgium                         2011               Nigeria          2009
Brazil                          2011               Norway           2011
Bulgaria                        2009               Pakistan         2009
Cambodia                        2011               Peru             2009
Cameroon                        2011               Philippines      2009
Canada                          2009               Poland           2009
Chile                           2011               Romania          2011
China                           2011               Russia           2011
Colombia                        2009               Senegal          2011
Croatia                         2009               Singapore        2009
Czech Republic                  2011               South Africa     2009
Dominican                       2009               South Korea      2009
El Salvador                     2009               Spain            2009
Estonia                         2011               Sweden           2009
Ethiopia                        2011               Thailand         2009
France                          2009               Turkey           2009
Germany                         2011               UAE              2011
Ghana                           2009               Uganda           2011
Guatemala                       2011               Ukraine          2011
Hong Kong                       2011               United Kingdom   2011
India                           2009               United States    2011
Indonesia                       2009               Venezuela        2011
Iran                            2011
Italy                           2011
Jamaica                         2011
Japan                           2009
Kazakhstan                      2011
Kenya                           2009
Kyrgyzstan                      2011
Lebanon                         2011
Malaysia                        2011




                                         39
