                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE EFFECTS OF “GIRL-FRIENDLY” SCHOOLS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE BRIGHT SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM IN BURKINA FASO

                                          Harounan Kazianga
                                              Dan Levy
                                           Leigh L. Linden
                                              Matt Sloan

                                         Working Paper 18115
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18115


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012



 This paper is based on an evaluation of the BRIGHT program funded by the Millennium Challenge
 Corporation (MCC), a U.S. government agency. We are grateful to several officials at MCC, including
 Sophia van der Bijl, Malik Chaka, Sophia Sahaf, and Franck Wiebe, for their help throughout the project.
 We are also grateful to the many people in Burkina Faso who were instrumental in making this study
 possible, including Michel Kabore (USAID) and several Ministry of Education officials who allowed
 us to interview them and gave us access to the application data, a key source of data. We also thank
 staff members at the four implementing agencies (Plan International, CRS, TinTua, and FAWE) for
 the information they provided to us, in particular to Fritz Foster (Plan International), Makasa Kabongo
 (chief of party, BRIGHT project), and Debra Shomberg (CRS country director). This study would
 not have been possible without the work and commitment of the many people who collected data in
 the evaluation. Collecting school and household data in almost 300 rural villages in Burkina Faso was
 an important and challenging task in this study. We are particularly grateful to Jean Pierre Sawadogo,
 Robert Ouedraogo, and Pam Zahonogo at the University of Ouagadougou for their commitment, hard
 work, advice, and leadership in the data collection process. We would like to thank Ama Baafra Abeberese,
 Jesse Antilles-Hughes, Joel Smith, and Ama Takyi for excellent research assistance. Finally, we would
 also like to thank many people who gave us insightful comments on the research, including Peter Schochet,
 Anu Rangarajan, and seminar participants at APPAM, Harvard Kennedy School, Mathematica Policy
 Research, MCC, SREE, and USAID. Corresponding author: Linden, leigh.linden@austin.utexas.edu.
 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2012 by Harounan Kazianga, Dan Levy, Leigh L. Linden, and Matt Sloan. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of “Girl-Friendly” Schools: Evidence from the BRIGHT School Construction
Program in Burkina Faso
Harounan Kazianga, Dan Levy, Leigh L. Linden, and Matt Sloan
NBER Working Paper No. 18115
May 2012
JEL No. I24,I25,I28,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate the causal effects of a program that constructed high quality “girl-friendly” primary schools
in Burkina Faso, using a regression discontinuity design 2.5 years after the program started. We find
that the program increased enrollment of all children between the ages of 5 and 12 by 20 percentage
points and increased their test scores by 0.45 standard deviations. The change in test scores for those
children caused to attend school by the program is 2.2 standard deviations. We also find that the program
was particularly effective for girls, increasing their enrollment rate by 5 percentage points more than
boys’, although this did not translate into a differential effect on test scores. Disentangling the effects
of school access from the unique characteristics of the new schools, we find that the unique characteristics
were responsible for a 13 percentage point increase in enrollment and 0.35 standard deviations in test
scores, while simply providing a school increased enrollment by 26.5 percentage points and test scores
by 0.323 standard deviations. The unique characteristics of the school account for the entire difference
in the treatment effect by gender.


Harounan Kazianga                                    Leigh L. Linden
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Oklahoma State University                            The Univesrity of Texas at Austin
Business 324                                         2225 Speedway
Stillwater, OK 74078                                 BRB 1.116, C3100
harounan.kazianga@okstate.edu                        Austin, Texas 78712
                                                     and NBER
Dan Levy                                             leigh.linden@austin.utexas.edu
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University                                   Matt Sloan
79 JFK Street                                        Mathematica Policy Research
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  1100 1st Street, NE, 12th Floor
dan_levy@harvard.edu                                 Washington, DC 20002-4221
                                                     MSloan@Mathematica-Mpr.com
I. Introduction

Governments and donor agencies around the world have implemented several strategies to

increase enrollment and close gender disparities in education. However, while primary school

enrollment levels are increasing globally (UN, 2008a), enrollment rates and the gender gap in

enrollment remain stubbornly low in many countries. For example, 113 countries failed to meet

the Millennium Development Goal for gender equity by 2005, and of these, only 18 are

considered to be “on track” to achieve it by 2015. Geographically, these problem countries are

disproportionately located in Sub-Saharan Africa, Oceania, and Western Asia (UN, 2008b).

       From an economic perspective, a key issue to understand is the underlying household

decision surrounding the investment in an individual child’s human capital through the

participation in primary school. While there are many possible determinants of these choices,

infrastructure has been hypothesized as a major factor. In many parts of the world schools may

simply be inaccessible, but also, given gender divergent cultural preferences and opportunity

costs, the existing schools may better serve the needs of boys than girls. This paper examines the

effects of high quality, “girl-friendly” schools by assessing the effects of the Burkinabé Response

to Improve Girls’ Chances to Succeed (BRIGHT) school construction program, which placed

relatively well-resourced schools with a number of amenities directed at encouraging the

enrollment of girls in 132 rural villages in Burkina Faso. Amenities included inputs such as

separate latrines for boys and girls, canteens, take-home rations and textbooks, and “soft”

components such as a mobilization campaign, literacy training, and capacity building among

local partners.

       The difficulty in estimating the effect of school construction on schooling outcomes is

that communities with schools may differ from those without schools in ways that both affect the



                                               ‐1‐
outcomes of interest and are difficult to measure. However, for the BRIGHT program, the

Ministry of Education scored each of the 293 villages that requested a school, based on the

villages’ claims about the number of primary school-aged girls that would be likely to attend a

school both from the village under consideration as well as neighboring villages. Since the

Ministry then assigned schools to the highest ranking villages based on this score, we are able to

leverage the official rules for assigning BRIGHT schools to villages to evaluate the effects of the

program on enrollment and test scores using a regression discontinuity design.

       Additionally, because the scores used to rank the villages prove to be unrelated to the

actual outcomes observed for each village (most likely because the original claims were

inaccurate), our design has the added advantage that the villages directly around the discontinuity

closely resemble the other villages in the sample, minimizing the normal concerns of

generalizability associated with regression discontinuity designs. In fact, as we show below, the

treatment effects estimated for the regression discontinuity design are always similar to the

average differences observed between villages selected for the program and those not selected.

       Overall, the construction of schools with girl-friendly amenities proves to be a successful

strategy for improving enrollment and test scores for all children three years after the start of the

program. The impact of BRIGHT on enrollment was an improvement of 20 percentage points for

all children. This change in enrollment is also associated with large changes in test scores. The

program improved test scores for all children by 0.45 standard deviations on a test that covered

math and French subjects, and for those children caused to attend school by the program, test

scores increased by 2.2 standard deviations. The effects are consistent across both subjects.




                                                ‐2‐
Consistent with these results, we find reductions in children’s engagement across a range of

household activities.2

        With respect to the program’s focus on gender, we find the schools were successful at

targeting the enrollment of girls. It increases their enrollment by 5 percentage points more than

boys. However, we do not find that the higher enrollment rates led to a differential impact on test

scores for all children by gender—boys and girls test scores increased by the same amount.

        Finally, using both the regression discontinuity design and the fact that assignment to the

set of villages selected for treatment seems largely random, we estimate the individual effects of

the unique characteristics of the BRIGHT schools relative to the impact of providing a traditional

school alone. All three estimation strategies yield consistent results, suggesting that these “girl-

friendly” amenities increase enrollment by 13 percentage points above the 26.5 percentage point

effect of providing a regular school, and increase test scores for all children in the village by 0.35

standard deviations, over the 0.33 standard deviation effect of providing a non-BRIGHT school.

We also find the BRIGHT amenities account for the entire difference in treatment effects

observed between boys and girls.

        Our work builds on a large literature investigating the determinants of school enrollment

and attendance. This includes the investigation of the cost of education, including scholarships

(Kremer et al. 2009), direct incentives (for example, Schultz, 2004; Barrera-Osorio, 2011),

school fees (Barrera-Osorio, 2007) as well as changes in the quality of schools (Banerjee et al.,

2007; He et al., 2008, Borkum et al., 2012). More directly, our work complements existing work

on the effects of the presence of a school on both the overall level of enrollment and existing

gender gaps in enrollment. The large changes in overall enrollment that we observe confirm

2
 Our findings related to child work are in contrast to those of de Hoop and Rosati (2012) who argue that the
BRIGHT program increased children’s participation in these activities.


                                                    ‐3‐
studies that investigate the effects of school construction (Duflo, 2001; Andrabi et al., 2010) as

well as existing evidence that the characteristics of schools can affect the relative participation of

girls (Burde and Linden, 2011). Our findings are inconsistent with existing cross-section studies

that demonstrate a low elasticity of enrollment in the distance to the nearest school (for example,

Filmer, 2007).

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II characterizes the context of

education in Burkina Faso and describes the BRIGHT program in more detail. Section III

presents and assesses our research design. Section IV shows our verification of the internal

validity of the research design, and Section V presents the main results. In Section VI, we offer

estimates that attempt to disentangle the effects of providing access to a school versus providing

access to a school with the unique characteristics of the BRIGHT program. Section VII contains

estimates of the cost-effectiveness of the intervention. Finally, we present our conclusions in

Section VIII.



II. Burkina Faso and the BRIGHT Program

A. Education in Burkina Faso

Households in Burkina Faso can enroll their children in primary school free of charge, although

in practice they often are asked to support some school-related direct expenditures in addition to

the opportunity costs of their children’s time. Officially, children are supposed to attend primary

school between the ages of 6 and 12, although late entries and grade repetitions suggest that

many children complete primary school after they turn 12. Students attend primary school for six

years, and a national exam at the end of the 6th grade determines advancement to the secondary




                                                 ‐4‐
level. By law, schooling is compulsory until age 16. However, due to various factors including

an inadequate number of schools, this law has not been enforced, especially in the rural areas.

       Primary school enrollment rates in Burkina Faso remain some the lowest in the world,

despite sustained efforts by the government over the past few years. At the time of independence

from France in 1960, school enrollment rates were around 6.7 percent (Kobiane, 2006).

Enrollment rates gradually increased in subsequent years, growing from 12 percent in 1970 to 56

percent in 2005 (UNESCO 2009). During the same period, the primary school completion rate

grew from 7 percent to 30 percent. Nevertheless, Burkina Faso’s primary school enrollment rate

remains very low, even by African standards. Moreover, these national figures also do not show

the large disparities that exist between rural and urban areas. There are also marked differences

in school participation between boys and girls. The net enrollment rate was estimated in 2003 to

be 42 percent for boys and 29 percent for girls (Back et al., 2003).

       To some extent, the low school participation can be attributed to a lack of schools,

especially in the remote rural areas. However, it is well documented that even in villages where a

primary school is available, a sizable fraction of school-age children are out of school at any

given time (see for example, Akresh et al., forthcoming; Kazianga et al., 2012). It is apparent that

placing school buildings in a village (or reducing distance to a school) may not by itself be

enough to induce enrollment of all children, let alone enrollment of all girls of school age.

       Prior to the BRIGHT program, the government initiated the 10-year Basic Education

Development Plan (PDDEB) that started in 2002 and was supposed to last until 2011. The stated

objective of the PDDEB was to “provide quality education for all”, especially in the rural areas.

Accordingly, the program sought to expand basic education infrastructures as well as to improve

quality (Ki and Ouedraogo, 2006). PDDEB structured its activities around increasing access to



                                                ‐5‐
education, improving education quality, and capacity building. Its activities to increase access

included the construction and restoration of schools, and several initiatives to promote girls’

education. PDDEB operated in 20 provinces across the country, including the 10 provinces of the

BRIGHT program. Partly because of PDDEB, the average number of schools per province

increased between 1998 and 2004, and more than doubled in BRIGHT provinces during the

same period (Levy et al, 2009).



B. The BRIGHT Program

The BRIGHT program aimed to improve education outcomes of children in rural villages in

Burkina Faso. The program was financed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) and

implemented by a consortium of NGOs under the supervision of USAID (Levy et al, 2009). The

program started in 2005 and implemented an integrated package of education interventions in

132 rural villages. Along with school construction, the program provided incentives to children

to attend school and a mechanism for mobilizing community support for education in general

and for girls’ education in particular.

           The construction scheme itself included many amenities that are not common in public

elementary schools in Burkina Faso, especially in the rural areas. The prototype school included

three classrooms,3 housing for three teachers, separate latrines for boys and girls, and a borehole

equipped with a manual pump that served as a source of clean water. The construction also

included two multipurpose halls, one office, and one storage room. All the program schools were

equipped with student desks, teacher desks, chairs, and metal bookshelves, as well as a




3
    Prior to the completion of the schools, temporary schools were operated in each location.


                                                          ‐6‐
playground. We show in Section IV below that the BRIGHT schools were significantly different

from other schools in that there were much more likely to have these amenities.

        The complementary interventions targeted students and their parents, as well as teachers.

All students (boys and girls) were eligible for school meals each day they attended school. Girls

were eligible for take-home rations4 conditional on 90 percent attendance each month.5 Students

also received school kits and textbooks. Interventions that targeted parents directly included an

extensive information campaign on the potential benefits of education, and particularly of girls’

education; an adult literacy training program for mothers; and capacity building among local

officials (Levy et al, 2009). Consistent with the goal of creating a girl-friendly environment, the

program sought to place more female teachers in program schools. Finally, teachers and other

officials from the ministry of education received gender-sensitivity training.



III. Research Design

A. Allocation of BRIGHT Schools

Faced with the challenge of selecting individual villages to receive BRIGHT schools, the

Ministry of Education instituted a process designed to ensure that the schools would be allocated

in an objective manner according to a predetermined set of criteria. This process was

administered in a consistent manner, with all records retained to ensure transparency.

        Individual departments were allowed to nominate villages to be considered for a school.

The goal was to identify villages that could benefit from a school because of low female

enrollment rates and an interest in sending more girls to school. In total, 293 villages were


4
 The take-home rations consisted of 5 kilograms of rice and 0.5 liter of cooking oil per student.
5
 Bundy et al. (2009) provide a recent review of school feeding programs in low-income countries. For an evaluation
of school feeding programs in Burkina Faso, see Kazianga et al. (2012).


                                                      ‐7‐
nominated from 10 provinces and 49 departments. After villages were nominated, the allocation

followed a four-step process:

   1. First, each village was visited by a staff member of the Ministry of Education, who

       assisted the village in completing the survey which is described in detail in Table A8. The

       form focused on collecting information on the number of girls who would be served if a

       school were placed in that village. This includes the number of girls below the age of 12

       and the number of primary school-aged girls in school, as well as information on the

       distance to the nearest villages and schools.

   2. Once collected, this information was processed so that each village received a numerical

       score. The score was largely a function of the total number of children that could be

       served by the school. This included children in the village in question, with additional

       points provided for there being girls in the village who already attended school.

       Additional points were also awarded for having other nearby villages for the school to

       draw on, with points deducted for remoteness. The greatest weight was given to the

       number of girls in the village and in nearby villages as well as the number of girls already

       in school within the applicant village.

   3. Within each department, the schools were then ranked based on this score; villages

       ranked in the top half received a BRIGHT school. In the event of an odd number of

       villages, the median village did not receive a school.

   4. If a department only nominated one village, that village was selected to receive a school.

       Only two departments nominated a single village.

       The individual components of the scoring survey are provided in Table A8 of the

Appendix. In general, the survey counted the number of primary school-aged girls and students



                                                 ‐8‐
in the village under consideration as well as in villages within 3km.6 In practice, the survey was

completed by representatives from the village with assistance from an enumerator from the

Ministry of Education and the answers represent the “best guess” of the representatives,

particularly with regard to the number of girls in surrounding villages.7 They did not, for

example, visit each nearby village or conduct household surveys of the villages in question. The

result is that the relationship between every outcome of interest—including whether or not a

village has a school—and the assigned scores is extremely small and usually statistically

indistinguishable from zero across a wide range of specifications. Compared to the

generalizability of most regression discontinuity designs, this presents a distinct advantage,

because the villages near the discontinuity have similar characteristics to those further away from

the discontinuity. And, in fact, we demonstrate for each outcome that the treatment effect

estimated using the regression discontinuity design is similar to the treatment effect estimated by

just comparing the average outcomes by whether or not a village was selected.

    This process generated a set of 138 villages that should have received a BRIGHT school.

However, not all villages selected to receive a school could receive a school, because in some

cases the location proved inappropriate (for example, if there was a lack of a suitable water

source). In total, 127 villages that were initially selected to receive a school did receive one; in

addition five villages not initially selected to receive a school based on this process did receive

one. While we were unable to learn the official rule for determining how schools were



6
  The score was adjusted slightly if the nearest surrounding villages were far away or if there was already a nearby
school. However, as shown in Table A8, these adjustments were minor compared to the number of girls falling into
each category.
7
  In conversations about the scoring process, officials themselves expressed significant doubts about the accuracy of
the information. The process was instead viewed as the best solution to objectively and expeditiously award the
BRIGHT program to villages in a context in which the Ministry of Education had little current information on the
set of villages that had applied to the program.


                                                        ‐9‐
reallocated if they were not assigned to a village selected through the scoring process.8 So, in

what follows, the number of schools that violated the assignment rule is so small that we ignore

this noncompliance.

B. Evaluation Design

The selection process used to allocate the BRIGHT schools to villages allows us to use a

regression discontinuity design to assess the causal effect of the BRIGHT schools on child

outcomes. Ignoring the information about which villages were not able to receive a school, we

replicate the original assignment rule and calculate the lowest score for each village receiving a

BRIGHT school in each department. We then rescale the cutoff scores so that they coincide at

zero by constructing a variable,          _        , which is equal to the score given to each village less

the cutoff score for the village’s department.

        We then estimate the following equation via Ordinary Least Square:

                                                               _          )+δ                             (1)

In this equation,      indicates the individual child in household              in village . The variable

represents the outcome of interest (test scores, enrollment, attendance, etc.) and the variable

is a vector of child and household characteristics. The variables                 and      _        relate to the

relative score, with      being an indicator variable for whether or not a village was at or above the

cutoff score in the respective department and                  _         ) being a polynomial expansion of the

relative score itself. In this model, the coefficient              provides an estimate of the discontinuity. As

we show below, the relationship between villages’ scores and any of the children’s

characteristics or outcomes is so small that we have to make two accommodations in the

8
  Four of the five villages that received a school in contravention of the process were the next highest-ranked
villages. This is consistent with a strategy of reallocating schools to the next highest-ranked school based on the
survey, but we cannot be certain.


                                                      ‐ 10 ‐
estimation procedures. First, in the regression results presented in the tables, we measure the

relative score in units of 10,000 points. Second, while we show that the results are robust to a

wide variety of specifications, we use a linear specification for the polynomial,                          _             ),

as our preferred specification.

        We also must take into account the fact that the behavior and academic abilities of the

children in each village are likely to be correlated. Failing to take this into account would likely

lead us to underestimate the standard error of the treatment effects (Bertrand et al., 2004). This

would lead us to over-reject the null hypotheses and too frequently declare the treatment effects

to be statistically significant. As a result, we cluster the individual error terms at the village level

using the standard Huber-White estimator.

        Finally, we also conduct a simple exercise to check the location of the discontinuity for

our primary outcome variables in Figures 2 through 6. Following Card et al (2008) and Hansen

(2000), we estimate the following specification for values of              within the range of         _             :

                                                         _                                                     (2)

We then calculate the value of           that maximizes the         for each model, resulting in a consistent

estimate of the point of the discontinuity.



C. Survey Administration

The survey was conducted in spring 2008. Of the original 293 applicant villages, 287 villages9

were included in the data set used for the analysis. For each village, a census was conducted of


9
  The survey company was unable to provide data for four of the villages due to logistical issues such as not being
able to locate the village based on the information in the application forms. We also dropped the two departments
that only chose to nominate a single village, both because treatment of these villages was guaranteed under the
assignment process and because the relative score variable required for inclusion in the analysis is undefined in the
case in which only a single village is included in a department.


                                                       ‐ 11 ‐
all households with children between the ages of 5 and 12. From this list, 30 households were

randomly sampled, with selection stratified by whether or not the family has access to a beast of

burden. This yielded a total sample of 8,432 households and 17,970 children.

       The survey comprised three components. First, each household completed a household

questionnaire. This included socio-demographic questions about the household. It also included

an enumeration of all children between the ages of 5 and 12 living in the household and

questions about their educational status and history. Second, each child in the household was

asked to complete a short test in math and French. The individual questions were taken from the

official government textbook and focused on competencies from grade 1. Third, we conducted a

school survey of local schools and, during the visit, checked the attendance of children the

household had identified as being enrolled in school.



D. Description of the Sample

Table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics of children in the 287 villages that we use for

the subsequent analysis. Panel A contains the characteristics of the children’s households while

Panel B contains the characteristic of the children themselves. The first column contains the

overall average characteristics of all of the villages. On average, children live in households with

a head who is 48 years old and who is almost always male (98.2 percent). Almost all of the

children’s households have floors made out of basic material (usually dirt) and 55 percent of

them have basic roofing material as well (thatch). Turning to asset ownership, 75 percent of

children live in a household with a radio, 19 percent with a phone, and 80 percent with a watch.

The average child’s household has 1.5 bicycles and claims to own 5.7 cows. Fifty-eight percent

of children live in a household that is Muslim (as opposed to animists and a very small number



                                               ‐ 12 ‐
of Christians). Turning to the children themselves, the average age is 8.8 years. Just over half the

children are male (53.4 percent). For almost all of the children (88.4 percent), the head of the

household was their parent.

         Figure 1 provides an estimate of the distribution of the relative score variable. While the

range is large, the bulk of the distribution falls within the range of -750 to 750. To identify the

effect of the BRIGHT schools, the regression discontinuity design relies on villages that are

close to the cutoff in treatment assignment. This is a valid local estimate for those schools right

around the cutoff, but if these villages are extremely different from villages that are farther away

from the cutoff, then the resulting estimates may not be generalizable to the other villages. To

check for differences, we separately estimate the average characteristics for villages that have a

relative score of less than -40 and great than 40 in column 2, and for villages that have a relative

score that falls between -40 and 40 in column 3. (For reference, -40 and 40 are marked in Figure

1 by vertical dashed lines.) The villages whose characteristics are estimated in column 3 are the

ones that drive the estimates of the causal effects presented below. The difference between these

two groups of villages is presented in column 4, with standard errors clustered at the village

level.

         Consistent with the randomness inherent in the scoring process described in Section

III.A, the villages near the discontinuity are very similar to the other villages in the sample—

suggesting that, in this study, the criteria of being near the cutoff is not very restrictive and that

our estimates should be readily generalizable. None of the differences are statistically significant

at even the 10 percent level, and all are small in magnitude. The fact that these differences are

small suggests that villages near the cutoff are similar to ones not close to the cutoff and that the




                                                ‐ 13 ‐
estimates resulting from a comparison of villages close to the cutoff will generalize to the other

villages.



IV. Assessment of Internal Validity of Research Design

A. Treatment Delivery Differential

In order to implement the regression discontinuity approach, assignment to treatment should

have varied discontinuously at the cutoff point. According to the assignment rule, within each

department, villages with a relative score at or above zero were to be selected to receive a

BRIGHT school. Therefore, if this rule was followed, at a relative score of zero, there should be

a discrete jump in the probability that a village received a BRIGHT school.

        Figure 2 presents nonparametric estimates of a village’s probability of receiving a

BRIGHT school as a function of its relative score. The probability of receiving a BRIGHT

school is shown on the left vertical axis and the relative score is shown on the horizontal axis.

The solid line presents the results of a nonparametric regression, assuming a discontinuity in the

probability of receiving a school at a relative score of zero, while the dashed line presents results

assuming no discontinuity. In addition to these nonparametric plots, the dotted line represents the

R2 statistic test described in the methodology section. The circled point is the maximum value of

the plotted values and the associated number indicates the maximand.

        The solid line shows a sharp jump in the probability of receiving a BRIGHT school at a

relative score of zero. For villages with a relative score below zero, the probability of receiving a

BRIGHT school is for the most part zero, with a few low, nonzero probabilities reflecting the

small number of villages that were not supposed to receive a BRIGHT school according to the

assignment rule but did get one. At the relative score of zero, the probability of receiving a



                                                ‐ 14 ‐
BRIGHT school increases sharply from essentially zero to over 80 percent. Thus, by and large,

the vast majority of villages with a relative score equal to or above the cutoff point of zero

received a BRIGHT school while villages with a relative score below the cutoff point did not.

Even without assuming a discontinuity at a relative score of zero, there is a noticeably sharp

change in the probability of receiving a BRIGHT school between the relative scores of -100 and

50, around zero, as shown by the dashed line. Finally, the dotted line displays the R value

resulting from the estimation of Equation 2, assuming a discontinuity at the respective point.

Consistent with treatment assignment occurring at zero, the maximum value occurs for a

regression that assumes a discontinuity at a relative score of -1.

       In Table 2, we estimate the discontinuity in the probability of receiving a BRIGHT

school using different parametric models. The results from our preferred model, the one that

includes a linear function of the relative score, are shown in column 1. The results in column 2

only include the indicator variable for the relative score, while those in column 3 are from a

model that includes a quadratic polynomial in the relative score. In column 4, we present the

results from a model that includes both a linear term in the relative score and an interaction term

between the relative score and an indicator variable of whether or not a village should have been

selected to receive a BRIGHT school according to the assignment rule. Column 5 provides the

estimated marginal effects from the preferred specification within a probit model. In column 6,

we present the results from a model similar to that in column 2, but for which the sample is

restricted to those villages with a relative score close to the cutoff score of zero, in particular,

between -40 and 40.

       The results from the preferred specification in column 1 imply that villages with a

relative score equal to or above the cutoff score of zero were about 87.8 percentage points more



                                                ‐ 15 ‐
likely to receive a BRIGHT school than those villages with relative scores below the cutoff

value. This is consistent with the nonparametric estimates from Figure 2. This estimate is

statistically significant at the 1 percent level and remains essentially invariant across the different

specifications, including the simple comparison of means in column 2. The largest estimate is

92.4 percentage points from the probit model and the smallest is 87.4 percentage points from the

quadratic model, both of which are very close to the estimate of 87.8 percentage points from the

preferred specification.

       Also of note is the fact that the coefficients on the relative score variables are mostly

statistically insignificant. The only statistically significant one is the coefficient on the relative

score in the probit model in column 5, but its magnitude is too small to be of any practical

relevance. The relative scores in Table 2 and successive tables are measured per 10,000 students.

Hence, in column 5, the coefficient on the relative score of 8.253 implies that a village would

need an extra 10,000 students to increase its probability of receiving a BRIGHT school by 8.253

percentage points. We have also performed these estimations using models that include higher

order polynomials in the relative score, up to a quintic, and the results remain the same. The

absence of a correlation between the relative score and the probability of receiving a BRIGHT

school implies that, while the assignment rule was based on the relative score, the noisiness of

the scoring process described in Section III.A made the assignment of schools essentially

random.




                                                ‐ 16 ‐
B. Differences in Educational Infrastructure

1. Existence of a School

While the BRIGHT program directly constructed a school in the selected villages, villages not

selected by the program were also eligible to receive schools through the normal programs run

by the Ministry of Education, such as the PDDEB program described in Section II.A. As a result,

we first ask if the BRIGHT program increased the probability that a village had any school at all

at the time of our survey.

         In Table 3, we use our preferred linear model to estimate the effect of the BRIGHT

program on the probability that a village has any school, including schools not provided through

the BRIGHT program. Column 1 presents this estimate for 2008, the year in which the follow-up

survey was conducted. Columns 2 through 6 present this estimate for each of the five years

preceding 2008. In column 7, we estimate the effect on the number of years a school had been in

a village starting in 2003, the year in which most of the oldest children in the sample would have

started school.10

         The estimates in column 1 indicate that being selected for a BRIGHT school increased

the probability of having any school in 2008 by about 32 percentage points. The results in

columns 2 and 3 show that there was no significant difference between the selected and non-

selected villages in the existence of a school in 2003 or 2004 prior to the BRIGHT program. In

2005 when the BRIGHT program started, provisional schools were created in the villages

selected to receive a BRIGHT school in anticipation of the construction of the BRIGHT schools.

Consistent with this, as indicated by the results in column 4, starting in 2005 the selected villages


10
   Note that the sample size in column 1 is 287 villages, compared to 270 villages in the other columns. This is due
to the fact that we were unable to obtain data on the history of the schools in 17 of the villages and therefore have
excluded them from the regressions in columns 2 to 7.


                                                       ‐ 17 ‐
were 37.3 percentage points more likely than the non-selected villages to have a school. This

differential grew to 56.3 percentage points in 2006 (column 5) as more BRIGHT schools were

constructed, and fell slightly to 43.3 percentage points in 2007 (column 6).

       The last row of Table 3 shows that there was a notable increase in the probability of the

existence of a school in the non-selected villages over this period. This probability increased

steadily from about 6 percent in 2003 to about 60 percent in 2008. Thus, at the same time that the

BRIGHT schools were being constructed in the selected villages, other schools were being

constructed in the non-selected villages. The treatment differential is therefore a combination of

two effects: the effect of having a BRIGHT school versus having no school at all, and the effect

of having a BRIGHT school versus having a regular government school. In terms of the timing

of the receipt of a school, the results in column 7 imply that villages selected to receive a

BRIGHT school tended to receive a school about 1.7 years earlier than the non-selected villages.

       The results in Table 3 also show that, as with inclusion in the BRIGHT program, there is

little correlation between a village’s relative score and its probability of having a school. All the

coefficients on the relative score variable are small and statistically insignificant, underscoring

the idea that assignment to receive a BRIGHT school was effectively random due to the

noisiness of the relative score. To check the robustness of the estimates in Table 3, we performed

the estimation for the probability of a village having a school in 2008 using all the different

models presented in Table 2. The results of these regressions are reported in Table A1 in the

Appendix and demonstrate that the estimates are robust across the different specifications.

       In Figure 3, we carry out nonparametric estimations similar to the ones in Figure 2, but

look at the relationship between whether the village has any school—including schools not

provided through the BRIGHT program—and the relative score. The layout of Figure 3 is similar



                                                ‐ 18 ‐
to that of Figure 2. Consistent with the regression estimates in Table 3, Figure 3 shows that

villages with a relative score equal to or above the cutoff value of zero were more likely to have

a school. The solid line, which assumes a discontinuity at zero, shows a discrete jump in the

probability of having a school at a relative score of zero, although this jump is not as sharp as the

jump in the probability of having a BRIGHT school in Figure 2, due to the increase in the

construction of government schools in the non-selected villages. The dashed line, which does not

assume a discontinuity at zero, still shows a noticeable change in the probability that a village

had a school around the cutoff score of zero. Finally, the maximum R value occurs at

-16, which is again consistent with the discontinuity at zero.

       When we look instead at the probability of having a school in 2004, the year before

assignment to receive a BRIGHT school began, we find little evidence of a difference in the

probability of having a school between the selected and non-selected villages. The results of this

analysis are shown in Figure 4. The solid line, which assumes a discontinuity in the probability at

a relative score of zero, suggests that the selected villages actually had a lower probability of

having a school in 2004 than the non-selected villages. However, this estimate is very

inconsistent and changes depending on the bandwidth used in the nonparametric estimation. In

addition, if we do not assume a discontinuity at zero, the dashed line shows that there is hardly

any difference in the probability of having a school in 2004 between the selected and non-

selected villages. This is consistent with what is observed in column 3 of Table 3. Corroborating

the lack of a discontinuity at a relative score of zero, the dotted line shows that the maximum R2

occurs in a regression that assumes a discontinuity at a relative score of 240, which is

substantially above zero.




                                                ‐ 19 ‐
2. School Characteristics

We have demonstrated that villages selected to receive a BRIGHT school were more likely to

have a school than those that were not selected. We now check if, apart from being more likely

to have a school, the children in selected villages had access to schools of better quality. In Table

4, we compare the characteristics of the schools to which children have access in the selected and

non-selected villages. School characteristics have been broken down into three categories: girl-

friendly characteristics in Panel A, school resources in Panel B, and teacher characteristics in

Panel C.11 In calculating these average characteristics, villages without schools are assigned a

value of zero for each characteristic that is a count variable. For the categorical variables,

villages without schools are assigned a value of 0, corresponding to “no,” or 1, corresponding to

“yes,” depending on the nature of the question. (For example, villages without a school are

recorded as having insufficient textbooks and desks.) In column 1, we take the average of each

characteristic over all villages not selected for the BRIGHT program (those with a relative score

below zero). In column 2 we perform a similar calculation but only for the non-selected villages

that have a school. In column 3, we take the average of each characteristic over all villages

selected for the BRIGHT program. In column 4, we estimate the average difference in each

characteristic between the selected and non-selected villages using our preferred linear model

depicted in Equation 1.

         The results in Table 4 indicate that, in addition to increasing the probability that a child

was exposed to a BRIGHT school, the program also increased the relative quality of the schools

to which the child has access. As columns 1 and 2 demonstrate, the majority of the non-selected

11
  The estimates are performed at the child level. For the count variables, if a village has more than one school, we
add up the values for all the schools in the village. For the categorical variables, we assign villages with more than
one school a value corresponding to having the positive characteristic if at least one school in the village possesses
that positive characteristic.


                                                        ‐ 20 ‐
villages do not have girl-friendly characteristics, have fewer school resources, and generally have

fewer teachers (particularly female teachers) with less experience. Of the selected villages,

children had access to schools with a higher prevalence of girl-friendly characteristics: 84

percent of schools have a feeding program, 85 percent have toilets, and the vast majority have

gender-segregated toilets. Similarly, these schools are less likely to report shortages of resources;

they also report better infrastructure as well as more and more experienced teachers.

        Column 4 puts these differences into the regression discontinuity framework by

estimating the differences at the discontinuity using Equation 1. The results are similar to the

overall differences in characteristics. The selected villages are 52.6 percentage points more likely

to have a feeding program, about 31.8 percentage points more likely to have a dry rations

program, and only slightly more likely (about 7 percentage points) to have a day care program.

The selected villages are also more likely to have an adequate supply of school resources. They

are about 32 percentage points less likely than the non-selected villages to have an insufficient

number of textbooks, 69 percentage points less likely to have an insufficient number of desks,

and 61 percentage points more likely to have water supply. Besides having more resources than

the non-selected villages, the selected villages have resources of higher quality. For instance,

they report having 1.8 more usable rooms and 2.6 more legible blackboards than the non-selected

villages. In addition, the selected villages have almost one additional female teacher, more

experienced teachers, and more teachers who underwent gender-sensitivity training than the non-

selected villages. All of these differences are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

        We have also estimated differences in the characteristics of schools attended by children

in the village, including schools located outside the village. The results of this analysis are




                                                 ‐ 21 ‐
reported in Table A2 in the Appendix. Overall, the estimated results are similar to those

presented in Table 4.



C. Internal Validity

The internal validity of our results hinges on one crucial assumption—that except for receipt of

the treatment, all other characteristics of children that could affect the outcomes of interest vary

continuously at the point in which receipt of the BRIGHT program is discontinuous. This

continuity condition guarantees that the outcomes for children just below the cutoff would have

been similar to those just above the cutoff in the absence of the treatment. This, in turn, allows us

to causally attribute any differences that do exist to the receipt of the treatment (Lee and

Lemieux, 2010).

       Local continuity implies that villages that are close to but on different sides of the

threshold should have similar potential outcomes. These villages (including households and

children living there) should be comparable both in terms of observable and unobservable

characteristics. Hence, one could test for balance (similarity) among the observable

characteristics. The tests consist in running the regression discontinuity model while replacing

the outcome variables with household and children characteristics. Unlike the outcome variable,

however, each characteristic should have an estimated treatment effect statistically and

economically indistinguishable from zero, if observables are balanced just above and below the

cutoff. The regressions results are shown in Table 5.

       Panel A contains results for household characteristics, including characteristics of the

head of the household (gender, age, and education), religion, language, and ethnicity. Panel B

presents results pertaining to the wealth of the household, in particular, the possession of various



                                                ‐ 22 ‐
assets, namely a floor, a roof, phones, watches, vehicles, and cows. Panel C reports results for

children’s characteristics, including the number of children in the household and their age,

gender, and relationship to the head of the household. The null hypothesis is that, after

conditioning on the relative test score, selection into BRIGHT is not significantly correlated with

the dependent variables in this table.

       Our estimation results indicate that most of the estimated differences between the

selected and non-selected villages are statistically and practically insignificant. Because of the

large sample size, a few of the differences are statistically significant, but they are too small in

magnitude to be of any practical importance. For instance, the difference in the probability of

having a male head of household is less than 1 percentage point, and the difference in the

probability of a child being the son or daughter of the head of household is less than 2 percentage

points. The largest estimated difference is for the probability of a household speaking Fulfulde,

but this difference is less than 5 percentage points. The results suggest that the assumption that

villages just above and below the cutoff are similar in observables cannot be rejected.



V. Estimated Treatment Effects

A. Enrollment

We now assess the effect of the program on school enrollment. Table 6 compares the enrollment

rates of the children in the villages selected to participate in the BRIGHT program and those in

the non-selected villages. Column 1 presents estimates of the treatment effect using our preferred

model that includes a linear term in the relative score as well as demographic controls and

department fixed effects. The model used in column 2 is similar to that used in column 1, but

does not include demographic controls. In column 3, we look at the simple difference between



                                               ‐ 23 ‐
the students in the selected and non-selected villages while controlling for demographic

characteristics and department fixed effects. The results in column 4 are from a model that

includes a quadratic polynomial in the relative score as well as demographic controls and

department fixed effects. The model used in column 5 is similar to that used in column 1, but

includes an interaction between the relative score, and an indicator variable for whether a village

had a relative score greater than or equal to zero. This allows for a discontinuity in the first

derivative. Column 6 presents the results from our linear specification within a probit model. In

column 7, we report the simple difference between the selected and non-selected villages, while

controlling for department fixed effects, but with the sample restricted to villages with a relative

score around the cutoff score of zero, specifically with a relative score between -40 and 40.

Finally unlike the previous columns, which report self-reported enrollment during the

2007–8 academic year, column 8 presents the estimated effect on whether or not the child was

present in school on the day that the child’s school was visited for surveying.

       The results from our preferred model in Table 6 indicate that the program had a positive

impact on enrollment, with a 20.3 percentage point increase (column 1) in the probability of a

child being enrolled due to the implementation of the program. Excluding the demographic

controls in the model used in column 2 does not change the estimated treatment effect much,

reinforcing the conclusion from Table 5 that villages with relative scores just below and just

above the cutoff are similar in terms of their demographic characteristics. Changing the

specification in columns 3 through 6 also has little impact on the estimated treatment effect, with

all the estimates being very close to our preferred estimate of 20.3 percentage points. In column

7, where we focus narrowly on the villages with relative scores around the cutoff score of zero,

we again obtain an estimate of the treatment effect that is only about 3 percentage points lower



                                               ‐ 24 ‐
than the estimate from our preferred model. The insensitivity of the estimate of the treatment

effect to the different specifications lends credibility to our conclusion that the program

increased school enrollment.

        As another check of our findings, we use the verified enrollment variable instead of the

self-reported one as the dependent variable in column 8. We were able to visit each school only

once to verify directly the presence of children claiming to be enrolled in school. Because of this,

the results using the verified enrollment variable most likely underestimate our treatment effect,

since the single observation likely underestimates total enrollment by omitting absent children.12

Despite this data limitation, however, we obtain a treatment effect of 16.9 percentage points,

which is very close to the estimate of 20.3 percentage points obtained using the self-reported

enrollment variable. We perform the same robustness checks for the verified enrollment variable

as we did for the self-reported measure by estimating the effect of the program on verified

enrollment using all the models in Table 6. The results of this analysis are reported in Table A3

in the Appendix and confirm that the estimates for the verified enrollment variable are robust to

the different regression specifications.

        Nonparametric estimates of the treatment effect presented in Figure 5 reiterate the finding

that the program had a positive effect on enrollment. The layout of Figure 5 is similar to that of

Figures 2 through 4. The variable on the left vertical axis in this case is the probability of a child

being enrolled in school. The solid line, which assumes a discontinuity at a relative score of zero,

shows a sharp jump in the probability of enrollment at zero. This jump is about 20 percentage

12
   The enrollment levels in villages without a school to visit are accurately estimated at zero, since these children
had no school to attend. In villages with schools, the attendance level will be lower than actual enrollment due to
daily absences by students. Since selected villages are more likely to have schools, enrollment measures in these
villages will be too low, on average, while estimated enrollment in the non-selected villages will be more accurate,
on average,. The net effect is that the estimated treatment effect for selected villages based on the observed
attendance measure will underestimate the effect on total enrollment.


                                                       ‐ 25 ‐
points, which is identical to the parametric estimate obtained from our preferred model in Table

6. Even the dashed line, which does not assume a discontinuity at zero, shows a sharp increase in

the probability of enrollment between the relative scores of -50 and 50. Further corroborating the

presence of a discontinuity in the probability of enrollment at the cutoff score of zero, the

maximum R2 occurs for a regression that assumes a discontinuity at a relative score of -1, which

is very close to the cutoff score of zero.

       Finally, because household chores and employment are the often hypothesized

opportunity cost of school participation, we also assessed the degree to which the program

affected children’s participation in range of activities. Table A4 of the appendix shows the

probability of a household reporting that a child is engaged in the specified activity for the

household. Consistent with the increases in enrollment, we find that the program reduces the

fraction of children who are engaged in a wide range of these activities. All of the coefficients

are negative, and except for shopping, are statistically significant at conventional levels. In

results not presented in the manuscript, we also assess the probability that children are engaged

in activities outside of the household (either for remuneration or not), and we find no effect of

the program on these activities.



B. Test Scores

We investigate if the program had a positive effect on students’ test scores in Table 7, which has

a layout similar to that of Table 6. The models used in columns 1 to 5 of Table 7 are identical to

those used in the same columns of Table 6. Column 6 of Table 7, however, contains results from

the preferred linear model but with the sample restricted to villages with a relative score between

-40 and 40, rather than a probit model.



                                               ‐ 26 ‐
       The program was able to increase total test scores by about 0.446 standard deviations

(column 1) as estimated using our preferred linear model. This estimate is robust to changing the

regression specification, as shown by the similarity of the treatment effect estimates in the

different columns of Table 7. In column 7, we estimate the change in test scores for those

children caused to enroll in school by the program, using the standard instrumental variables

specification for the estimation of local average treatment effects, and find that their test scores

increased by 2.2 standard deviations. Nonparametric estimates of the treatment effect presented

in Figure 6, with a layout similar to that of Figure 5, also show a sharp increase in the test score

around the cutoff score of zero. In addition, the maximum R2 occurs for a regression that

assumes a discontinuity at -1, very close to the cutoff score of zero.

       In Table 8, we analyze the effect of the program on performance on the individual

subjects, math and French. All the results in this table are estimated using our preferred model

that includes a linear term in the relative score as well as demographic controls and department

fixed effects. For reference, column 1 reports the results for the total test score from column 1 of

Table 7. Columns 2 through 4 contain results for the math section of the test, while columns 5

through 7 contain results for the French section. For each of these sections, we report results for

the overall test score on that subject in the first column and the results for scores on the easy and

hard questions in the second and third columns, respectively. All questions are from the first-

grade curriculum. The easy questions test the competencies typically taught in the early stages of

the first grade, while the hard questions test the competencies typically taught in the late stages

of the first grade. In math, the easy questions include number recognition and identifying if a

number is greater than or less than another number. The hard questions are simple addition and

subtraction problems. In French, the easy questions relate to being able to identify letters and



                                                ‐ 27 ‐
read words. The hard questions deal with syntax and grammar, and include problems such as

choosing the right words to fit into a sentence.

       There is no statistical difference between the effects of the treatment on the overall scores

for math and French. The program had almost identical effects on performance in both subjects,

increasing the test scores for both subjects by about 0.4 standard deviations (columns 2 and 5).

There is, however, a difference in the treatment effects on the students’ performance on the easy

and hard questions of the tests. The treatment effects on performance on the easy questions are

much larger than the effects on performance on the hard questions. The difference in the

treatment effects on performance on the easy and hard questions is statistically significant at the

1 percent level for both math and French.

       As a further check of our results, we subject the test scores for the individual subjects to

the same robustness tests used for the total test score in Table 7. Tables A4 and A5 in the

Appendix report these results for the math and French tests, respectively. The different

regression specifications yield very similar estimates of the treatment effects for both the math

and French test scores, strengthening the reliability of the estimates presented in Table 8.



C. Disaggregation by Gender

A main goal of the BRIGHT program was to address gender bias in enrollment by making

schools conducive to the education of both boys and girls. We address this question by

investigating whether or not these specially designed schools succeed in improving enrollment

rates for boys and girls equally.

       In Table 9, we present results on variation in the program’s effect by gender. The table

reports the program’s effect on all the outcome variables analyzed in this study (self-reported



                                                   ‐ 28 ‐
enrollment, verified enrollment, total test score, math test score, and French test score) using our

preferred model that includes a linear term in the relative score as well as demographic controls

and department fixed effects. We also include an interaction term between an indicator variable

for whether a village had a relative score greater than or equal to zero and an indicator variable

for whether or not a child is female.

       The program succeeded in improving the enrollment rates of both boys and girls, with

girls’ enrollment increasing more than boys’. From the results for the self-reported enrollment

measure in column 1, a boy in a selected village was 18.1 percentage points more likely to attend

school than a child in a non-selected village, while a girl in a selected village was 22.9

percentage points more likely to attend school than a child in a non-selected village. This

difference of 4.8 percentage points is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. We obtain

similar results using the verified enrollment measure.

       This differential between the enrollment rates of boys and girls, however, does not appear

to translate into a difference in test scores. The results in column 3 suggest that both boys and

girls experienced the same gain of 0.443 standard deviations in their test scores as a result of the

program. We get similar results when the test scores are broken out into the individual subjects,

math and French, in columns 4 and 5.



VI. Access Versus School Characteristics

As explained above, the estimated treatment effect of the BRIGHT school construction program

is a combination of the effect of providing schools along with the effect of providing schools

with possibly better characteristics than a regular, non-BRIGHT school. The regression

discontinuity design used to evaluate the overall program, however, does not provide a means of



                                               ‐ 29 ‐
disentangling these separate effects. To do so, we adopt two alternative strategies for estimating

these individual effects, find that they yield comparable results, and demonstrate that the

estimates of the effects of a non-BRIGHT school and the BRIGHT amenities are consistent with

the estimated treatment effects using the primary regression discontinuity design in Tables 6 and

7.

       First, we directly estimate the average differences in student outcomes between villages

with BRIGHT schools, non-BRIGHT schools, and no schools. The obvious concern with this

straightforward approach is the endogeneity of the assignment of schools to villages. However,

as we describe in Section III.A, the school allocation process was largely random and the

empirical results presented to date support this conclusion. First, in Tables 2, 6, and 7, we show

that the estimated effect using the regression discontinuity design is equivalent to the effect

estimated through a simple comparison of means. Second, even when estimating the regression

discontinuity specifications, the relationship between the academic outcomes of children in a

village and the village’s relative score in the assignment process is negligible. As shown in

Figures 2, 5, and 6, except for the discontinuity, the relationship between the relative score a

village receives and children’s attendance and test scores is relatively constant. This is also borne

out in the actual regressions in Tables 2, 6, and 7 where the coefficient on relative score in the

linear specification is extremely small. Finally, we also directly compare the villages by school

status in Table A7, and find that, on average, the villages are very similar. All of the estimated

coefficients are small in magnitude, and of the 66 tests performed, only two are significant at the

5 percent level and four at the 10 percent level.

       The second strategy leverages our knowledge of the location of schools in 2004 before

the BRIGHT schools were assigned to villages. Focusing on villages that had schools at that time



                                                ‐ 30 ‐
allows us to estimate the treatment effect using a sample of villages in which we know that the

BRIGHT schools replaced pre-existing institutions solely by adding the unique BRIGHT

amenities. The main limitation of this strategy is generalizability, since villages that received

schools by 2004 may respond differently to the improvement of a school than do villages that

received schools later.13

        The point estimates for these regressions are presented in Table 10. First, we estimate the

effects on enrollment. Column 1 presents the results for the simple regression on whether or not

a village has any school and then specifically a BRIGHT school with no controls. In this

specification, the coefficient on “BRIGHT school” provides the estimated additional effect of the

BRIGHT amenities. Column 2 presents the same regression with controls and fixed effects. As

expected, the point estimates are very similar, lending support to the argument that the two types

of villages are indeed similar in observable characteristics. Based on these estimates, adding a

BRIGHT school to a location that would have otherwise received a non-BRIGHT school would

cause an additional increase in enrollment of 12.6 percentage points—a difference that is again

significant at the 1 percent level—beyond the 26.5 percentage point effect of adding a school

without the BRIGHT amenities to a village.

        To check these estimates, in column 3 we compare the effect of improving an existing

school into a BRIGHT school shown in column 2 to the estimates obtained through the

regression discontinuity design using only villages that had a school in 2004. The estimated

discontinuity for villages with schools in 2004 is 14.7 percentage points, statistically significant




13
   As a check on the correlation between the treatment effect and the timing of a village’s original receipt of a
school, we separately estimate the effects on villages that received schools by 2003 and find similar point estimates
to those that had a school by 2004. These results are available upon request


                                                       ‐ 31 ‐
at the 1 percent level. While these estimates are slightly higher than the estimates in column 2,

they are very close and confirm the validity of those estimates.

        Columns 4 through 6 contain the estimates of the relative effect on children’s total test

scores. As before, the estimates with and without controls are similar (columns 4 and 5). The

effect of improving the school to be a BRIGHT school increases test scores by 0.35 standard

deviations, which is also significant at the 1 percent level, beyond the 0.323 effect of receiving a

school without the BRIGHT specific amenities. These estimates are consistent with the estimates

for villages that had a school in 2004 using the regression discontinuity design. Finally, in

columns 7 through 10, we perform the same comparison using the individual math and French

scores and find the same pattern of results.

        Finally, we check for consistency of the estimated effects of the non-BRIGHT schools

and the BRIGHT specific amenities presented in columns 2 and 5 with the treatment effects

estimated in column 1 of Tables 6 and 7. Using our preferred estimates for the difference in the

probability that a village has both a BRIGHT school and any school in Tables 2 and 3, we

multiply these differences by the previously estimated coefficients to obtain a back-of-the-

envelope estimate of the discontinuity of 0.195 and 0.407 for enrollment and test scores

respectively.14 These are extremely close to the actual estimates of 0.203 and 0.446.

        Overall, these results suggest that the specific characteristics of the BRIGHT schools do

improve children’s enrollment beyond what is achieved by a regular public school. Enrollment is

increased by an additional 12.6 percentage points and test scores are 0.35 standard deviations

larger at the village level. It is important to note, however, that we cannot separate the enrollment

14
  The back-of-the-envelope estimate of the discontinuity can be calculated by multiplying the effect of receiving a
non-BRIGHT school by the estimated difference in the probability of receiving any school at the discontinuity
(Table 3) and adding this to the product of the effect of the BRIGHT specific amenities and the discontinuity in the
probability of receiving a BRIGHT school at the discontinuity (Table 2).


                                                       ‐ 32 ‐
and test score effects to conclude that the differences in test scores result from the BRIGHT

schools being more effective at increasing student learning. Finally, we have also disaggregated

the results presented in column 2 and column 5 to differentially estimate the effects for boys and

girls. We find that girls are not differentially affected by the presence of a traditional school, but

we do find that girls’ enrollment increases by 6.6 percentage points more than boys’ (statistically

significant at the 1 percent level) due to the BRIGHT characteristics, emphasizing the

importance of the “girl-friendly” amenities in girls’ higher enrollment levels.15,16



VII. Cost-Effectiveness

As with all interventions, it is important to consider the benefits achieved by a particular program

relative to the costs. To facilitate this, we use the standard methodology to calculate the cost per

unit of benefit achieved for both enrollment and changes in test scores. However, several caveats

are necessary. First, many of the interventions in the BRIGHT schools could have had impacts

on outcomes other than enrollment and test scores. For example, the dry rations might have had

an impact on nutrition, an outcome that was not included in the survey. Second, while we have

very detailed cost information on the BRIGHT schools, our estimates of the cost of the

government schools are less certain. In fact, we received two divergent estimates of the cost of a

government school, and as a result, present the cost-effectiveness estimates for two scenarios

using each of the cost estimates that we received. Finally, while the BRIGHT intervention

created new schools with a range of amenities, the majority of studies in the literature evaluate

15
  The results are available upon request.
16
   One of the other possible issues with the BRIGHT schools compared with other schools is that villages typically
received BRIGHT schools about a half of a year earlier than other schools. However, even when controlling for the
length of time that a school has been in a village (either linearly or with fixed effects for the year that a school was
introduced), we find that enrollment is 8–10 percent higher due to the characteristics of a BRIGHT school, and the
estimates are still statistically significant at the 1 percent level. These results are available upon request.


                                                         ‐ 33 ‐
programs that are implemented in already existing schools. As a result, we estimate the cost-

effectiveness of two interventions: implementing a BRIGHT school as assessed in Section V,

and the cost of taking a planned government school and incurring the additional cost to add the

unique BRIGHT amenities. The latter is more comparable to existing estimates of educational

programs. However, as noted in Section VI, these estimates have weaker internal validity

because they do not directly leverage the regression discontinuity design. We present details of

all the calculations in the Appendix.

       Starting with the cost-effectiveness of the BRIGHT program, we estimate the cost of

enrolling one additional student per year to be between $62.50 and $69.77, depending on

whether we use the high or low estimates for the cost of a government school, respectively. The

cost-effectiveness of the average change in test scores per child living in the village is $7.11 to

$7.94 per 0.1 of a standard deviation over 2.5 years. For moving from a regular government

school to a BRIGHT school, the cost-effectiveness is $38.15 to $58.01 per child enrolled for a

year and $3.79 to $5.76 per 0.1 of a standard deviation per child for 2.5 years.

       Tables A14 and A15 in the Appendix provide a tabulation of the cost-effectiveness of

other interventions in the literature (Evans and Ghosh, 2008; Kremer et al., 2007; He et al.,

2008). Compared to other programs aimed at improving enrollment, both considered versions of

the BRIGHT intervention are comparable to the mid-range of interventions in the table,

including school meals at $43.34 (Vermeersch and Kremer, 2005) and teacher incentives at

$67.64 (Duflo et al., 2007), but the BRIGHT programs are less cost-effective than extremely

inexpensive interventions such as deworming at $4.36 (Miguel and Kremer, 2004). Compared to

other school construction programs, the BRIGHT program is more expensive than a village-

based school program in Afghanistan at $39.57 (Burde and Linden, 2011), but cheaper than a



                                               ‐ 34 ‐
large-scale school construction program in Indonesia at $83.77 (Duflo, 2001). In terms of

changes in test scores, the programs fare similarly.



VIII. Conclusion

The preceding results confirm that the existence and quality of educational infrastructure is an

important determinant in families’ decisions to enroll their children in primary school. We show

that “girl-friendly” schools increase overall enrollment by 20 percentage points and improve the

test scores of all children in the village by 0.45 standard deviations. For those children caused to

go to school by the program, the improvement in test scores is 2.2 standard deviations.

Additionally, these schools improve the enrollment rates of girls by 5 percentage points more

than boys, but they improve the test scores of children by equal amounts.

       An important area for future research is to understand which of the many unique

characteristics of these schools contribute most to the changes in household decisions and

academic achievement. We are able to identify the effects of these amenities as a whole and

demonstrate that they account for an increase in enrollment of 13 percentage points and a change

in test scores of 0.35 standard deviations. We are also able to show that they explain the

observed differences in the treatment effect between boys and girls. The next step is to determine

which individual treatment or combination of treatments is necessary to achieve such an effect.




                                               ‐ 35 ‐
IX. References

Akresh, Richard, Emilie Bagby, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. “Child Ability and

   Household Human Capital Investment Decisions in Burkina Faso.” Economic Development

   and Cultural Change, forthcoming.

Andrabi, Tahir, Jisnu Das, and Asim Khwaja. “Students Today, Teachers Tomorrow? Identifying

   Constraints on the Provision of Education.” Journal of Public Economics, 2010.

Back, Lucien, N’gra-zan C. Coulibaly, and Karen Hickson. “Evaluation of the African Girls’

   Education     Initiative   Country   Case   Study:   Burkina   Faso,”   2003   Available   at

   [http://www.unicef.org/evaldatabase/files/Burkina_Faso_Case_Study.pdf.]

Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. “Remedying Education:

   Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

   vol. 122, no. 3, 2007, pp. 1235–1264.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Leigh L. Linden, and Miguel Urquiola. “The Effects of User-Fee

   Reductions on Enrollment: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment.” Manuscript. Department of

   Economics. The University of Texas at Austin, 2007.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “How Much Should We Trust

   Difference in Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, no. 1, 2004,

   pp. 249–275.

Bjorkman, Martina. “Does Money Matter for Student Performance? Evidence from a Grant

   Program in Uganda.” Manuscript. Stockholm, Sweden: Institute for International Economic

   Studies (IIES), Stockholm University, 2007.




                                               ‐ 36 ‐
Borkum, Evan, Fang He, and Leigh Linden. “School Libraries and Language Skills in Indian

   Primary Schools: A Randomized Evaluation of the Akshara Library Program.” Manuscript.

   Department of Economics. The University of Texas at Austin, 2012.

Bundy, Donald, Carman Burbano, Margaret Grosh, Aulo Gelli, Matthew Jukes, and Lesley

   Drake. Rethinking School Feeding: Social Safety Nets, Child Development, and the

   Education Sector. Washington, DC: World Food Program and the World Bank, 2009.

Burde, Dana, and Leigh Linden. “The Effects of Village-Based Schools: Evidence from a

   Randomized Controlled Trial in Afghanistan.” National Bureau of Economic Research

   Working Paper No. w18039. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. “Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation,”

   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, no. 1, 2008, pp. 177–218.

Duflo, Esther. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia:

   Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review, vol. 91, no. 4,

   2001, pp. 795–813.

Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen Ryan. “Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come

   to School,” 2007. Available at [http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/2405].

Evans, Dwight, and Arkadipta Ghosh. “The Cost Effectiveness of Education Interventions in

   Poor Countries.” Policy Insight, vol. 2, no. 4, 2008.

Filmer, Deon. “If You Build It, Will They Come? School Availability and School Enrolment in

   21 Poor Countries.” Journal of Development Studies, vol. 43, no. 5, 2007, pp. 901–928.

Hansen, Bruce E. “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation.” Econometrica, vol. 68, no. 3,

   2000, pp. 575–603.




                                              ‐ 37 ‐
He, Fang, Leigh L. Linden, and Margaret MacLeod. “How to Teach English in India: Testing the

   Relative Productivity of Instruction Methods within the Pratham English Language

   Education Program.” Manuscript. Department of Economics, The University of Texas at

   Austin, 2008.

de Hoop, J., and F.C. Rosati. “Costs of Education and Child Labour: Evidence from Burkina

   Faso’s BRIGHT Project.” Working Paper. Understanding Children’s Work Programme

   Working Paper Series, 2012.

Kazianga, Harounan, Damien de Walque, and Harold Alderman. “Educational and Child Labor

   Impacts of Two Food-for-Education Schemes: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Rural

   Burkina Faso.” Journal of African Economies, 2012.

Ki, Boureima J., and Louis-Honore Ouedraogo. “Negotiating with development partners: ten-

   year plan for the development of basic education in Burkina Faso.” Prospects, vol. 36, no. 2,

   2006, pp. 205–221.

Kobiané, Jean-Francois. Ménages et Scolarisation des enfants au Burkina Faso: à la recherche

   des déterminants de la demande scolaire. Louvain la Neuve: Academia Bruylant, 2006.

Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. “Incentives to Learn.” Review of

   Economics and Statistics, vol. 91, no. 3, 2009, pp. 437–456.

Lee, David. S., and Thomas Lemieux. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”

   Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 48, no. 2, 2010, pp. 281–355.

Levy, Daniel, Matthew Sloan, Leigh Linden, and Harounan Kazianga. “Impact Evaluation of

   Burkina Faso’s Bright Program: Final Report.” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy

   Research, Inc., 2009.




                                             ‐ 38 ‐
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in

   the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, vol. 72, no.1, 2004, pp. 158–217.

Schultz, T. Paul. “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa Poverty

   Program.” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 74, no. 1, 2004, pp. 199–250.

UNESCO           Institute       for        Statistics.       2009.         Available          at

   [http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/ReportFolders/ReportFolders.aspx].

United Nations. Fact Sheet: Goal 2 Achieve Universal Primary Education. United Nations

   Department of Public Information, publication number DPI/2517H, September, 2008a.

United Nations. Fact Sheet: Goal 3 Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women, United

   Nations Department of Public Information, publication number DPI/2517I, September,

   2008b.

Vermeersch, Christel, and Michael Kremer. “School Meals, Educational Achievement, and

   School Competition: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” Policy Research Working

   Paper Series 3523. Washington, DC: the World Bank, 2005.




                                             ‐ 39 ‐
Figure 1: Distribution of Sample by Relative Score




Note: This figure presents a nonparametric estimate of the distribution of subjects by the relative score assigned to
their village. The distribution is estimated using a kernel weighted estimator with a bandwidth of 25 and an
Epanechnikov kernel. The vertical dashed lines represent relative scores of -40 and 40.

Figure 2: Inclusion in the BRIGHT Program




Note: The left vertical axis represents a nonparametric plot of the probability of a village being included in the
BRIGHT program by receiving a BRIGHT school as a function of the relative score assigned to the village. The plot
is estimated using a linear local polynomial estimator with an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 100. The
right vertical axis presents the estimated location of the discontinuity using the procedure described in Section III.B.
The plot represents the estimated R2 of a regression assuming a discontinuity at the indicated relative score. The
circle represents the point at which the R2 is maximized. The number is the associated relative score.
Figure 3: Existence of Any School in 2008




Note: The left vertical axis represents a nonparametric plot of the probability of a village having any school at the
time of the survey as a function of the relative score assigned to the village. The plot is estimated using a linear local
polynomial estimator with an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 100. The right vertical axis presents the
estimated location of the discontinuity using the procedure described in Section III.B. The plot represents the
estimated R2 of a regression assuming a discontinuity at the indicated relative score. The circle represents the point
at which the R2 is maximized. The number is the associated relative score.

Figure 4: Existence of Any School Prior to Start of BRIGHT Program




Note: The left vertical axis represents a nonparametric plot of the probability of a village having any school in 2004,
the year before the BRIGHT program started, as a function of the relative score assigned to the village. The plot is
estimated using a linear local polynomial estimator with an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 100. The right
vertical axis presents the estimated location of the discontinuity using the procedure described in Section III.B. The
plot represents the estimated R2 of a regression assuming a discontinuity at the indicated relative score. The circle
represents the point at which the R2 is maximized. The number is the associated relative score.
Figure 5: Enrollment




Note: The left vertical axis represents a nonparametric plot of the probability of a child being enrolled in school as a
function of the relative score assigned to the child’s village. The plot is estimated using a linear local polynomial
estimator with an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 100. The right vertical axis presents the estimated
location of the discontinuity using the procedure described in Section III.B. The plot represents the estimated R2 of a
regression assuming a discontinuity at the indicated relative score. The circle represents the point at which the R2 is
maximized. The number is the associated relative score.

Figure 6: Total Test Scores




Note: The left vertical axis represents a nonparametric plot of the child’s total test score as a function of the relative
score assigned to the child’s village. The plot is estimated using a linear local polynomial estimator with an
Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 100. The right vertical axis presents the estimated location of the
discontinuity using the procedure described in Section III.B. The plot represents the estimated R2 of a regression
assuming a discontinuity at the indicated relative score. The circle represents the point at which the R2 is maximized.
The number is the associated relative score.
Table 1: Summary of Village Characteristics
                                    Overall                     Non-Marginal Marginal
                                   Average                        Villages   Villages                 Difference
Characteristic                        (1)                           (2)        (3)                        (4)
Panel A: Household
   Head is Male                      0.982                            0.982             0.982            -0.001
                                    (0.132)                          (0.132)           (0.133)          (0.005)
   Age of Head                      48.058                           48.629            47.037            -1.592
                                   (12.425)                         (12.856)          (11.544)          (0.510)
   Head's Years of School            0.159                            0.185             0.114            -0.071
                                    (0.929)                          (1.025)           (0.724)          (0.036)
   Language: Moore                   0.392                            0.438              0.31            -0.128
                                    (0.488)                          (0.496)           (0.463)          (0.052)
   Ethnicity: Mossi                   0.4                             0.444              0.32            -0.124
                                    (0.490)                          (0.497)           (0.467)          (0.052)
   Basic Floor Material              0.931                            0.922             0.947            0.025
                                    (0.253)                          (0.268)           (0.224)          (0.016)
   Basic Roof Material               0.552                            0.532             0.588            0.056
                                    (0.497)                          (0.499)           (0.492)          (0.049)
   Number of Radios                  0.752                            0.795             0.675             -0.12
                                    (0.808)                          (0.843)           (0.733)          (0.045)
   Number of Phones                  0.187                            0.208             0.149            -0.059
                                    (0.480)                          (0.514)           (0.409)          (0.025)
   Number of Watches                 0.819                            0.862             0.741            -0.121
                                    (0.944)                          (0.992)           (0.847)          (0.050)
   Number of Bikes                   1.473                             1.57               1.3             -0.27
                                    (1.267)                          (1.333)           (1.119)          (0.090)
   Number of Cows                    5.665                            5.504             5.951            0.446
                                   (10.087)                         (10.175)           (9.923)          (0.587)
   Religion Muslim                   0.583                             0.58             0.589            0.009
                                    (0.493)                          (0.494)           (0.492)          (0.046)
Panel B: Children
   Age                               8.765                             8.75             8.791            0.041
                                    (1.970)                          (1.980)           (1.952)          (0.046)
   Male                              0.534                            0.529             0.544            0.015
                                    (0.499)                          (0.499)           (0.498)          (0.009)
   Head's Child                      0.884                            0.878             0.894            0.016
                                    (0.320)                          (0.327)           (0.308)          (0.015)
Note: This table presents the household- and child-level characteristics for children in the sample. Columns one, two,
and three present the average and standard deviation of the characteristics for the full sample, the sample with an
assigned score between -40 and 40, and the sample with a score below -40 or above 40. Finally, column four presents
the estimated average difference between columns two and three, along with the standard deviation of the difference
in parentheses. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.
Table 2: Estimated Discontinuity in Probability of Receiving a BRIGHT School

                                        (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)
Selected for BRIGHT                  0.878***           0.898***            0.874***           0.895***           0.924***           0.894***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                  (0.031)            (0.027)             (0.035)            (0.036)            (0.035)            (0.070)
Relative Score                         0.615                                  0.778             -0.655             8.253**
                                      (0.468)                                (0.737)            (1.349)            (4.089)
Relative Score2                                                              -0.757
                                                                             (2.641)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                         1.53
                                                                                                (1.525)
Constant                                0.061              0.051              0.064              0.048                                 0.071
                                       (0.074)            (0.074)            (0.075)            (0.075)                               (0.169)
Observations                             287                287                287                287                287                104
  2
R                                      0.824              0.823               0.824              0.825                                 0.815
Prob > F                              < 0.001            < 0.001             < 0.001            < 0.001                               < 0.001
Prob > Chi2                                                                                                        < 0.001
Model                                  Linear            Discrete          Quadratic          Interacted            Probit        Relative Score
                                                                                                Linear             Linear              < 40
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between being selected for the BRIGHT program and receiving a
BRIGHT school using the indicated specification for equation (1). Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of
the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 3: Presence of a Any School in Sample Villages
                        Any School                                                     School Present in Indicated Year                                             Number of Years
                          In 2008           2003                                  2004               2005             2006                          2007              with School
                             (1)             (2)                                   (3)                (4)               (5)                           (6)                  (7)
Selected for BRIGHT      0.320***         < 0.001                                -0.026           0.373***          0.563***                      0.433***             1.703***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)      (0.051)         (0.028)                               (0.036)            (0.058)           (0.052)                       (0.055)              (0.209)
Relative Score             1.057           -0.114                                0.136              -0.353            0.982                          1.18                 2.81
                          (0.758)         (0.415)                               (0.531)            (0.852)           (0.766)                       (0.802)              (3.067)
Constant                 0.541***            0.1                                 0.113              0.113            0.219*                       0.384***             1.451***
                          (0.120)         (0.065)                               (0.083)            (0.133)           (0.120)                       (0.125)              (0.480)
Observations                287              270                                   270                270               270                          270                  270
R-squared                  0.339           0.375                                 0.311               0.41             0.523                         0.421                0.443
Prob>F                    < 0.001          0.933                                 0.654             < 0.001           < 0.001                       < 0.001              < 0.001
Non-Selected Averge        0.609           0.058                                 0.094              0.201             0.338                         0.468                1.734
Note: This table presents estimates of the discontinuity in the relationship between whether or not a village has a school of any type in the indicated year and the relative score.
Column one presents estimates for whether or not a school exists at the time of the survey. Columns two through six present estimates for whether or not a school exists in the
indicated year, and column seven presents esitmates of the effect on the number of years a village has had any school. The sample size for columns two through six is smaller than
the full sample because school officials could not provide dates on which schools were started in seventeen villages. However, the availability of information is balanced the
discontinuity. (Results available upon request.) All estimates are made using equation (1) with no control variables and a linear specification for the relative score function. Relative
Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and
*, respectively.
Table 4: Village Level Comparison of School Characteristics
                                    Average All     Average                                   All              Estimated
                                    Non-Selected Non-Selected                               Selected          Discontinuity,
                                       Villages     Villages                                Villages               All
                                                   w/ School                                                    Villages
                                         (1)           (2)                                      (3)                (4)
Panel A: Girl Friendly Characteristics
  Feeding Program                       0.278         0.646                                   0.838              0.526***
                                                                                                                 (0.053)
   Feeding Program:                                 0.079                0.185                0.449              0.318***
     Dry Rations                                                                                                 (0.048)
   Toilets                                          0.126                0.292                0.846              0.696***
                                                                                                                 (0.047)
   Toilets, Gender Segregated                       0.113                0.262                0.779              0.621***
                                                                                                                 (0.051)
   Daycare                                          0.007                0.015                0.081              0.071***
                                                                                                                 (0.027)
Panel B: School Resources
  Insufficient Textbooks                            0.821                0.585                  0.5             -0.321***
                                                                                                                 (0.057)
   Insufficient Desks                               0.848                0.646                0.235             -0.685***
                                                                                                                 (0.052)
   Water Supply                                     0.106                0.246                0.743              0.610***
                                                                                                                 (0.052)
   Number of Usable Rooms                           0.801                1.862                2.787              1.822***
                                                                                                                 (0.175)
   Number of Blackboards                            0.722                1.677                2.779              1.907***
                                                                                                                 (0.175)
  Number of Blackboards,                            0.086                  0.2                2.721              2.560***
    Legible for All Students                                                                                     (0.276)
Panel C: Teacher Characteristics
  Number of Teachers                                0.762                1.769                2.375              1.475***
                                                                                                                 (0.163)
   Number of Teachers,                              0.113                0.262                1.022              0.779***
     Female                                                                                                      (0.096)
   Number of Teachers,                                 0                    0                 0.096                0.04
     Post Secondary Training                                                                                     (0.029)
   Number of Teachers,                               0.55                1.277                1.816              1.162***
     > 5 Years Experience                                                                                        (0.121)
   Number of Teachers,                              0.166                0.385                0.441              0.266***
     Bet 5 and 10 Years Experience                                                                               (0.073)
   Number of Teachers,                              0.046                0.108                0.118                0.047
     > 10 Years Experience                                                                                       (0.039)
   Number of Teachers,                              0.073                0.169                0.699              0.587***
     Gender Sensitivity Training                                                                                 (0.069)
Note: This table presents estimates of the school characteristics available to children based on whether or no their village was
selected for the BRIGHT program. Columns one, two, and three present the average characteristics for all villages that were
not selected, those that were not selected but that had other types of schools, and all villages selected for the program,
respectively. Column four presents the estimated child-level discontinuity in the given characteristic using equation (1) with
no control variables and linear specification for the relative score function. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten
percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 5: Continuity of Household Characteristics

                     (1)       (2)                        (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)
Panel A: Household Characteristics
 Characteristic    Head      Head's                  Head Yrs                                                     Language Language Language Ethnicity Ethnicity                              Ethnicity
                   Male        Age                   Schooling Muslim                Animist       Christian      Fulfulde Gulmachema Moore Gourmanche Mossi                                     Peul
 Selected        -0.009**    -0.116                   -0.002     0.001                0.001        < 0.001        0.045*** -0.042***    0.008  -0.028***  -0.001                              0.037***
                  (0.004)   (0.318)                   (0.022)   (0.010)              (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.008)   (0.006)  (0.008)                              (0.007)
 Relative Score   0.112**    -7.176                  1.834*** -0.512***              0.287**        0.211*        -0.263**   0.226** -0.314***    0.11   -0.258**                              -0.180*
                  (0.055)   (4.734)                   (0.332)   (0.151)              (0.137)        (0.115)        (0.105)   (0.093)   (0.115)   (0.095)  (0.118)                              (0.105)
 Sample Average     0.98      46.28                     0.15      0.6                  0.26          0.13            0.21      0.28     0.37      0.29     0.38                                  0.2

Panel B: Household Assets
 Asset             Basic     Basic  Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of
                   Floor     Roof    Radios    Phones    Watches     Bikes    Cows    Motorbikes  Carts
 Selected       -0.025*** -0.028***   0.013     -0.01     0.012    -0.050**  -0.016    0.025**   -0.023
                  (0.006)   (0.010)  (0.017)   (0.010)   (0.020)    (0.025)  (0.215)   (0.012)   (0.016)
 Relative Score   -0.077     0.079    0.398   0.859***    0.386   1.605***   -4.182     0.255     0.086
                  (0.085)   (0.144)  (0.256)   (0.148)   (0.297)    (0.371)  (3.207)   (0.172)   (0.236)
 Sample Average    0.94      0.57     0.66       0.15     0.73       1.29     4.78       0.23     0.55

Panel C: Child Characteristics
 Characteristic  Number                                               Head's   Head's     Head's
                 Children        Age                     Boy           Child Grand Child Nephew
 Selected          0.09         0.024                 -0.020**      -0.016***  -0.006    0.012***
                  (0.069)      (0.034)                 (0.009)        (0.005)  (0.004)    (0.003)
 Relative Score    1.421        0.051                   0.151       -0.304*** 0.265***    -0.038
                  (1.020)      (0.499)                 (0.127)        (0.079)  (0.055)    (0.047)
 Sample Average     4.8         8.76                    0.53           0.88      0.05       0.04
Note: This table presents evidence of the continuity of the various child- and household-level characteristics with respect to the relative score. All estimates are conducted using equation (1) with no
control variables and a linear specification for the relative score function. Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance
at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 6: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Enrollment

                                        (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
Selected for BRIGHT                  0.203***          0.212***         0.217***         0.185***         0.198***         0.230***         0.169***         0.169***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                  (0.025)           (0.026)          (0.021)          (0.025)          (0.026)          (0.028)          (0.037)          (0.024)
Relative Score                         0.434              0.52                            1.075**           0.766            0.469                             0.251
                                      (0.447)           (0.485)                           (0.519)          (1.104)          (0.505)                           (0.396)
Relative Score2                                                                           -3.080*
                                                                                          (1.580)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                                  -0.399
                                                                                                           (1.344)
Constant                                0.092          0.415***           0.085            0.104            0.097                           0.387***           0.131
                                       (0.121)          (0.099)          (0.120)          (0.122)          (0.123)                           (0.044)          (0.125)
Observations                            0.092          0.415***           0.085            0.104            0.097                           0.371***           0.131
R-squared                              -0.121           -0.099            -0.12           -0.122           -0.123                            -0.064           -0.125
Prob>F                                  17970            17970            17970            17970            17970            17970            6448             17970
Prob > Chi2                             0.184            0.121            0.184            0.185           0.184                            0.094              0.166
Demographic Controls                     Yes              No               Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              No                Yes
Department Fixed Effects                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes
Model                                                                                                    Interacted         Probit         Rel Score
                                       Linear           Linear          Discrete        Quadratic          Linear           Linear           < 40              Linear
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between a child's probability of being enrolled during the 2007-8 academic year
and the child's village being selected for the BRIGHT program using the indicated specification for equation (1). Columns one through seven show estimates of the
model based on self-reported enrollment while column eight uses a model based on whether or not the child was directly observed by the surveyors when they visited
the child's school. Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten
percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 7: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Total Test Scores

                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)                (7)
Selected for BRIGHT                              0.446***          0.467***         0.459***          0.411***          0.441***          0.344***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                              (0.049)           (0.053)          (0.041)           (0.050)           (0.050)           (0.074)
Enrolled                                                                                                                                                    2.199***
                                                                                                                                                             (0.176)
Relative Score                                     0.392             0.556                              1.697**            0.78                              -0.562
                                                  (0.765)           (0.906)                             (0.802)           (1.841)                            (0.489)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                             -6.263***
                                                                                                        (2.357)
Constant                                         -0.561**             0.15           -0.567**          -0.537**          -0.555**           0.093           -0.763***
                                                  (0.233)           (0.177)           (0.231)           (0.235)           (0.233)          (0.141)            (0.158)
Observations                                       17970             17970             17970             17970             17970            6448               17970
R-squared                                          0.186             0.105             0.186             0.187             0.186            0.066              0.451
Prob>F                                            < 0.001           < 0.001           < 0.001           < 0.001           < 0.001          < 0.001           < 0.001
Demographic Controls                                Yes                No               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                No
Department Fixed Effects                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
Model                                                                                                                   Interacted        Rel Score
                                                  Linear            Linear           Discrete         Quadratic           Linear            < 40            IV, Linear
Note: Columns one through six of this table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between a child's total tes score and the child's
village being selected for the BRIGHT program using the indicated specification for equation (1). Column seven presents the results of an instrumental variables
esitmate in which total test score is regressed on a child's enrollment status, and enrollment status is instrumented by whether or not the child's village was selected to
be part of the BRIGHT program. Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the
one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 8: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Individual Subjects
                                     Total                                      Mathematics                                              French
                                     Score         Total                            Easy               Hard              Total             Easy              Hard
                                      (1)           (2)                              (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
Selected for BRIGHT                0.446***     0.439***                         0.481***           0.364***           0.407***         0.439***          0.220***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                (0.049)      (0.049)                          (0.050)            (0.049)            (0.045)          (0.047)           (0.043)
Relative Score                       0.392         0.296                           0.401              0.417              0.202            0.295             0.514
                                    (0.765)      (0.706)                          (0.683)            (0.750)            (0.665)          (0.714)           (0.631)
Constant                           -0.561**       -0.082                          -0.254           -0.598***             -0.18          -0.604**          -0.447**
                                    (0.233)      (0.226)                          (0.243)            (0.217)            (0.248)          (0.251)           (0.180)
Observations                         17970        17970                            17970              17970              17970            17970             17970
R-squared                            0.186         0.121                            0.19              0.152              0.109            0.168             0.127
Prob>F                              < 0.001      < 0.001                          < 0.001            < 0.001            < 0.001          < 0.001           < 0.001
Demographic Controls                  Yes           Yes                             Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Department Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes                             Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Note: This table presents estimates of the discontinuity in the relationship between a child's test scores and the child's village being selected for the BRIGHT program
using equation (1) with all control variables and a linear specification for the relative score variable. Column one presents the results for the overall total score.
Columns two, three, and four present the results for all the questions on the math section, the easier questions on the math section, and the more difficult math
questions, respectively. Columns five, six, and seven then do the same for the French questions. Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small
magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 9: Effects of BRIGHT Schools by Gender
                                 Self-Reported                        Verified              Total                Math               French
                                   Enrollment                        Enrollment             Score                Score               Score
                                       (1)                               (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)
Selected for BRIGHT                 0.181***                          0.142***            0.443***             0.432***            0.401***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                 (0.026)                           (0.025)             (0.052)              (0.050)             (0.049)
Selected * Female                   0.048***                          0.057***              0.006                0.015               0.013
                                     (0.018)                           (0.017)             (0.036)              (0.034)             (0.036)
Relative Score                        0.431                             0.247               0.392                0.295               0.202
                                     (0.446)                           (0.395)             (0.765)              (0.705)             (0.665)
Constant                              0.105                             0.146             -0.559**              -0.078              -0.176
                                     (0.122)                           (0.125)             (0.233)              (0.225)             (0.249)
Observations                          17970                             17970               17970                17970               17970
R-squared                             0.185                             0.167               0.186                0.121               0.109
Prob>F                               < 0.001                           < 0.001             < 0.001              < 0.001             < 0.001
Demographic Controls                   Yes                               Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Department Fixed Effects               Yes                               Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Note: This table presents the estimated discontinuities for the indicated outcome variable using equation (1) with the full set of controls and a
linear specification for the relative score function while allowing for separate effects for boys and girls. Relative Score is measured in units of
10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by
***, **, and *, respectively.
Table 10: Relative Effect of School Improvement versus School Access
                                        Enrollment                         Total Score                                                      Math Score                     French Score
                                  All       All    Had School        All       All     Had School                                         All    Had School               All    Had School
                               Villages   Villages   in 2004      Villages  Villages     in 2004                                      Villages     in 2004            Villages     in 2004
Variables                         (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)                                            (7)        (8)                  (9)        (10)
BRIGHT School                  0.138*** 0.126*** 0.147***        0.377*** 0.346*** 0.383***                                           0.357*** 0.352***               0.300*** 0.385***
                                (0.027)   (0.020)    (0.046)      (0.056)    (0.043)     (0.067)                                       (0.043)     (0.059)             (0.041)     (0.058)
Any Village School             0.267*** 0.265***                 0.284*** 0.323***                                                    0.279***                        0.311***
                                (0.034)   (0.031)                 (0.071)    (0.066)                                                   (0.069)                         (0.055)
Constant                       0.184***    -0.03    0.790***     -0.242*** -0.691*** 1.114**                                            -0.193    1.302***              -0.303    1.531***
                                (0.027)   (0.102)    (0.165)      (0.057)    (0.218)     (0.412)                                       (0.215)     (0.357)             (0.233)     (0.359)
Order of Control Function        None      None     Quadratic      None       None      Quadratic
Socio-Demographic Controls        No        Yes        Yes           No        Yes         Yes                                          Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Fixed Effects                     No        Yes        Yes           No        Yes         Yes                                          Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Observations                     17970     17970      1568         17970      17970       1568                                         17970           1568             17970          1568
R-squared                        0.095     0.216      0.219         0.06      0.197       0.321                                         0.13           0.22             0.119          0.229
Note: This table presents estimates of the relative effects of a BRIGHT school relative to a tradtitional school for the indicated outcomes. Columns one, two, four, seven, and nine present the
results of an OLS regression, including the indicated controls. Columns three, six, eight, and ten present esitmates of the discontinuity using only the sample of children whose villages already
had schools in 2004, before the BRIGHT program was started. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Appendix: Cost Effectiveness Calculations

This appendix presents our estimates of the cost-effectiveness of the BRIGHT intervention. In

Section A, we present our strategy for estimating the costs of both BRIGHT and traditional

government public schools. In Section B, we present the cost-effectiveness estimates of the

BRIGHT program as implemented. In Section C, we present the marginal cost-effectiveness of

moving from a traditional government school to a BRIGHT school.

    A key issue underlying the analyses presented in this memo is that although we have

reasonably reliable information on the costs associated with the BRIGHT program, the

information on the costs of the government schools is much less reliable. In fact, we obtained

two cost estimates of building a typical government school—and one is 2.4 times the other.

Although we tried to investigate why the two estimates were so different, we do not feel enough

confidence in the information gathered to favor one estimate over the other. We therefore present

our cost-effectiveness estimates under two scenarios: one based on the high-cost estimate of the

government schools (scenario I), and the other based on the low-cost estimate (scenario II). All

cost-effectiveness estimates are measured in 2007 U.S. dollars.



A. Estimating the Costs of the Schools

We begin with a detailed estimate of the costs of the various components in the schools. These

are presented in Table A9. These estimates were obtained from the Millennium Challenge

Corporation (MCC) and the Burkina Faso Ministry of Education. As explained in the text, we

received two estimates of costs from the Ministry, which are presented as scenarios I and II.

Panel A contains costs that are estimated to last for the 40-year lifetime of the building. Panel B

lists costs that recur on an annual basis, and Panel C contains maintenance costs that need to be

                                                  -1-
spent every five years. It is important to note that for scenario I, we were given a lump sum cost

that included many of the amenities that are broken out for the BRIGHT schools and for scenario

II. In addition, for scenario II (and for the maintenance costs in scenario I), we were unable to

obtain cost estimates for individual amenities. In scenario I, we use the same cost estimates as for

the BRIGHT schools. In scenario II, we use the BRIGHT cost estimates reduced by the ratio of

the cost of the BRIGHT and government school complex to account for the fact that the

government normally spent less than the amounts required by the BRIGHT program.

    To calculate the total cost for each panel, we have to take into account that not all schools

have each amenity. We thus provide the associated probability that each amenity is present. We

can then take the sum of each amenity multiplied by the fraction of schools with the given

amenity to calculate the average cost per school for each panel.

    To calculate the incremental cost of the BRIGHT intervention, we need to take into account

the fact that villages on either side of the discontinuity had either access to a BRIGHT school,

access to government schools, or no access to any school. Table A10 contains the fractions of

villages that had the specified type of school for villages just below the cutoff (control) and

villages just above the cutoff (treatment). Clearly, the treatment villages overwhelmingly have

BRIGHT schools, while the control villages have a combination of mostly government schools

and no schools.

    The ultimate annual costs are then presented in Table A11. We first calculate the estimates

for the BRIGHT and government schools for each scenario in the first two rows. To do this, we

depreciate the total costs for each panel of Table A9 by the indicated period and add the resulting

per-year costs together. We assume a constant rate of depreciation so that, for example, the total

fixed cost of a BRIGHT school of $101,232 results in an annual cost of $2,530.80 when

                                                  -2-
calculated over the estimated 40-year lifespan. The total annual cost ($12,059) is then calculated

by adding the total amortized fixed cost to the amortized maintenance costs ($300) and the total

of the annual costs ($9,229).

    The estimates for the treatment and control villages are based on the estimates for the

BRIGHT and government schools. Using the probabilities presented in Table A10, we weight

the costs of the government and BRIGHT schools. So, for example, the annual cost for a

treatment village is 0.91 times the cost of a BRIGHT school added to 0.04 times the cost of a

government school. Row 5 then contains the difference in cost between a selected and a non-

selected village and row 6 contains the difference between a BRIGHT school and a government

school.

    Finally, Table A12 contains the estimates of our outcome variables for the villages and the

schools. In Panel A, all of the estimates are taken from regressions similar to those presented in

Tables 6 and 7. The estimates for the non-selected villages are taken from regressions similar to

those in column 2, but without the department-level fixed effects, so that the estimate of the

coefficient on the constant term is then an estimate of the average for villages directly to the left

of the discontinuity. The estimate for the selected villages is then the estimate for the non-

selected villages plus our estimate of the treatment effect from our preferred specification in

column 1 of Tables 6 and 7. The estimates in Panel B are similar to those in Panel A, but they are

taken from columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 of Table 10 instead.



B. Cost-Effectiveness of the BRIGHT Program as Implemented

Table A13 presents the key information used to calculate the cost-effectiveness of the BRIGHT

program as implemented. The costs presented in the table are on a per-year basis (enrollment

                                                   -3-
figures) or per-2.5-year basis (test scores figures), because the choice to enroll is an annual

decision made by parents, while the children’s test scores reflect learning that occurred in the

first 2.5 years of the BRIGHT program. The difference in outcomes presented are based on the

impacts estimated using the regression discontinuity design presented in Table A12.

      To estimate the cost-effectiveness of BRIGHT, we first estimated the costs associated with

providing the program in the villages close to the eligibility cutoff and then divided this amount

by the impact estimates (which are based on this same set of villages). In the case of enrollment,

we divided the costs of BRIGHT over one year by the impact on the number of enrolled children.

In the case of test scores, we divided the per child costs over 2.5 years by the impact in test

scores measured in 0.1 of a standard deviation.

      The cost-effectiveness of BRIGHT at increasing enrollment is $62.50 per student per year

under scenario I, and $69.71 per student per year under scenario II (Table A13). The cost of

improving test scores is $7.11 per student per 0.1 of a standard deviation over the 2.5 years of the

intervention under scenario I and $7.94 per student per 0.1 of a standard deviation under scenario

II.



C. Marginal Cost-Effectiveness of Moving from a Government School to a BRIGHT School

While the estimates presented in Section B measure the cost-effectiveness of BRIGHT relative to

what would have happened in the absence of the program (that is, the counterfactual), they are

not directly comparable to other interventions that have been recently evaluated and for which

we have cost-effectiveness information. Almost all these other education interventions are add-

on programs for existing schools. Because BRIGHT involves building schools, it is reasonable to

expect that the cost of BRIGHT will be much higher than the cost of interventions that take

                                                  -4-
advantage of existing schools. Moreover, the comparison is problematic because those other

interventions can only be implemented in places where a school already exists; therefore, they

would not be viable interventions for the 40 percent of villages that would not have a school in

the absence of BRIGHT. In this section, we present the cost-effectiveness estimates of building a

BRIGHT school in a village where a government school is already planned. Since the

government school is already planned, it makes sense to compare the marginal benefits of

investing more in infrastructure to produce a BRIGHT school versus investing the additional

funds in some of the other add-on programs that have been evaluated in the literature.

    The key advantage of these marginal cost-effectiveness estimates over the ones presented in

the previous section is that they are more comparable to cost-effectiveness estimates of other

interventions in the literature. The key disadvantage is that they rely on impact estimates that are

less reliable than the ones used in Section V, because they depend on the results presented in

Section VI, which require additional assumptions.

    To construct this estimate, we divided the difference in cost between a BRIGHT school and

a government school by the impacts in enrollment and test scores that are due to a higher quality

school (that is, the estimated impacts of BRIGHT relative to a government school). It is

important to note that while the previous estimate is an average cost-effectiveness calculation,

this one is a marginal cost-effectiveness calculation because it compares the change in costs to

the change in benefits from the program.

    The marginal cost-effectiveness of the increase in enrollment is $38.15 per student per year

under scenario I and $58.01 under scenario II. The marginal cost-effectiveness of the change in

test scores is $3.79 per student per 0.1 of a standard deviation over two years under scenario I

and $5.76 under scenario II in Table A14.

                                                  -5-
    To get a broad sense of the magnitude of these cost-effectiveness estimates, we compared

them to cost-effectiveness estimates of other education interventions in the literature. The

BRIGHT cost-effectiveness estimates are in the mid-range for both enrollment and for test scores

(Tables A15 and A16). It is important to note that most of these other interventions were also

add-ons evaluated in traditional government schools and are thus viable comparisons to the

marginal cost-effectiveness of the BRIGHT schools.

    Nevertheless, these comparisons require caution for a number of reasons. First, since some

interventions may affect multiple outcomes, such as health and schooling (as in the deworming

intervention), the overall effectiveness of such programs will be understated when calculating a

cost-effectiveness estimate for schooling alone. Second, costs of similar interventions could vary

across countries. Third, different measures of enrollment were used in different research papers.

Fourth, the impacts of BRIGHT on test scores are driven partly by the additional enrollment

produced by the program, whereas in many of the other interventions, the impact is based on

students already enrolled in school. Finally, some of these programs involve transfers, in which

case some of the real cost for the social planner is the cost of raising funds, that is, the

deadweight loss associated with raising funds (see Kremer et al., 2007). To the extent that the

cost of raising funds differs by country, cost-effectiveness comparisons need to be exercised with

caution.




                                                 -6-
D. References

Angrist, Joshua, E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. King, and M. Kremer. “Vouchers for Private

   Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” The American

   Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 5, 2002, pp. 1535–1558.

Duflo, Esther, Pascaline DuPas, and Michael Kremer. “Peer Effects, Pupil-Teacher Ratios, and

   Teacher Incentives.” Hanover, NH: Dartmouth College, Department of Economics, 2007.

Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer, and Sylvie Moulin. “Textbooks and Test Scores: Evidence from

   a Prospective Evaluation in Kenya.” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Department of

   Economics, 2003.

Glewwe, Paul, Ilias Nauman, and Michael Kremer. “Teacher Incentives.” Working paper no.

   9671. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.

Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer, Sylvie Moulin, and Eric Zitzewitz. “Retrospective vs.

   Prospective Analyses of School Inputs: The Case of Flip Charts in Kenya.” Journal of

   Development Economics, vol. 74, no. 1, 2004, pp. 251–268.




                                                -7-
Table A1: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Existance of a School

                                                    (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
Selected for BRIGHT                              0.320***          0.355***           0.318***          0.336***          0.317***          0.243***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                              (0.051)           (0.044)            (0.056)           (0.058)           (0.055)           (0.081)
Relative Score                                     1.057                                1.142            -0.088             1.277
                                                  (0.758)                              (1.195)           (2.191)           (1.207)
Relative Score2                                                                        -0.398
                                                                                       (4.282)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                                 1.379
                                                                                                         (2.476)
Constant                                         0.541***          0.523***           0.542***          0.529***                            0.661***
                                                  (0.120)           (0.120)            (0.121)           (0.122)                             (0.108)
Observations                                        287               287                287               287               287               104
R-squared                                          0.339             0.334               0.34              0.34                               0.283
Prob>F                                               0                 0                  0                 0                                 0.341
Prob > Chi2                                                                                                                 0.1
Department Fixed Effects                             Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Model                                                                                                  Interacted         Quadratic         Rel Score
                                                 Quadratic           Linear             Cubic          Quadratic           Probit             < 40
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between being selected for the BRIGHT program and the
existance of any school in a village at the time of the follow-up survey using the indicated specification for equation (1). Relative Score is measured
in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by
***, **, and *, respectively.
Table A2: Comparison of Schools Attended by Students from Selected and Non‐Selected Villages
                                         Average          Average         Estimated
                                       Schools Near     Schools Near    Discontinuity,
                                       Non‐Selected       Selected             All
                                         Villages          Villages         Schools
                                            (1)               (2)              (3)
Panel A: Girl Friendly Characteristics
  Feeding Program                         0.503             0.746          0.235***
                                                                            (0.057)
  Feeding Program:                        0.105             0.371          0.202***
      Dry Rations                                                           (0.046)
  Toilets                                 0.327             0.721          0.398***
                                                                            (0.057)
  Toilets, Gender Segregated               0.24             0.619          0.372***
                                                                            (0.057)
  Daycare                                 0.006             0.066          0.054**
                                                                            (0.023)
Panel B: School Resources
  Insufficient Textbooks                  0.737             0.584         ‐0.187***
                                                                            (0.056)
  Insufficient Desks                      0.357             0.188         ‐0.257***
                                                                            (0.054)
  Water Supply                            0.263             0.614          0.344***
                                                                            (0.058)
  Number of Usable Rooms                  2.509             3.063          0.514***
                                                                            (0.160)
  Number of Blackboards                   2.402             3.057          0.620***
                                                                            (0.168)
  Number of Blackboards,                   1.42             2.886          1.442***
      Legible for All Students                                              (0.349)
Panel C: Teacher Characteristics
  Number of Teachers                      2.536             2.759            0.264
                                                                            (0.185)
  Number of Teachers,                     0.464             1.101          0.598***
      Female                                                                (0.128)
  Number of Teachers,                      0.08             0.127             ‐0.03
      Post Secondary Training                                               (0.046)
  Number of Teachers,                     1.643             2.032          0.496***
      > 5 Years Experience                                                  (0.154)
  Number of Teachers,                     0.696             0.576            ‐0.146
      Bet 5 and 10 Years Experience                                         (0.109)
  Number of Teachers,                     0.196             0.152           ‐0.087*
      > 10 Years Experience                                                 (0.051)
  Number of Teachers,                     0.152             0.614          0.489***
      Gender Sensitivity Training                                           (0.082)
Note: This table presents estimates of the school characteristics for schools based on whether or not the
village in which the school is located was selected for the BRIGHT program. These estimates are similar
to those presented in Table 4, but these are estimated at the school level rather than at the child level.
Columns one and two present the average characteristics for schools in villages that were not selected
and school in villages selected for the program, respectively. Column three presents the estimated
discontinuity in the given characteristic using equation (1) with no control variables and linear
specification for the relative score function. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels
is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table A3: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Verified Enrollment

                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)
Selected for BRIGHT                             0.169***          0.176***         0.177***          0.154***          0.151***          0.191***         0.145***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                             (0.024)           (0.025)          (0.022)           (0.027)           (0.027)           (0.026)          (0.042)
Relative Score                                    0.251             0.332                              0.795             1.573             0.253
                                                 (0.396)           (0.422)                            (0.662)           (1.283)           (0.420)
Relative Score2                                                                                       -2.613
                                                                                                      (1.819)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                                               -1.591
                                                                                                                        (1.401)
Constant                                          0.131           0.410***            0.127            0.141             0.152                            0.263***
                                                 (0.125)           (0.104)           (0.124)          (0.126)           (0.127)                            (0.068)
Observations                                      17970             17970             17970            17970             17970             17970            6448
R-squared                                         0.166              0.12             0.166            0.167             0.167                              0.085
Prob>F                                           < 0.001           < 0.001           < 0.001          < 0.001           < 0.001                            < 0.001
Prob > Chi2                                                                                                                              < 0.001
Demographic Controls                               Yes               No                Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               No
Department Fixed Effects                           Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               No
Model                                                                                                                  Interacted       Quadratic         Rel Score
                                                Quadratic        Quadratic           Linear            Cubic           Quadratic          Probit            < 40
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between being selected for the BRIGHT program and whether or not a child was
observed in class during the survey of the child's school using the indicated specification for equation (1). Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to
the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table A4: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Children's Activities
                                 Collecting                  Fetching                                 Caring for         Tending            Help              Help
                                  Firewood     Cleaning        Water                                   Siblings          Animals           Farming          Shopping
                                       (1)         (2)           (3)                                     (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
Selected for BRIGHT               ‐0.080***     ‐0.046**     ‐0.049***                                ‐0.059***         ‐0.071***          ‐0.021*             ‐0.014
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                (0.021)      (0.020)       (0.018)                                  (0.021)           (0.019)          (0.012)            (0.022)
Relative Score                       ‐0.076       0.235         ‐0.05                                    0.021             ‐0.331           0.116              0.183
                                                  (0.293)           (0.206)           (0.245)           (0.183)           (0.256)          (0.111)            (0.173)
Constant                                         0.456***            0.108           0.541***         0.465***          0.357***           0.260**             0.141
                                                  (0.133)           (0.111)           (0.094)           (0.126)           (0.105)          (0.118)            (0.111)
Observations                                       17911             17919             17920             17922             17922            17923              17923
R-squared                                          0.166             0.207             0.177             0.183              0.15            0.171              0.263
Prob>F                                               0                 0                 0                 0                  0               0                   0
Demographic Controls                                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Department Fixed Effects                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Note: This table presents estimates of the discontinuity in the relationship between the probability that a child engages in the indicated activity and the child's village
being selected for the BRIGHT program using equation (1) with all control variables and a linear specification for the relative score variable. Relative Score is
measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***,
**, and *, respectively.
Table A5: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on Math Test Scores

                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Selected for BRIGHT                           0.439***         0.437***          0.449***         0.407***         0.434***         0.315***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                           (0.049)          (0.050)           (0.041)          (0.051)          (0.051)          (0.073)
Relative Score                                  0.296            0.468                             1.460*            0.648
                                               (0.706)          (0.749)                            (0.755)          (1.799)
Relative Score2                                                                                   -5.592**
                                                                                                   (2.186)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                                           -0.424
                                                                                                                   (2.208)
Constant                                       -0.082            0.034            -0.087           -0.061           -0.077           -0.081
                                               (0.226)          (0.157)           (0.224)          (0.228)         (0.227)           (0.131)
Observations                                    17970            17970             17970            17970           17970             6448
R-squared                                       0.121            0.109              0.12            0.121            0.121            0.064
Prob>F                                         < 0.001          < 0.001           < 0.001          < 0.001         < 0.001           < 0.001
Demographic Controls                             Yes              No                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Department Fixed Effects                         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Model                                                                                                             Interacted        Rel Score
                                              Quadratic        Quadratic          Linear            Cubic         Quadratic           < 40
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between being selected for the BRIGHT program and the
child's total math score using the indicated specification for equation (1). Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small
magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table A6: Effects of BRIGHT Schools on French Test Scores

                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
Selected for BRIGHT                            0.407***         0.405***          0.413***         0.374***         0.402***          0.265***
(Relative Score ≥ 0)                            (0.045)          (0.047)           (0.038)          (0.047)          (0.046)           (0.067)
Relative Score                                   0.202            0.403                             1.389*            0.528
                                                (0.665)          (0.704)                            (0.802)          (1.675)
Relative Score2                                                                                    -5.699**
                                                                                                    (2.258)
Relative Score X Selected                                                                                             -0.392
                                                                                                                     (2.054)
Constant                                         -0.18            0.015            -0.183           -0.158            -0.174           0.005
                                                (0.248)          (0.198)           (0.248)          (0.249)          (0.248)          (0.133)
Observations                                     17970            17970             17970            17970            17970            6448
R-squared                                        0.109            0.097             0.109            0.109             0.109           0.064
Prob>F                                          < 0.001          < 0.001           < 0.001          < 0.001          < 0.001          < 0.001
Demographic Controls                              Yes              No                Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
Department Fixed Effects                          Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
Model                                                                                                               Interacted       Rel Score
                                               Quadratic        Quadratic          Linear            Cubic          Quadratic          < 40
Note: This table presents estimates of the estimated discontinuity in the relationship between being selected for the BRIGHT program and the
child's total French score using the indicated specification for equation (1). Relative Score is measured in units of 10,000 points due to the small
magnitude of the coefficients. Statistical significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Table A7: Comparison by Village School Status

Household                                     Any School- MCC School-                       Household Assets/                         Any School- MCC School-
Characteristics                     No School No School Any School                        Child Characteristics             No School No School Any School
Number of Members                    11.074      -0.313      0.183                      Basic Flooring                        0.943      -0.003      -0.021
                                                (0.495)     (0.393)                                                                     (0.019)     (0.018)
Number of Kids                        5.819      0.086       0.277                      Basic Roof                            0.542       0.04       -0.049
                                                (0.252)     (0.215)                                                                     (0.060)     (0.051)
Head is Male                          0.987      -0.009      0.006                      Number or Radios                      0.746         0        0.013
                                                (0.006)     (0.006)                                                                     (0.062)     (0.051)
Head's Age                           48.735      -0.392      -0.825                     Number of Phones                      0.143    0.065**       -0.016
                                                (0.694)     (0.584)                                                                     (0.030)     (0.031)
Head's Years of Schooling             0.106      0.035       0.056                      Number of Watches                     0.793      0.056       -0.042
                                                (0.039)     (0.043)                                                                     (0.069)     (0.054)
Religion: Muslim                      0.565      0.042       -0.033                     Number of Bikes                       1.522      -0.066      0.006
                                                (0.055)     (0.047)                                                                     (0.107)     (0.098)
Religion: Animist                     0.293      -0.042      0.022                      Number of Cows                        5.619       0.03       0.048
                                                (0.047)     (0.040)                                                                     (0.746)     (0.559)
Religion: Christian                   0.135      -0.003      0.014                      Number of Motorbikes                  0.271       0.03       0.019
                                                (0.031)     (0.027)                                                                     (0.033)     (0.029)
Language: Fulfude                     0.149      0.036       0.024                      Number of Carts                        0.68      -0.014      -0.028
                                                (0.045)     (0.043)                                                                     (0.058)     (0.049)
Language: Gulmachema                  0.304      -0.019      -0.019                     Child's Age                           8.837    -0.121**      0.053
                                                (0.068)     (0.056)                                                                     (0.059)     (0.050)
Language: Moore                       0.401      -0.003      -0.014                     Child is Male                         0.558     -0.024*      -0.011
                                                (0.070)     (0.057)                                                                     (0.014)     (0.009)
Ethnicity: Gourmanche                 0.307      -0.015      -0.014                     Head's Child                          0.906      -0.022      -0.012
                                                (0.068)     (0.057)                                                                     (0.018)     (0.017)
Ethnicity: Mossi                      0.414      -0.004      -0.025                     Head's Grandchild                     0.045      0.016       -0.012
                                                (0.070)     (0.057)                                                                     (0.013)     (0.010)
Ethnicity: Peul                       0.146      0.023       0.026                      Head's Neice/Nephew                   0.031      -0.001      0.011*
                                                (0.044)     (0.041)                                                                     (0.006)     (0.006)
Note: This table compares the average characteristics of children from villages based on the type of school present in the village. The first column presents the average
characteristics for children living in villages with no school. The second column presents the difference in average characteristics for children living in villages with non-
BRIGHT schools versus those living in village with no schools. The third column then presents the relative difference in characteristics between children living in villages
with BRIGHT schools and those living in villages with non-BRIGHT schools. Statistical signficance at the one, five, and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.
Table A8: Scoring Survey for Assignment of Villages to BRIGHT Program

Question (Score)
1. Number of 7-year-old girls in your village. (+1 pt per girl)
2. Number of girls between 7 and 12 years old in your village. (+1 pt per girl)
3. Number of girls between 7 and 12 years old in your village that are in school. (+1 pt per girl)
4. Distance to travel to the nearest school. (+1 if bet 0 and 5 km, -1 if > 6km)
5. Number of students at the nearest school. (+1 pt per student)
6. Number of classrooms at the nearest school. (+1 if no rooms, -1 if rooms exist)
7. Number of villages within 3km radius. (+1 if bet 0 and 5 km, -1 if > 6km)
8. Number of schools for all nearby villages in question 7. (-1 for each school, +1 if none exist)
9. Distance to the closest schools in villages listed in question 7. (For each village, +1 if bet 0 and 5 km, -1 if > 6km)
10. Number of girls between 7 and 12 years old in the villages in question 7. (+1 pt per girl)
11. Distance from your village to a high school (+1 if bet 0 and 20km, -1 if > 20km)
12. Number of students at the high school. (+1 per student)
13. Name of town where the high school is located. (Not scored)
14. What is your plan for assuring that all girls will be in school? (+1 pt for each action or plan)
15. What is your plan for helping with the unskilled labor needed to build the school? (+1 pt for each action or plan)
16. What is your plan for teaching the students' parents to read and write? (+1 pt for each action or plan)
17. How do you propose to participate in the management of the school? (+1 pt for each action or plan)
Note: This table contains the individual quesitons that comprise the scoring forumula for determing the selection of a village into the BRIGHT
program.
Table A9: Costs Associated with Each Type of School
                                                  Bright                                        Government Schools
                                                      % Schools                                                 % Schools
                                        Cost ($US) with Amenity                         Scenario I Secnario II with Amenity
A. Fixed Costs Over School Life (40 Years)
   School Complex1                        $83,366          1                             $67,391 2        $26,087               1
   Playground                               $138           1                                $0               $593               1
   Construction Supervision                $1,087          1                                $0              $4673               1
   M & E Coordination                      $1,087          1                                $0              $4673               1
   Water Supply                            $9,034        0.743                              $0                $04             0.246
   Has Preschool                           $7,744        0.081                              $0             $33303             0.015
   Toilets                                 $3,790        0.846                              $0             $16303             0.292
   Separate Toilets (for boys and girls) $3,790          0.779                              $0            $1,6303             0.262
   Total Fixed Costs                     $101,232                                        $67,391          $28,614

B. Annual Costs (1 Year)
   Take-Home Ration                                 $1,435             0.449              $1,435          $1,435              0.185
   Teacher Salary                                   $7,746 5             1                $8,440 5        $8,440 5              1
   Total Annual Costs                               $9,229                                $7,885          $7,885

C. Other Costs (5 Years)
   Maintenance                                       $1,500               1               $1,500 6         $6453                1
   Total Other Costs                                 $1,500                               $1,500           $645
Note: Cost estimates for BRIGHT schools were obtained from the Mellinium Challenge Corporation directly while cost estimates for
the government schools were obtained from the Ministry of Education.
1
  School complex includes both school building comprised of 3 classrooms and teachers' houses.
2
  School complex costs for Scenario I include the cost of the classrooms, teachers' houses, well, and other fixed costs.
3
  We were unable to find cost estimates for these amenities. Costs are estimated by taking the costs for the BRIGHT schools and
reducing them in proportion to the relative cost of a BRIGHT and Government school building with three classrooms. The resulting
calculation is to estimate the costs of these amenities at 43 percent of the cost of the same amenity for a BRIGHT school.
4
  Schools under this scenario did not include the construction of a well.
5
  Teacher salary is estimated by multiplying our estimate for the annual salary of a teacher ($3,045) by the number of teachers in each
type of school. This is 2.544 for the BRIGHT schools and 2.772 for the government schools.
6
  We were unable to obtain estimates of this cost. Given that this is the higher cost scenario, we include the cost at the same rate as for
the BRIGHT schools.
Table A10: Fraction of villages with schools
                 Non-Selected       Selected
School Type        Villages         Villages
Bright               0.034            0.912
Government           0.582           0.044
None                0.384            0.046
Note: The fraction of villages with BRIGHT schools is
based on the coefficients of a regression similar to that
presented in column one of Table 2 but without department
fixed effects. The estimates of the fraction of villages with
government schools are calculated using the estimates from
a regression similar to the one presented in column one of
Table 3 without department fixed effects.
Table A11:Annual Costs

                                      Scenario I Scenario II
BRIGHT School                           $12,059    $12,059
Government School                        $9,869     $8,729
Selected Village at Discontinuity     $11,432.36 $11,382.18
Non-Selected Village at Discontinuity $6,153.95 $5,490.23
Selected less Non-Selected               $5,278     $5,892
Additional Cost of Bright School         $2,190     $3,330
Note: All estimates are calculated by ammoratizing the costs from Table A8
over the specified time period using straight-line depreciation. The cost of
placing a school in a Selected Village is determined by using the ratio of
schools for villages that are just over the cut-off point for receiveing a
BRIGHT school listed in Table A9. The cost of placing a school in a Non-
Selected Village is determined by using the ratio of schools for villages that are
just under the cut-off point for receiveing a BRIGHT school listed in Table A9.
The marginal cost of turning a planned (but not constructed) government
school into a BRIGHT school is just the difference in cost between the two
types of schools.
Table A12: Estimated Benefits for Each Type of Intervention

                                  Fraction Enrolled                      Enrollment              Total Scores
Panel A: Estimates at the Discontinuity
   Selected Villages                    0.555                                230.88                  0.367
   Non-Selected Villages                0.352                               146.432                  -0.079

Panel B: Village Level Averages
   With BRIGHT Schools                               0.589                  245.024                  0.388
   With Government Schools                           0.451                  187.616                  0.042
Note: Estimates in Panel A are taken from regressions similar to those presented in Tables 6 and 7. The estimates
for the non-selected villages are taken from regressions similar to those in column two, but without the department
level fixed effects. We calculated the estimate for the selected villages by adding the estimate for the non-selected
villages to our estimate of the treatment effect from our preferred specification in column one of Tables 6 and 7.
The estimates presented in Panel B are created using the same methodology as those in Panel A but using the
esitmates from columns one, two, four, and five of Table 10 instead.
Table A13: Cost-Effectiveness of BRIGHT as Implemented
                                                 Enrollment                                         Test Scores
                                          Scenario I Scenario II                              Scenario I Scenario II
Panel A: Costs
 BRIGHT Villages                            $11,432     $11,382                                 $28,581          $28,455
 Comparison Villages                         $6,154      $5,490                                 $15,385          $13,726
 Difference in Costs                         $5,278      $5,892                                 $13,196          $14,730

Panel B: Outcomes
 BRIGHT Villages                                                231             231               0.37             0.37
 Comparison Villages                                            146             146               -0.08            -0.08
 Difference in Outcomes (i.e. Impacts)                           84              84               0.45             0.45

Panel C: Cost-Effectiveness
 Enrollment (One additional student per year)    $62.50       $69.77
 Test Scores (One Tenth of a standard deviation in two years)                                     $7.11           $7.94
Note: This table presents the estimated cost-effectiveness of the BRIGHT program as implemented. Panel A summarizes
the estimated costs. For enrollment, these are annual costs. For test scores, the costs are calculated over 2.5 years. Panel B
provides the estimates gains due to the program based on the impact esitmates provided in Tables 6, 7, and A11. Finally,
Panel C provides the estimated cost-effectiveness in US$ 2007.
Table A14: Cost-Effectiveness of the BRIGHT Specific Amenities
                                                 Enrollment                                     Test Scores
                                          Scenario I Scenario II                          Scenario I Scenario II
Panel A: Costs
 BRIGHT Schools                             $12,059     $12,059                             $30,148         $30,148
 Government Schools                          $9,869      $8,729                             $24,673         $21,822
 Difference in Costs                         $2,190      $3,330                              $5,475          $8,326

Panel B: Outcomes
 BRIGHT Schools                                                245            245             0.39            0.39
 Government Schools                                            188            188             0.04            0.04
 Difference in Outcomes (i.e. Impacts)                          57             57             0.59            0.59

Panel C: Cost Effectiveness
 Enrollment (One additional student per year)    $38.15      $58.01
 Test Scores (One Tenth of a standard deviation in two years)                                $3.79           $5.76
Note: This table presents the estimated cost-effectiveness of the amenities that are unique to the BRIGHT program.
Panel A summarizes the estimated costs. For enrollment, these are annual costs. For test scores, the costs are calculated
over 2.5 years. Panel B provides the estimates gains due to the program based on the impact esitmates provided in
Tables 10 and A11. Finally, Panel C provides the estimated cost-effectiveness in US$ 2007.
Table A15: Cost-Effectiveness Estimates of Other Education Interventions on School Enrollment
Intervention                  Country     Cost Eff.                     Study
Extra teachers (OB)             India       $2.81   Chin (2005)
Deworming                       Kenya       $4.36   Miguel and Kremer (2004)
Iron & deworming                India      $34.31   Bobonis, Miguel, and Sharma (2004)
Village-Based Schools        Afghanistan $39.57     Burde and Linden (2011)
School meals                    Kenya      $43.34   Vermeersch and Kremer (2005)
Teacher incentives              India      $67.64   Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2007)
School construction           Indonesia    $83.77   Duflo (2001)
School uniforms(a)              Kenya      $95.82   Evans, Kremer and Ngatia (2008)
School uniforms(b)              Kenya     $130.82 Kremer, Moulin, and Namunyu (2003)
Cash incentives for teachers    Kenya    No impacts Glewwe, Nauman, and Kremer (2003)
Textbook provision              Kenya    No impacts Glewwe, Kremer, and Moulin (2003)
Flip chart provision            Kenya    No impacts Glewwe, Kremer, Moulin, and Zitzewitz (2004)
Note: Cost needed to achieve an impact of one additional student enrolled in school per year. Measured in 2007 US$ (Evans
and Ghosh, 2008; Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton, 2008; He, Linden, and MacLeod, 2008). The estimates in this table are
different than the ones presented in Evans and Ghosh (2008) for two reasons: First, their estimates were in 1997 US$, whereas
we have expressed them in 2007 US$. Second, they presented “education budget cost-effectiveness” of interventions, which
accounts for the deadweight loss associated with raising the necessary funds, whereas we present the original estimates given
by the authors of the studies (adjusted to 2007 US$).
Table A16: Cost-Effectiveness Estimates of Other Education Interventions on Test Scores
Intervention                               Country    Cost Eff                         Study
Teacher training program                     India      $0.22    He, Linden, and MacLeod (2008)
Remedial ed (tutors or “Balsakhi”)           India      $0.97    Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, and Linden (2006)
Computer-assisted learning (PicTalk)         India      $1.00    He, Linden, and MacLeod (2008)
Additional teachers with student tracking   Kenya       $2.41    Duflo, DuPas, and Kremer (2007)
Village-Based Schools                     Afghanistan $3.24      Burde and Linden (2011)
Teacher incentives (India)                   India      $3.98    Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2007)
Girls’ scholarship                          Kenya       $4.07    Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton (2007)
Teacher incentives (Kenya)                  Kenya       $4.34    Glewwe, Nauman, and Kremer (2003)
Textbooks                                   Kenya       $5.30    Glewwe, Kremer, and Moulin (2003)
Computer-assisted learning (CAL)             India      $7.22    Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, and Linden (2006)
Educational vouchers                       Colombia    $41.34    Angrist et al. (2002)
Deworming                                   Kenya    No impacts Miguel and Kremer (2004)
Flip chart provision                        Kenya    No impacts Glewwe, Kremer, Moulin, and Zitzewitz (2004)
Child sponsorship program                   Kenya    No impacts Kremer, Moulin, and Namunyu (2003)
Note: This table presents the cost per student needed to achieve an impact of 0.1 of a standard deviation in test scores. Measured in 2007 US$
(Evans and Ghosh, 2008; Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton, 2007; He, Linden, and MacLeod, 2008). The estimates in this table are different than the
ones presented in Evans and Ghosh (2008) for two reasons: First, their estimates were in 1997 US$, whereas we have expressed them in 2007 US$.
Second, they presented “education budget cost-effectiveness” of interventions, which accounts for the deadweight loss associated with raising the
necessary funds, whereas we present the original estimates given by the authors of the studies (adjusted to 2007 US$).
