                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOUSING PRODUCTIVITY AND THE SOCIAL COST OF LAND-USE RESTRICTIONS

                                         David Albouy
                                         Gabriel Ehrlich

                                      Working Paper 18110
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w18110


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2012, Revised August 2018




Previously circulated as "Metropolitan Land Values and Housing Productivity." We would like to
thank participants at seminars at the AREUEA Annual Meetings (Chicago), Ben-Gurion
University, Brown University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Housing- Urban-
Labor-Macro Conference (Atlanta), Hunter College, the NBER Public Economics Program
Meeting, the New York University Furman Center, the University of British Columbia, the
University of California, the University of Connecticut, the University of Georgia, the University
of Illinois, the University of Michigan, the University of Rochester, the University of Toronto,
the Urban Economics Association Annual Meetings (Denver), and Western Michigan University
for their help and advice. We especially want to thank Morris Davis, Andrew Haughwout, Albert
Saiz, Matthew Turner, andWilliam Wheaton for sharing data, or information about data, with us.
The National Science Foundation (Grant SES-0922340) generously provided financial assistance.
Please contact the author by e-mail at albouy@illinois.edu or by mail at University of Illinois,
Department of Economics, 1407 W. Gregory, 18 David Kinley Hall, Urbana, IL 61801. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Albouy and Gabriel Ehrlich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Productivity and the Social Cost of Land-Use Restrictions
David Albouy and Gabriel Ehrlich
NBER Working Paper No. 18110
May 2012, Revised August 2018
JEL No. D24,R31,R52

                                          ABSTRACT

We use metro-level variation in land and structural input prices to test and estimate a housing cost
function with differences in local housing productivity. Both OLS and IV estimates imply that
stringent regulatory and geographic restrictions substantially increase housing prices relative to
land and construction input costs. The typical cost share of land is one-third, and substitution
between inputs is inelastic. A disaggregated analysis of regulations finds state-level restrictions
are costlier than local ones and provides a Regulatory Cost Index (RCI). Housing productivity
falls with city population. Typical land-use restrictions impose costs that appear to exceed
quality-of-life benefits, reducing welfare on net.


David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801-3606
and NBER
albouy@illinois.edu

Gabriel Ehrlich
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
gehrlich@umich.edu
1       Introduction
Many researchers (e.g., Glaeser et al., 2005a, Saiz, 2010) blame land-use restrictions for
declining housing affordability. Summers (2014) comments that one of “the two most im-
portant steps that public policy can take with respect to wealth inequality” is “an easing of
land-use restrictions.” Yet such restrictions are also argued to increase local housing de-
mand by improving local quality of life and the provision of public goods (Hamilton, 1975,
Brueckner, 1981, Fischel, 1987). Consequently, land-use restrictions could raise house
prices either by increasing housing demand or reducing housing supply. That ambiguity
makes the restrictions’ effects on social welfare difficult to assess.
    We resolve this ambiguity using a two-step process. First, we estimate a cost function
for housing across metro areas using the prices of land and construction inputs, along with
measures of regulatory and geographic restrictions. We call the gap between an area’s ac-
tual housing prices and the prices predicted by input costs an area’s “housing productivity,”
in the spirit of a Solow (1957) residual. Our results indicate that regulatory land-use re-
strictions (Gyourko et al., 2008) and geographical constraints (Saiz, 2010) raise the cost of
housing relative to input prices, meaning that they lower housing productivity.
    Second, we estimate whether land-use restrictions predict high housing prices rela-
tive to local wages. Such an effect on residents’ “willingness-to-pay” to live in an area
would suggest that land-use restrictions improve their quality of life (Roback, 1982). We
find, however, that after accounting for the tendency of areas with more desirable natural
amenities to be more regulated, willingness-to-pay is no higher in regulated areas than in
unregulated ones.
    Together, our results imply that the typical land-use restriction reduces social welfare.
Observed land-use restrictions raise housing costs by 15 percentage points on average,
reducing average welfare by 2.3 percent of income on net.1
    Our cost function estimates are particularly novel in that they employ variation in land
and construction price across cities. Conditioning on local land prices is central in isolat-
ing the supply-side effects of land-use restrictions housing prices from the demand-side
effects. Our main results hold whether we estimate the housing cost function parameters
using ordinary least squares (OLS) or instrumental variable (IV) methods. The estimates
imply that land typically accounts for one-third of housing costs and that the elasticity of
    1
     We calculate those magnitudes by comparing the increase in housing costs implied by moving from the
fifth percentile of costs imposed by land-use regulation to the average level (15 percent), and scaling the
implied increase in costs by housing’s share of the average expenditure bundle of 16 percent.


                                                    1
substitution between inputs is below one. Our results regarding land-use restrictions also
hold over a wide range of parameter values for the housing cost function.2
    Our new measure of metropolitan housing productivity supplements other metropolitan
indices of economic value, namely productivity indices for firms in the traded sector—as
in Beeson and Eberts (1989), Gabriel and Rosenthal (2004), Shapiro (2006), and Albouy
(2016)—and indices of quality of life—as in Roback (1982), Gyourko and Tracy (1991),
Albouy (2008), and others. Estimated housing productivity levels vary widely, with a stan-
dard deviation equal to 23 percent of total housing costs. Contrary to common assumptions
(e.g., Rappaport, 2008) that productivity levels in traded and housing sectors are equal, we
find the two are negatively correlated across metro areas.
    We consolidate the predicted efficiency loss of observed land-use regulations into a
“Regulatory Cost Index,” or RCI. The RCI measures the extent to which observed regula-
tions reduce housing productivity. It has a cardinal economic interpretation given by the
efficiency costs imposed by a variety of regulations. The RCI explains two-fifths of the
variance between input costs and output prices, and rises along with city population and
density. This last result suggests that endogenous local politics may impose a diseconomy
of urban scale.
    There are important antecedents to our work on housing productivity. Rose (1992)
finds that geographic restrictions in Japan raise land and housing values in 27 cities. Ih-
lanfeldt (2007) documents that land-use regulations predict higher housing prices but lower
land values using assessment data from 25 Florida counties. Glaeser and Gyourko (2003,
2005) document that housing and land values differ most in cities where rezoning requests
take the longest using data from 20 U.S. cities. They also argue that regulations push the
unit prices in tall Manhattan buildings above their marginal construction costs. These ex-
tra costs do not offset the estimated benefits of preserved views. Our study builds upon
these approaches by providing a unified framework for measuring the net welfare effects
of land-use regulation across a wide range of U.S. metro areas. Waights (2015) builds on
our approach using panel data and finds similar results for England, including low factor
substitution and negative welfare consequences of land-use restrictions.
   2
     An expanded model with factor bias suggests land-use restrictions lower the relative value of productivity
of land. When we examine the separate effects of 11 sub-indices provided by the Wharton Residential Land-
Use Restriction Index, we find state political and court involvement predict the largest increases in costs.




                                                      2
2       A Model of Housing Costs and Price Determination
Our econometric model embeds a cost function for housing within a general-equilibrium
model of urban areas, similar to Roback (1982) and Albouy (2016). The national economy
contains many cities indexed by j, which produce a numeraire good, X, which is traded
across cities, and housing, Y , which is not traded across cities, and has a local price pj .3


2.1     Housing Costs, Productivity, and Supply
Firms produce housing, Y , with land, L, and structural inputs, M . While we refer to the
latter loosely as “construction,” inputs, they include time and capital costs of maintenance,
renovation, and building. The production function for housing obeys the relationship:

                                          Yj = AY F (L, M ; BjY )                                             (1)

where F Y is concave and exhibits constant returns to scale at the firm level.4 Housing
productivity, AYj , is a city-specific characteristic that may vary with characteristics such
as population or regulatory environment. BjY captures factor bias in city j, or the relative
productivity of land to construction inputs.5
    We assume that input and output markets are perfectly competitive.6 Land earns a
city-specific price, rj , while construction inputs cost vj per unit. Marginal and aver-
    3
      To simplify, we assume away federal taxes and land in the traded sector.
    4
      The production model is meant to apply to all housing, not only to new construction. The use of a single
function to model the production of a heterogeneous housing stock was first established by Muth (1969). In
the words of Epple et al. (2010, p. 906), “The production function for housing entails a powerful abstraction.
Houses are viewed as differing only in the quantity of services they provide, with housing services being ho-
mogeneous and divisible. Thus, a grand house and a modest house differ only in the number of homogeneous
service units they contain.” This abstraction also implies that a highly capital-intensive form of housing,
e.g., an apartment building, can substitute in consumption for a highly land-intensive form of housing, e.g.,
single-story detached houses. Our analysis uses data from owner-occupied properties, accounting for 67% of
homes, of which 82% are single-family and detached.
    5
      In our primary model we ignore variation in BjY , but we include it in an extended model. Briefly,
suppose housing productivity is factor-specific, so that the production function for housing is Yj =
F (L, M ; AYj , BjY ) = F (AYj L L, AYj M M ; 1). Then the factor bias BjY in equation 1 is captured by the
ratio BjY = AYj L /AYj M . Appendix A shows that ÂYj = φÂYj L + (1 − φ)ÂYj M and B̂jY = ÂY L − ÂY M .
    6
      Many studies support the hypothesis that the construction sector is competitive. Glaeser et al. (2005b)
report that “...all the available evidence suggests that the housing production industry is highly competitive.”
Basu et al. (2006) calculate returns to scale in the construction industry as unity, indicating firms in construc-
tion have no market power. On the output side, competition seems sensible as new homes must compete
with the stock of existing homes. Nevertheless, if markets are imperfectly competitive, then AYj will vary
inversely with the mark-up on price above cost.


                                                        3
age costs are given by the unit cost function c(rj , vj ; BjY )/AYj ≡ minL,M {rj L + vj M :
AYj F (L, M ; BjY ) = 1}. The equilibrium condition for housing output is that in every city
j that has positive production, housing prices should equal unit costs:7

                                        pj = c(rj , vj ; BjY )/AYj .                                      (2)

     A first-order log-linear approximation of equation (2) expresses how housing prices
vary with input prices and productivity: p̂j = φr̂j + (1 − φ)v̂j − ÂYj , where ẑj represents,
for any variable z, city j’s log deviation from the national average, z̄: ẑj = ln zj − ln z. φ
is the cost share of land for the typical city. Thus, p̂j , r̂j , and v̂j represent housing-price,
land-value, construction-price differentials, or “indices,” for each city j. AYj is normalized
so that a one-point increase in ÂYj corresponds to a one-point reduction in log costs.
     A second-order approximation of equation (2) reveals two more parameters, the elas-
ticity of substitution, σ, and differences in factor bias, Bj :

                                       1
              p̂j = φr̂j + (1 − φ)v̂j + φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j − B̂jY )2 − ÂYj ,                      (3)
                                       2

The data will indicate that σ < 1 if output prices increase in the square of the factor-price
differences, (r̂j −v̂j )2 . Factor biases against land, −B̂jY , have a similar effect. When σ 6= 0,
the cost-share of land in a particular city j, φj , can deviate from the typical share, φ. This
deviation depends on input prices and factor bias according to the approximation:

                            φj = φ + φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j − B̂jY ).                                  (4)

When σ < 1, the local land share rises with the price of land relative to construction inputs,
r̂j − v̂j , and falls with land’s factor bias, B̂jY .
     Local housing supply differences across cities are approximated by:
                                                       
                     1 − φj                      1 − φj
       Ŷj = L̂j + σ        (p̂j − v̂j ) + 1 + σ          ÂYj + (1 − φj ) (1 − σ) B̂jY                  (5a)
                       φj                          φj
          = L̂j + ηj (p̂j − v̂j ) + (1 + ηj ) ÂYj + (1 − φj − φj ηj ) B̂jY                             (5b)

where ηj ≡ σ (1 − φj ) /φj is the local partial-equilibrium own-price elasticity of housing
supply, which falls in the cost share of land, φj . More generally, equation (5a) expresses
   7
    In previous drafts, we considered when this condition could be slack. Low-growth markets exhibited
slackness in a manner consistent with Glaeser and Gyourko (2005), but this had little effect on other results.


                                                      4
several channels that may affect housing supply. Those concerning overall land supply, L̂j ,
are not addressed here. Housing productivity increases housing supply by lowering factor
costs, raising output by ηj ÂYj , which then frees up land to supply additional housing by an
amount ÂYj . If σ < 1, land-biased productivity also increases supply directly. Furthermore,
the price elasticity ηj is higher in places where the local cost share of land, φj , is lower.8


2.2     Simultaneous Determination of Housing and Land Prices
This section considers how input and output prices are jointly determined in an equilibrium
model of a system of open cities. In addition to housing productivity, AYj , cities j vary in
trade productivity, AX j , and quality of life, Qj . Each production sector has its own type of
worker, k = X, Y , where type-Y workers produce housing. Preferences are represented by
U (x, y; Qkj ), where x and y are personal consumption of the traded good and housing, and
Qkj varies by worker type. Each worker supplies a single unit of labor and earns wage wjk ,
along with non-labor income, I k , which does not vary across metros.
    Consider the case in which workers are perfectly mobile and preferences are homoge-
neous. In equilibrium, this requires that workers receive the same utility in all cities, ūk , for
each type. Define sY as the expenditure share on housing and t as labor’s share of income,
assumed equal across sectors. Appendix A shows that this mobility condition implies that
the local quality-of-life index is proportional to residents’ willingness-to-pay determined
by housing prices and wages:

                                      Q̂kj = sY p̂j − tŵjk , k = X, Y,                                        (6)

i.e., higher quality of life must offset high prices or low after-tax wages.9 The aggregate
quality of life index is Q̂j ≡ λQ̂X               Y
                                   j + (1 − λ)Q̂j , where λ is the share of labor income in
the traded sector. Likewise, the aggregate wage index is ŵ ≡ λŵjX + (1 − λ)ŵjY .
     Traded output has a uniform price of one across all cities. It is produced with Cobb-
Douglas technology, with AX   j being factor neutral. The trade-productivity index is then
proportional to the wage index:
                                         ÂX        X
                                           j = θ ŵj ,                                  (7)
   8
      This constitutes a local approximation. When σ = 1, differences in price elasticities ηj cannot depend
on prices or factor bias, which affect φj endogenously through (4). Thy must instead be related to exogenous
differences in φj or in land supply elasticities, through L̂j .
    9
      Qkj is normalized such that Q̂kj of 0.01 is equivalent in utility to a one-percent rise in total consumption.



                                                        5
where θ is the cost share of labor. Mobile capital, with a uniform price across cities, ac-
counts for remaining costs in the traded sector.
   Construction inputs are produced with local labor and traded capital according to the
production function Mj = (N Y )a (K Y )1−a , implying that v̂j = aŵjY . This permits us to
write an alternative housing productivity measure that uses wages, weighted by the labor’s
cost share in housing, a (1 − φ):

                                    ÂYj = φr̂j + a (1 − φ) ŵjY − p̂j .                                    (8)

The total-productivity index of a city, is ÂTj OT ≡ sY ÂYj + sX ÂX
                                                                    j ,
   Combining equations (6), (7), and (8) gives the following system of equations:

                    tŵjX =λ−1 sX ÂX
                                    j                                                                      (9a)
                                  −1 X X
                   sY p̂j =Q̂X
                             j + λ s Âj                                                                  (9b)
                                        −1 X X
                    tŵjY =Q̂X     Y
                             j − Q̂j + λ s Âj                                                             (9c)
                 sY φr̂j =λQ̂X            Y    X X     Y Y            T OT
                             j + (1 − λ)Q̂j + s Âj + s Âj = Q̂j + Âj                                   (9d)

where sY φ is land’s share of income. Housing prices are determined by the traded sector’s
productivity and the amenities valued by its workers. Wages in the housing sector keep up
with those in the traded sector, but are lower insofar as workers in the housing sector prefer
the local amenities. Land values capitalize the full value of all amenities; unlike housing
prices, these values include housing productivity and quality of life for housing workers. As
noted by Aura and Davidoff (2008), improvements in local housing productivity need not
reduce the unconditional price of housing. In this model, they raise land values instead.10


3        Empirical Approach
Here, we adapt a translog functional form for the housing cost function and propose spec-
ification tests for it. We also discuss identification from the perspective of our theoretical
    10
     Two amendments to the model can create a negative relationship between housing productivity and hous-
ing prices. The first is to introduce land into the non-traded sector (Roback, 1982). The second is to introduce
heterogeneity in location preference, which is similar to introducing moving costs. The mathematics in these
two richer cases are complicated, but are described and simulated in Albouy and Farahani (2017) when
Q̂X       Y
  j = Q̂j . As heterogeneity in preferences increase, the city becomes closed, and estimation issues related
to simultaneity diminish. At the same time, it becomes more difficult to examine the quality-of-life benefits
of land-use restrictions.


                                                       6
model and compare our parametric estimation approach to non-parametric approaches that
treat housing quantities as a latent variable.


3.1       Adapting and Testing the Translog Cost Function
Assume city j’s housing productivity and factor bias are determined in part by a vector
of observable restrictions, Zj , which is partitioned into regulatory and geographic com-
ponents: Zj = [ZjR , ZjG ]. Productivity and bias are also determined by unobserved city-
specific components, ξj = [ξAj , ξBj ], such that:

                                            ÂYj = −Zj δA − ξAj                                         (10a)
                                           B̂jY = −Zj δB − ξBj .                                        (10b)

A positive δA indicates that a restriction reduces productivity; a positive δB indicates that a
restriction is biased against land. Substituting equations (10a) and (10b) into (3) gives the
following reduced-form equation:

            p̂j − v̂j = β1 (r̂j − v̂j ) + β3 (r̂j − v̂j )2 + γ1 Zj + γ2 Zj (r̂j − v̂j ) + ζj + εj .         (11)

The error in this regression comprises two components. The first, ζj , is driven mainly by
unobservable determinants of productivity and bias:

            ζj = ξAj + ξBj φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ) Zj δB + r̂j − v̂j + ξBj /2 + (Zj δB )2 /2 .
                                                                                   
                                                                                                            (12)

The second component, εj , may capture sampling, specification, and measurement error.11
Appendix A provides more detail.
   Relaxing the homogeneity assumption gives a more general form of equation (11):

 p̂j = β1 r̂j + β2 v̂j + β3 (r̂j )2 + β4 (v̂j )2 + β5 (r̂j v̂j ) + γ1 Zj + γ2 Zj r̂j + γ3 Zj v̂j + ε0j . (13)

The first five terms correspond to the general translog cost function (Christensen et al.,
1973) with land and construction prices. The last three terms augment it with Zj and
its interactions. The translog is equivalent to the second-order approximation of the cost
function (see, e.g., Binswanger, 1974, Fuss and McFadden, 1978) under the homogeneity
  11
       This could result from market power or disequilibrium forces causing prices to deviate from costs.



                                                       7
constraints:

                                                   β1 = 1 − β2                                         (14a)
                                           β3 = β4 = −β5 /2                                            (14b)

The extended model, with δB 6= 0, also imposes the restriction that γ2 = −γ3 .12 The econo-
metric model allows us to test for Cobb-Douglas technology, which imposes the restriction
σ = 1 in (3) or, in equation (13):

                                           β3 = β4 = β5 = 0.                                            (15)

   The reduced-form coefficients of equation (11) correspond to the following structural
parameters:

                                 β1 = φ                                                                (16a)
                                 β3 = (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)                                             (16b)
                                 γ1 = δA                                                               (16c)
                                 γ2 = φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)δB = 2β3 δB .                                     (16d)

Inverting the equations to solve for the structural parameters shows that β1 identifies the
distribution parameter, φ, and together with β3 it identifies the substitution parameter σ. γ1
identifies how much measures in Z raise costs (or conversely, lower productivity). γ2 and
β3 identify how measures in Z bias productivity against land when γ2 β3 > 0.


3.2     Identification, Simultaneity, and Instrumental Variables
The econometric specification in equation (13) regresses housing costs p̂j on land values
r̂j , construction prices v̂j , and restrictions, Ẑj . With no factor bias (B̂jY = 0), the residual
represents either unobserved housing productivity, ζj , or the more general error term, εj .
This specification isolates supply factors in AYj , which pull the price of housing away from
land, from the demand factors in Qj and AX         j , which move housing and land prices in the
same direction. OLS estimates of the housing-cost parameters will be consistent if ζj = 0
  12
     While the model assumes constant returns to scale at the firm level, it does not rule out non-constant
returns at the city level. Urban (agglomeration) economies of scale will be reflected in AYj , as addressed in
section 6.2.



                                                      8
and εj is orthogonal to the regressors.
    A simultaneity problem arises if there are unobserved cost determinants ζj 6= 0 not
absorbed by the controls, Zj ; see Appendix B for technical details. In an open city, high
housing productivity raises land values without changing housing prices, as seen in (9b) and
(9d). This variation attenuates the estimate of land’s share, φ̂, towards zero. Correlation
between ζj and other cost-function elements may also introduce omitted variable bias.
    One solution to these potential problems is to find instrumental variables (IVs) for land
values and structural input prices. The model implies that variables that predict quality of
life Qj or trade productivity AX  j will be relevant in that they will raise land values. To
satisfy the exclusion restriction, these variables must be uncorrelated with ζj .


3.3     Comparison to Alternative Estimation Techniques
A long literature estimates housing production and cost functions: see, for instance, Mc-
Donald (1981) and Thorsnes (1997). Here, we compare our methodology to the related
and influential approaches of Epple et al. (2010) and Combes et al. (2017). Those stud-
ies estimate the housing production function using developers’ optimality conditions for
combining land and structure, treating housing quantities as latent variables.
    An important advantage of this other approach is that it relies on a direct measure of
housing value (price times quantity) per acre. In contrast — as noted by Combes et al.
(2017) — our approach requires estimating a cross-sectional housing-price index, which
we impute imperfectly using hedonic methods. Additionally, both Epple et al. (2010) and
Combes et al. (2017) estimate the housing production function non-parametrically, rather
than with a translog form.13
    The approach taken here has somde advantages. Most importantly, it easily accom-
modates observable productivity shifters such as regulatory and geographic constraints. If
correctly specified, the parametric form efficiently estimates cost shares and elasticities of
substitution, which are heavily researched and easy to interpret. By focusing exclusively
on prices, the method also avoids problems that arise with measured quantities, such as op-
timization errors, which can attenuate estimates. Finally, the cost function approach can be
embedded in an equilibrium system of cities and used to assess the welfare consequences
of land-use regulations. Given the approaches’ different sets of strengths, we hope that they
will be seen as complements rather than substitutes in future research.
  13
    Combes et al. (2017) also allows for non-constant-returns-to-scale, in contrast to our approach and that
of Epple et al. (2010).

                                                     9
4        Data and Metropolitan Indicators
The residential land-value index used to estimate the housing cost function is adapted from
Albouy et al. (2018), who describe it in detail. It is based on market transactions from the
CoStar group and uses a regression framework that controls for some parcel characteristics.
It applies a shrinkage technique to correct for measurement error due to sampling variation,
which is important given sample sizes in smaller metros. It provides flexible land-value
gradients, estimated separately for each city using an empirical Bayes-type technique that
“borrows” information from other cities with a similar land area. The residential index
used in this paper differs from the index in Albouy et al. (2018) in that it: i) weights census
tracts according to the density of residential housing units, rather than by simple land area;
ii) uses fitted values for residential plots, rather than for all uses; and iii) encompasses all
metropolitan land, not only land that is technically urban.


4.1      Housing Price, Wages, and Construction Price Indices
Housing-price and wage indices for each metro area, j, and year, t, from 2005 to 2010,
are based on 1% samples from the American Community Survey (ACS).14 As Appendix
C describes in more detail, we regress the logarithm of individual housing prices ln pijt on
a set of controls Xijt , and indicator variables for each year-metro interaction, ψijt , in the
equation ln pijt = X0ijt β + ψijt + eijt . The indicator variables ψijt provide the metro-level
indices (or differentials), denoted p̂j .15
    Metropolitan wage indices are calculated similarly, controlling for worker skills and
characteristics, for two samples: workers in the construction industry only, to estimate ŵjY ,
and workers outside the construction industry, to estimate ŵjX . Appendix figure A shows
that the two wage measures are highly correlated, but that wages in the construction sector
are more dispersed across metros.
    Our main price index for structural inputs, v̂j , comes from the Building Construction
Cost data from the RS Means company (Waier et al., 2009). The index covers the costs
of installation and materials for several types of structures and is common in the literature,
e.g., Davis and Palumbo (2008), and Glaeser et al. (2005a). It is provided at the 3-digit zip-
    14
     The time period is restricted to those years because prior to 2005, the ACS is too coarse geographically,
and our land transaction data end in 2010. We use MSA definitions for the year 2000.
  15
     Alternative methods using price differences such as letting the coefficient β vary across cities produce
similar indicators (Albouy et al., 2016a). We aggregate the inter-metropolitan index of housing prices, p̂jt ,
across years for display; it is normalized to have mean zero nationally.


                                                     10
code level. When a metro contains multiple 3-digit zipcodes, we weight each by the share
of the metro’s housing units in each zipcode. Appendix figure B shows that construction
wages ŵjX and construction prices v̂j are highly correlated.
    Columns 2 through 5 of table 1 present the housing-price, land-value, construction-
cost, and construction-wage indices for a subset of metro areas. They tend to be positively
correlated with each other and with metro population, reported in column 1.16


4.2     Regulatory and Geographic Restrictions
Our index of regulatory restrictions comes from the Wharton Residential Land Use Regu-
latory Index (WRLURI) described in Gyourko et al. (2008). The index reflects the survey
responses of municipal planning officials regarding the regulatory process. The responses
form the basis of 11 subindices, coded so that higher scores correspond to greater reg-
ulatory stringency.17 Gyourko et al. (2008) construct a single aggregate Wharton index
through factor analysis. Our analysis use both their aggregate index and the subindices.
The base data for the Wharton index is for the municipal level; we recalculate the index
and its subindices at the metro level by weighting the individual municipal values using
sampling weights provided by the authors, multiplied by each municipality’s population
proportion within its metro. We renormalize all of these as z−scores, with a mean of
zero and standard deviation one, weighting metros by the number of housing units. The
subindices are typically, but not uniformly, positively correlated with one another.
    Our index of geographic restrictions is provided by Saiz (2010), who uses satellite
imagery to calculate land scarcity in metropolitan areas. The resulting “unavailability”
index measures the fraction of undevelopable land within a 50 km radius of the city center,
where land is considered undevelopable if it is: i) covered by water or wetlands, or ii) has
a slope of 15 degrees or steeper. We consider both Saiz’s aggregate index and his separate
indices based on solid and flat land, each of which we re-normalize as a z−score.
  16
      We mark metros in the lowest decile of population growth between 1980 and 2010 with a “*” in case the
equilibrium condition (2) does not apply well to these areas.
   17
      The subindices comprise the approval delay index (ADI), the local political pressure index (LPPI), the
state political involvement index (SPII), the open space index (OSI), the exactions index (EI), the local project
approval index (LPAI), the local assembly index (LAI), the density restrictions index (DRI), the supply re-
striction index (SRI), the state court involvement index (SCII), and the local zoning approval index (LZAI).




                                                      11
4.3    Instrumental Variable Measures
Guided by the model, we consider two instruments for land values. The first is the inverse
of the distance to the nearest saltwater coast, a predictor of Q̂j and ÂXj . The second is an
adaptation of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s “Natural Amenities Scale” (McGrana-
han et al., 1999), which ought to correlate with Q̂j .18
    While it is straightforward to show that these instruments are relevant, it is difficult to
test the exclusion restriction. That said, we believe the instruments’ excludability is plau-
sible given our methods and controls. A priori, the inverse distance to the coast should
be uncorrelated with housing productivity conditional on geographical constraints to de-
velopment. At first, the documented correlation between weather and construction activity
(e.g., Fergus, 1999) may seem to be problematic for the natural amenities instrument. Re-
call, however, that we include a measure of construction costs directly in equation (3), so
any potential violation of the exclusion restriction must operate through correlation of the
weather with unobserved elements of housing productivity, not construction costs per se.
    A separate concern regarding identification is that regulatory restrictions may be en-
dogenously correlated with unobserved supply factors. We follow Saiz (2010) in consider-
ing two instruments for regulatory restrictions. The first is the proportion of Christians in
each metro area in 1971 who were adherents of “nontraditional” denominations (Johnson
et al., 1974). The second is the share of local government revenues devoted to protective in-
spections according to the 1982 Census of Governments (of the Census, 1982). Saiz shows
that these instruments predict land-use regulations in his data, as do we in ours.
    To be valid instruments for land-use restrictions, these variables must also be exclud-
able. A potential concern is the finding in Davidoff (2016) that the nontraditional Christian
share is correlated with measures of housing demand growth. It is important to recall,
though, that our regressions include a direct measure of metro-level land values, which
ought to capitalize demand shifts. The exclusion restriction in our context is therefore that
the instruments must be uncorrelated only with supply determinants in the housing sector,
after controlling for construction costs. This restriction is weaker than the requirement that
the instruments be uncorrelated with house prices unconditionally.
  18
     The natural amenities index in McGranahan et al. (1999) is the sum of six components: mean January
temperature, mean January hours of sunlight, mean July temperature, mean relative July humidity, a mea-
sure of land topography, and the percent of land area covered in water. We omit the last two components
in constructing the IV because they are similar to the components of the Saiz (2010) index of geographic
restrictions to development. The adapted index is the sum of the first four components averaged from the
county to metro level.


                                                  12
    We run standard over-identification tests as a formal check on the validity of our instru-
mental variables, which we discuss in section 5.3. One limitation of these tests is that they
require assuming at least one of the instruments is valid. Additionally, the results can be
sensitive to many factors, such as the clustering of standard errors. We encourage readers
to keep these limitations in mind when interpreting our results. We do believe, though, that
the presence of land values and construction costs in equation 13 significantly strengthens
the plausibility of the exclusion restrictions in our context.


5        Cost-Function Estimates
In this section, we estimate the cost function in section 3.1 using the data described in
section 4 to examine how costs are influenced by geography and regulation. We restrict
our analysis to metros with at least 10 land-sale observations, and years with at least 5.
For our main estimates, the metros must also have available regulatory, geographic, and
construction-price indices, leaving 230 metros and 1,103 metro-years. Regressions are
weighted by the number of housing units in each metro.


5.1      Base OLS Estimates and Tests of the Housing Cost Model
Figure 1 plots the housing-price index, p̂j , against the land-value index, r̂j . Assuming
Cobb-Douglas production and no other input cost or productivity differences, the simple
regression line’s slope of 0.53 would correspond to the cost share of land, φ. The convex
gradient in the quadratic regression implies that the average cost-share of land increases
with land values, yielding an imprecise estimate of σ = 0.47. The vertical distance be-
tween each metro marker and the estimated regression line forms the basis of our estimate
of housing productivity. As such, figure 1 suggests San Francisco has low housing produc-
tivity and Las Vegas has high housing productivity.
     Next we consider the construction-price index, v̂j , which is plotted against land values
in figure 2. Although the two are strongly correlated, land values vary much more, and thus
account for most of the variation in the land-to-construction price index r̂j − v̂j .19
    19
     Figure 2 also plots estimated input cost level curves for the surface in 3. From equation (3), these curves
satisfy φr̂j + (1 − φ) v̂j + φ (1 − φ) (1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j )2 = c for a constant c. With the log-linearization, the
slope of the level curve equals the negative ratio of the land cost share to the structural share, −φj / (1 − φj ).
The curve in the lower-left corresponds to a low fixed sum of housing price and productivity; the curve in the
upper-right corresponds to a higher sum. The curves are concave because the estimated σ is less than one, so



                                                       13
    Table 2 presents cost-function estimates with the aggregate geographic and regulatory
indices. Columns 1 through 3 impose Cobb-Douglas production, σ = 1, as in (15); columns
1 and 2 also impose the homogeneity constraint in (14a). Column 1 is the simplest regres-
sion specification, as it excludes the restriction measures, Zj . Including the construction
index in column 1 lowers the cost share of land to 47 percent from 53 percent in the sim-
ple regression in figure 1. When the geographic and regulatory restriction measures are
included in column 2, the estimated cost share of land falls to 36 percent.
    Both regulatory and geographic restrictions are estimated to raise housing costs, a find-
ing that persists throughout our analysis. The homogeneity constraint is rejected at the 5%,
but not the 1%, significance level in both columns 1 and 2. The same is true of the Cobb-
Douglas constraint from (15) in column 2. Column 3 relaxes the homogeneity constraint,
which this raises the coefficient on the construction price but has little effect on the other
estimates.
    Columns 4 through 6 present parallel specifications to columns 1 through 3, but using
the translog formulations (11) and (13) that allow for σ 6= 1. The cost surface shown in
figure 3 uses the estimates without Zj . The estimated σ there and in both columns 4 and
5 is below one-half. Importantly, the homogeneity constraints in (14a) and (14b) pass at
the 5% confidence level in both columns, meaning the translog specification passes our
formal statistical tests. Thus, the restricted model in column 5 provides a theoretically and
empirically reasonable account of housing costs. It explains 86 percent of the variation
across metro areas using only four variables.
    Finally, the results in column 7 present estimates from the extended model with factor
bias. This allows γ2 to be non-zero in equation (11) by interacting the land-to-construction
price index r̂j − v̂j with the restrictions Zj . The estimate of γ2 = 0.057 > 0 for the
regulatory interaction suggests that land-use regulations are biased against land. It implies a
one standard deviation increase in regulation raises the cost share of land by 5.7 percentage
points. Combining the value of γ2 with the estimate that β3 equals 0.044, equation (16d)
implies δB = 0.65, meaning this increase reduces the relative productivity of land by almost
50 percent. While suggestive, this specification fails the additional test imposed on the
reduced form equation (13) that γ2 = −γ3 .
land’s cost-share increases with its value.




                                              14
5.2     Estimate Variability and Stability
Table 3 reports several exercises to gauge how the estimates change when using different
data and sub-samples. All of the specifications use the constrained translog form from
equation (11) with γ2 = 0, corresponding to column 5 of table 2. That specification is
reproduced in column 1 of table 3 for convenience.
     Column 2 uses construction wages instead of the RS means index. The results are
similar, but the homogeneity restriction is rejected. We interpret this result as suggesting
that the RS Means index is a more appropriate construction-price measure, likely because
it also incorporates the price of non-labor inputs (i.e., materials).20
     Columns 3 and 4 use two alternative land-value indices: i) for all land uses (not just
residential), and ii) weighting land by area, not by the number of residential units. Using
land for all uses in column 3 results in a smaller φ and a higher σ. Appendix figure C
shows that land values for all uses vary considerably more than values for residential uses
only, biasing the slope and curvature of the estimated housing cost function downwards.
The results in column 4 show that weighting all land equally, ignoring where homes are
located, produces similar biases.
     Column 5 uses an alternative housing-price index that makes no hedonic correction for
housing characteristics. The results are largely similar, if noisier. If unobserved differences
in housing quality resemble observed differences, these results suggest that unobserved
differences should not overturn our main conclusions.
     In columns 6 and 7, we split the sample into two periods: a “housing-boom” period,
from 2005 to 2007, and a “housing-bust” period, from 2008 to 2010. The results are not
statistically different from those in the pooled sample. The former period shows stronger
effects from the restrictions, providing suggestive evidence that restrictions are more bind-
ing when housing demand is stronger.21
     Overall, the estimates in tables 2 and 3 support our key hypotheses: regulatory and geo-
graphic restrictions raise housing costs by 5 to 12 percent for a standard deviation increase
  20
      We also estimated a three input equation that separates the structural inputs into actual materials and
installation (labor) costs. Material costs vary little across space relative to these installation costs, making
them difficult to use reliably. That lack of variation provides weak justification for the assumption that
material costs are constant, justifying equation (8). Nevertheless, the Cobb-Douglas formulation produced a
very similar estimate of φ = 0.35 and an estimate for labor of a (1 − φ) = 0.39. Interestingly, if we regress
the construction wage measure on the RS means measure, we estimate a = 0.58, which implies a similar
value for a (1 − φ).
   21
      Minor differences may also arise from measurement error in the housing price index resulting from ACS
respondents’ imperfect awareness of current market conditions (Ehrlich, 2014).


                                                      15
in either measure. The translog model also passes tests of the homogeneity restriction in
(14a) and (14b). The estimated housing cost function parameters are quite plausible, with
the typical φ ranging from 0.32–0.36. The estimated σ is noisier and less stable, in the
range of 0.3–0.6, tentatively rejecting the Cobb-Douglas hypothesis in (15).


5.3    Instrumental Variables Estimates
Table 4 presents IV estimates of the base Cobb-Douglas and translog specifications in table
2.22 Columns 1 and 2 present IV versions of the estimates in column 2 of table 2.23 Column
1 uses inverse distance from the sea and the USDA amenity score as instruments for the
land-to-construction price index (r̂ − v̂). Column 2 adds the nontraditional Christian share
and protective inspections share as instruments, treating both the land-value and regulatory
indices as endogenous.
     The estimated land share in column 1 is higher than in the OLS estimates at 0.5, and a
Hausman-style test rejects the null hypothesis of exogenous land values at the 5% signif-
icance level. In column 2, which instruments for both indices, the estimated land share is
approximately one-third, similar to the OLS results. Instrumented increases in regulatory
stringency result in substantially higher, although less precise, estimates for their efficiency
costs.
     Translog IV estimates in columns 3 through 5 correspond to the OLS estimates in col-
umn 5 of table 2. Column 3 treats only land values as potentially endogenous, using the
levels, squares, and interaction of the USDA amenities score and inverse distance to the sea
as instruments for the (r̂ − v̂) index, and its square, (r̂ − v̂)2 . Column 4 additionally treats
the regulatory index as endogenous, using the nontraditional Christian share, the protec-
tive inspections share, and their interactions with the first two instruments as instruments.
The estimated cost shares of land are again higher than in the OLS estimates in table 2,
but are also less precise. The IV estimates of the cost of land-use restrictions in column
4 are 14 log points per standard deviation, larger than in the OLS but smaller than in the
IV Cobb-Douglas case. Column 5 uses a more limited set of instruments, using squares
and interactions of the predicted land-to-construction price and regulatory indices from the
first-stage regressions. The estimated cost share of land is closer to the OLS estimates,
while the cost of regulations is higher.
  22
     Appendix tables A1 and A2 present first-stage estimates for all regressions in this section.
  23
     Because there is no time variation in the instrumental variables, we must restrict ourselves to cross-
sectional estimates in these specifications.


                                                    16
    In column 6, we push the IV strategy further to test for factor bias. This model does
somewhat better at passing the over-identifying restrictions test, but at the risk of be-
ing under-identified, as evidenced by the Kleibergen-Paap statistic (Kleibergen and Paap
2006).24 The results are qualitatively similar to those in column 8 of Table 3, suggesting
that regulatory restrictions are biased against land. The estimated magnitude of the bias, as
well as φ̂ and σ̂, are even higher than in the OLS specification.
    The IV estimates suggest a somewhat higher cost share of land and larger impacts of
regulatory restrictions than the OLS estimates, but the IV estimates are less precise. The
two bottom rows of table 4 report the Wooldridge (1995) test of regressor endogeneity and
Hansen’s over-identification J-test of test of instrument exogeneity (Hansen 1982). All
of the specifications formally reject the null hypothesis of regressor exogeneity, despite
the substantive differences being small in several specifications. Half of the specifications
reject the over-identification test of instrument exogeneity, although notably not the limited
instrument specification in column 5, which features a strong first stage and results close to
the OLS estimates.
    The IV results largely reassure us of our OLS results. Their similar magnitudes suggest
that the unobserved productivity differences, ξj , are relatively small after conditioning on
the regulatory and geographic indices, minimizing the simultaneity and omitted-variable
concerns raised in section 3.2. As the IV specification tests are sensitive to various imple-
mentation choices, their results should be taken as suggestive, not definitive. In light of
these issues and the imprecision of the IV estimates, we prefer the OLS estimates.


5.4     Calibrating Alternative Cost Parameters
The literature on the housing cost function has offered a wide range of values for φ and
σ. Because our main focus is on housing productivity and the costs imposed by land-use
regulations, we also estimate δA using a wide range of cost parameters. This involves
setting, or “calibrating,” different values of φ and σ and estimating:

            p̂j − φr̂j − (1 − φ)v̂j − φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j )2 = Zj δA + ζj + εj

    Figure 4 shows the estimated effects using a range of φ from 0 to 0.5 and σY from
0 to 1.2. The effects of regulation decline as φ rises, and the effect of geography rises
  24
     The null hypothesis in the Kleibergen-Paap test is that the model is under-identified, so failing to reject
the null hypothesis is potential evidence of weak instruments.


                                                      17
slightly with σ. The point estimates suggest that both types of restrictions reduce housing
productivity over the entire range of calibrated parameters, although they are not quite
statistically significant at the 5% level for cost share near 0.5. Nevertheless, the finding
that regulatory and geographic restrictions reduce housing productivity is generally robust
to the exact shape of the housing cost function.25


5.5     Disaggregate Indices and the Regulatory Cost Index
We next consider which types of land-use restrictions do the most to increase housing costs.
The Wharton index aggregates 11 subindices, while the unavailability index aggregates
two. Column 1 of table 5 presents descriptive coefficient estimates from a regression of the
aggregate WRLURI z−score on the z−scores for the subindices. Column 2 presents sim-
ilar estimates for the Saiz subindices, which are negative because the subindices indicate
land that may be available for development.
    The key estimates in this table are in column 3, which features the disaggregated reg-
ulatory and geographic subindices in our favored restricted translog specification. The
estimates of φ = 0.332 and σ = 0.51 are close to our estimates in column 5 from ta-
ble 2. These small changes from moving to a richer model suggest that the biases from
unobserved housing-productivity determinants ζj are likely to be minor.
    The disaggregated results indicate that one-standard deviation increases in state polit-
ical and state court involvement reduce metro-level productivity by 6 and 4 percentage
points, while local supply restrictions raise costs by 1.5 percentage points. Those estimates
are significant at the 5% level; at the 10% significance level, local political pressure raises
costs by 2.4 percentage points. The one marginally significant negative coefficient is on
exactions (also known as “impact fees”). This result is suggestive because exactions are
thought to be a relatively efficient land-use regulation, especially when they help pay for
infrastructure improvements (Yinger, 1998).
    The regression coefficients are positively related to the coefficients in column 1, but
they put relatively more weight on state restrictions than on local ones. This is consistent
with results in Glaeser and Ward (2009) that more local regulations have limited effects on
prices, so long as housing consumers have substitute communities nearby where builders
are not constrained.
  25
   Appendix table A3 presents a similar sensitivity analysis for fewer parameter combinations in the instru-
mental variable context. The same qualitative patterns hold for the IV analysis.



                                                    18
    One caveat to these results is that, in theory, different types of land-use regulations
should have different effects on land and house prices. Brueckner (1999) shows that re-
strictions that reduce the supply of developable land without otherwise affecting the de-
velopment process should increase land prices without shifting the production and cost
functions. Our framework is arguably less well-suited to these sorts of restrictions, which
may be captured by the Open Space and Supply Restrictions subindices. The (insignificant)
negative coefficient on the open space index is consistent with this argument, although the
positive coefficient on the supply restrictions index is less so. Of course, given the diffi-
culties of measuring regulations, as well as the high multicollinearity between the various
subindices, we caution against taking any one estimate too literally.
    We use the estimates in column 3 of table 5 to construct a cardinal estimate of the
economic costs of land-use regulations, which we call the “Regulatory Cost Index” (RCI).
Partitioning the coefficient vectors into the regulatory and the geographic, γ R and γ G , the
RCI is given by the predicted value ZjR γ̂ R . It is worth noting how the weights on the RCI
in column 3 differ in relative magnitude from those in column 1.
    The coefficients on both of the Saiz subindices have statistically and economically sig-
nificant negative point estimates, indicating a one standard-deviation increase in the share
of solid or flat land is associated with a 7- and 8-percent reduction in housing costs, respec-
tively.26
    From the cost-share approximation in section 2, the cost share of land ranges from
6 percent in Jamestown, NY to 50 percent in New York City. The partial elasticities of
housing supply, ηj , range from 0.5 at the first percentile to 3.0 at the 99th percentile. Inter-
estingly, a 1-point increase in our estimated elasticity predicts a 1.05-point (s.e. = 0.15) in
the elasticity estimated by Saiz (2010).


6        Housing Productivity across Metropolitan Areas

6.1      Productivity in Housing and Tradeables
Column 1 of table 6 lists our most inclusive measure of housing productivity, including
both observed and unobserved components (i.e., ÂYj = −Zj γ̂1 − ζ̂j ), for both regulations
    26
     In appendix table A4, we also consider how these specific variables may contribute to factor bias. In-
cluding so many variables pushes the data to its limits. The most significant results imply that local project
approval and supply restrictions are biased against land. Meanwhile, flat and solid land both appear to reduce
the bias against land.


                                                     19
and geography, and assuming no error (εj = 0). Thus, McAllen, TX has the most pro-
ductive housing sector, while Santa Cruz, CA has the least. Among metros with over one
million inhabitants, the top five—excluding our low-growth sample—are Las Vegas, Hous-
ton, Indianapolis, Fort Worth, and Kansas City; the bottom five are San Francisco, San Jose,
Oakland, Orange County, and San Diego.27
    Column 2 reports our RCI, which is based only on the productivity loss predicted by
the regulatory subindices, ZjR γ̂1R . The cities with the highest regulatory costs are in New
England, notably Manchester, NH; Brockton, MA; and Lawrence, MA-NH. The regula-
tions in Boston, which tops the list of most regulated large cities, predict 30 percent higher
costs than in Chicago. The West South Central regions contains the cities with the low-
est RCI: New Orleans, LA; Lake Charles, LA; and Little Rock, AR. Column 3 provides a
comparable measure of trade productivity, following equation (6), using wages outside of
the construction sector and a cost share of θN = 0.85.28
    Figure 5 plots housing productivity relative to trade productivity. An interesting result
in the figure is that trade productivity and housing productivity are negatively correlated: a
1-point increase in trade productivity predicts a 1.6-point decrease in housing productivity.
Coastal cities in California have among the highest levels of trade productivity and the
lowest levels of housing productivity. In contrast, cities such as Dallas and Atlanta are
relatively more productive in housing than in tradeables. The figure includes a level curve
for total productivity ÂTj OT = sX ÂX     Y Y                            X
                                      j + s Âj , which has a slope of −s /s .
                                                                               Y




6.2    Productivity-Population Gradients in Housing
Part of the negative estimated correlation between trade and housing productivity estimates
is related to city size. As in Rosenthal and Strange (2004), economies of scale in traded
goods increase with city size. Urban economies of scale in housing production, however,
seem to decrease.
    This relationship may arise from technical difficulties in producing housing in crowded,
developed areas. Additionally, new construction and renovations impose negative externali-
ties on incumbent residents. Noise, dust, and safety hazards are greater nuisances in denser
environments. Local residents often protest new developments over fears of permanent
  27
      See appendix table A5 for the values of the major indices and measures for all of the metros in our
sample.
   28
      This follows Albouy (2016) except that we exclude a small component from land used by firms in the
traded sector, which we leave for future work.



                                                   20
negative externalities from greater traffic or blocked views (Glaeser et al., 2005a). These
fears of negative externalities can cause incumbent residents in populous areas to regulate
new development, raising housing costs. Figure 6 illustrates this idea by plotting the RCI
relative to population density. The two are positively correlated.
    Table 7 examines the relationship of productivity with population levels, aggregated at
the consolidated metropolitan (CMSA) level, in panel A, and population density, in panel
B. In column 1, the positive elasticities of trade productivity with respect to population and
density of 5.2 and 5.5 percent are consistent with many in the literature (Ciccone and Hall
1996, Melo et al. 2009). When trade productivity ÂX   j is weighted by its expenditure share,
 X
s = 0.64, in column 4, these elasticities are 3.3 and 3.5 percent.
    Column 2 indicates negative elasticities of housing productivity with respect to popu-
lation of 6.3 and 5.4 percent. We weight this using a conservative expenditure share on
housing of sY = 0.16 in column 5, which results in estimated diseconomies of negative 1
percent.29 Added together, the implied total economies of scale in production are reduced
to elasticities of 2–3 percent on net for both population and density.
    Column 3 shows elasticities with respect to the negative of the RCI (the negative is used
because a higher RCI reduces housing productivity). The results are smaller but still sub-
stantial: a 10-percent increase in population engenders regulations that raise housing costs
by roughly 0.25 percent. Weighted by the housing expenditure share, regulations lower
the income-population and density gradients for total productivity by about 0.4 percentage
points, eliminating about one-eighth of urban productivity gains.


7        Housing Productivity and Quality of Life

7.1      Do Land-Use Restrictions Increase Housing Demand?
Even if land-use regulations drive up the cost of housing, they may also increase local qual-
ity of life by “recogniz[ing] local externalities, providing amenities that make communities
more attractive” (Quigley and Rosenthal, 2005). In this manner, regulation raises house
prices by increasing demand, rather than by limiting supply. Moreover, so-called “fiscal
zoning” may be used to preserve the local property tax base and deliver public goods more
efficiently, in support of the Tiebout (1956) hypothesis (Hamilton, 1975, Brueckner, 1981).
    29
    That proportion uses a narrow definition of housing and a broad measure of expenditures. In other work,
(Albouy et al., 2016a), we use a broader definition of housing and a more narrow definition of expenditures,
resulting in sY above 0.22.

                                                    21
To our knowledge, there are only a few estimates of the net welfare benefits of land-use reg-
ulations, e.g., Cheshire and Sheppard (2002), Glaeser et al. (2005a), and Waights (2015),
all of which suggest low benefits.
    To examine this hypothesis across U.S. cities, we first estimate how housing productiv-
ity relates to quality of life. The quality of life estimates are based on willingness-to-pay
measures derived from equation (6).30 Figure 7 and panel A of table 8 show the relationship
between quality of life and the RCI without any controls. The simple regression line in the
figure suggests that a one-point increase in housing productivity is associated with a 0.25-
point decrease in quality of life (also shown in column 1). Column 4 of table 8 implies that
a one-point increase in regulatory costs is associated with a 0.46-point increase in quality
of life.31
    There are serious problems with interpreting these raw correlations as causal. First, they
ignore the likelihood that areas with higher quality of life may be more prone to regulate.
This problem motivates controlling for observable amenities that predict quality of life.
Second, the correlations suffer from a potential “division bias”: housing productivity is
inferred in part from low prices, while quality of life is inferred in part from high prices.
Therefore, any measurement error will automatically create a negative bias in the estimated
relationship.
    To control for observable amenities, we estimate the following equation:
                                                                 X
                             Q̂j ≡ sY p̂j − tŵj = ÂYj ∗ a +         qjk bk + ej                        (17)
                                                                  k


where qjk refers to individual amenities. The coefficient a represents the elasticity of house-
holds’ willingness to pay for housing productivity as a fraction of their incomes. To focus
on changes in productivity due to regulations, we replace ÂY ∗ with −RCIj∗ .
   Controlling for observable amenities changes the estimated relationship dramatically.
  30
      The derivation follows Albouy (2008) with some adjustments. We use an expenditure share of 0.16
for housing, and 0.64 for traded goods. The expenditure share is 0.2 for remaining non-housing non-traded
goods. We use p̂j + ÂYj as the price of this non-traded good to reflect input costs because we do not estimate
local productivity in that sector. This approach also minimizes problems of division bias. The value of
t = 0.72 we use implies a value of a(1 − φ) = 0.4, which is consistent with the disaggregated analysis
discussed above. To account for federal taxes on labor (Albouy, 2009), wage differences are reduced by a
third; for tax benefits to owner-occupied housing, housing price differences are reduced by one-sixth. We use
only aggregate estimates of Q̂j : Q̂X         Y
                                    j and Q̂j have a correlation of 0.91.
   31
      The coefficients on housing productivity and the RCI in quality-of-life regressions will tend to have
opposite signs because higher values of ÂYj denote more efficient housing production and higher values of
the RCI indicate more costly regulations.


                                                     22
Columns 2 and 5 include controls for natural amenities, such as climate, adjacency to the
coast, and the geographic restriction index. These presumably exogenous controls virtually
eliminate the estimated correlations between quality of life and housing productivity or
regulatory costs. For example, we estimate that Boston has a higher quality of life than
Chicago. However, after controlling for natural amenities, willingness-to-pay to live in
Chicago is actually higher than in Boston, despite the fact that Chicago’s land use is much
less regulated.
    Columns 3 and 6 add controls for artificial amenities such as the population level, den-
sity, education, crime rates, and number of eating and drinking establishments of each
metro area. Including these controls suggests that land-use restrictions could actually lower
quality of life, albeit insignificantly. Overall, the effect of regulations on housing demand is
confounded by local amenities: while attractive places tend to restrict land use, restricting
land use does not obviously make a place more attractive.32


7.2     Net Effects on Welfare and Land Values
To determine land use restrictions’ net effects on welfare, we again posit a conservative
share of expenditures on housing of sY = 0.16. Thus, the social cost of land-use restric-
tions, expressed as a fraction of total consumption, are to a first-order approximation an
average of 0.16 times the RCI. For quality-of-life benefits to exceed this cost, the elasticity
of quality of life with respect to the RCI, estimated in a, must exceed this share. That is,
the net costs of land-use regulations are equal to sY + a.
    If we were naively to accept the simple regression relationship in column 4 of table
8, panel A, as causal, the benefits of regulation would appear to outweigh their costs as
sY + a = −0.09. As discussed above, the regulatory environment is highly correlated with
local amenities that households value. Controlling for amenities in columns 5 and 6 renders
  32
     The quality of life estimates reflect values that are exhibited on the market. Regulations may produce
idiosyncratic values for local residents that are not valued externally by the marginal buyer. For example, a
majority of incumbent residents in a community may prefer a low residential density. If outside buyers, who
represent the majority of the outside market, care nothing for low densities, this will not show up in higher
housing (and land) prices or in willingness-to-pay measures. Idiosyncratic benefits are also related to how
preference heterogeneity impacts the willingness-to-pay used to estimate quality of life benefits. Limiting the
number of residents can raise the willingness to pay of the marginal resident through ωij , without producing
actual benefits in Q̂0j . This issue is most problematic if land-use restrictions reduce the supply of housing
by reducing land supply. With homogeneous preferences, simply removing land from development on this
“extensive” margin should not impact prices in a small open city: land supply does not enter equation (9d).
If preferences are heterogeneous, reducing land supply will lower the number of residents in a community,
raising willingness-to-pay in ωij , similar to the model of Gyourko et al. (2013).


                                                     23
the positive effects of regulation on quality of life too small economically to outweigh their
costs. The estimates in columns 5 and 6 imply an elasticity of social welfare with respect
to the RCI of negative 0.1–0.2, meaning regulations that lower housing productivity also
reduce social welfare.
    Welfare-reducing regulations may persist through inefficient local politics due to insider-
outsider dynamics. Suppose that voters in a community consist mainly of property owners
or renters subject to rent control. These community “insiders” are not harmed by regu-
lations that raise housing costs as long as they do not wish to move locally. Those costs
are borne instead by potential residents, community “outsiders,” who must purchase a new
house or rent at the market rate. These outsiders cannot vote in the communities they would
like to move to beforehand. If land-use restrictions produce quality-of-life benefits, how-
ever small or idiosyncratic, they may be supported by local voters.33 As our results are at
the metropolitan level, they could point to a Coasean failure. Potential residents or devel-
opers may lack the coordination to buy out incumbents, leading to aggregate inefficiency.
    We conclude in panel B of table 8 by considering the overall effects of productivity and
regulations on local land values. This involves running a regression of the form (17), except
with r̂j , instead of Q̂j , as the dependent variable. The net welfare loss from regulations
implies that they should lower land values despite increasing house prices.34
    The simple regressions in columns 1 and 4 reveal that land values are negatively related
to housing productivity and even more strongly positively related to the RCI. Again, this
correlation may be confounded by local amenities. In addition, as we saw earlier, places
with lower housing productivity have higher trade productivity, which also raises land val-
ues. As such, higher housing productivity or a lower RCI do not appear to raise land values
after controlling for natural amenities. Adding controls for artificial amenities in columns
3 and 6 provides some provisional evidence of that land-use restrictions may reduce land
values.
  33
     See Lindbeck and Snower (2017) for a model of insider-outsider dynamics. Levine (2005) examines
how U.S. courts consider have ignored costs placed on outsiders from land-use restrictions.
  34
     This prediction is subject to the caveat noted in Brueckner (1999) that policies that limit the extensive
margin of land supply can actually raise the price of developable land, by limiting population and raising the
willingness to pay of the marginal resident.




                                                     24
8    Conclusion
Our approach takes advantage of the large inter-metropolitan variation in land values, con-
struction prices, and regulatory and geographic restrictions to estimate a cost function for
housing in the United States. By separating input and output prices for housing, our ap-
proach isolates how land-use restrictions affect housing prices through supply and demand
channels. Despite our disparate data sources, the estimated cost function fits the data well,
and the estimates have credible economic magnitudes.
    The evidence supports the hypothesis that regulatory and geographic restrictions cre-
ate a wedge between the prices of housing and its inputs. Sensitivity checks, instrumental
variable methods, and calibration exercises support this conclusion. Disaggregated mea-
sures suggest that state political and court involvement are associated with large increases
in housing costs. Our new Regulatory Cost Index quantifies the economic cost of housing
regulations, purged of demand factors, which we hope will be useful to other researchers.
    The observed price gradients imply an average cost share of land in housing is near
one-third and that substitution between land and non-land inputs is inelastic, although our
estimates regarding regulatory and geographic restrictions appear to hold over a wide range
of housing-cost parameters, During our study period, land’s cost share ranged from 6 to 50
percent across metro areas. These varying cost shares provide an intuitive explanation for
why the price elasticities of housing supply differ across cities.
    A key result is that large cities tend to be less productive in the housing sector, while
more productive in traded sectors. These two productivities seem to be subject to opposite
economies of urban scale. Much of the urban scale diseconomy in housing is attributable
to larger cities being more regulated.
    While some land-use restrictions may enhance welfare, overall the regulations mea-
sured here have little positive impact on local quality of life after controlling for standard
observable amenities. For example, potential residents do not find Chicago less desirable
than Boston because it is less regulated, but they do benefit from Chicago’s higher housing
productivity. Thus, land-use regulations appear to raise housing costs more by restricting
supply than by increasing demand. On net, the typical land-use regulation in the United
States reduces well-being by making housing production less efficient and housing con-
sumption less affordable.




                                             25
References
Albouy, D. (2008). Are big cities bad places to live? estimating quality of life across
  metropolitan areas. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, No.
  w14472.

Albouy, D. (2009). The unequal geographic burden of federal taxation. Journal of Political
  Economy, 117(4):635–667.

Albouy, D. (2016). What are cities worth? land rents, local productivity, and the total value
  of amenities. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3):477–487.

Albouy, D., Ehrlich, G., and Liu, Y. (2016a). Housing demand, cost-of-living inequality,
  and the affordability crisis. Technical report, NBER Working Paper No. w22816.

Albouy, D., Ehrlich, G., and Shin, M. (2018). Metropolitan land values. Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics.

Albouy, D. and Farahani, A. M. (2017). Valuing public goods more generally: The case of
  infrastructure. Upjohn Institute working paper, (17-272).

Albouy, D., Graf, W., Kellogg, R., and Wolff, H. (2016b). Climate amenities, climate
  change, and american quality of life. Journal of the Association of Environmental and
  Resource Economists, 3(1):205–246.

Aura, S. and Davidoff, T. (2008). Supply constraints and housing prices. Economics
  Letters, 99(2):275–277.

Basu, S., Fernald, J. G., and Kimball, M. S. (2006). Are technology improvements con-
  tractionary? American Economic Review, 96(5):1418–1448.

Beeson, P. E. and Eberts, R. W. (1989). Identifying productivity and amenity effects in
  interurban wage differentials. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 3:443–452.

Binswanger, H. P. (1974). A cost function approach to the measurement of elasticities of
  factor demand and elasticities of substitution. American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
  nomics, 56(2):377–386.

Brueckner, J. (1981). Taxation and property taxes in a system of local governments: Further
  analysis. Urban Studies, 18:113–120.

                                             26
Brueckner, J. (1999). Modeling urban growth controls. In Panagariya, A., Portney, P., and
  Schwab, R., editors, Environmental and Public Economics: Essays in Honor of Wallace
  E. Oates, chapter 7, pages 151–168. Edward Elgar Publishers.

Cheshire, P. and Sheppard, S. (2002). The welfare economics of land use planning. Journal
  of Urban economics, 52(2):242–269.

Christensen, L. R., Jorgenson, D. W., and Lau, L. J. (1973). Transcendental logarithmic
  production frontiers. The Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 28–45.

Ciccone, A. and Hall, R. E. (1996). Productivity and the density of economic activity. The
  American Economic Review, 86(1):54–70.

Combes, P.-P., Duranton, G., and Gobillon, L. (2017). The production function for housing:
  Evidence from france. mimeo.

Davidoff, T. (2016). Supply constraints are not valid instrumental variables for home
  prices because they are correlated with many demand factors. Critical Finance Review,
  5(2):177–206.

Davis, M. A. and Palumbo, M. G. (2008). The price of residential land in large us cities.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 63(1):352–384.

Ehrlich, G. (2014). Price and time to sale dynamics in the housing market: The role of
  incomplete information. Technical report.

Epple, D., Gordon, B., and Sieg, H. (2010). A new approach to estimating the production
  function for housing. The American Economic Review, 100(3):905–924.

Fergus, J. T. (1999). Where, when, and by how much does abnormal weather affect housing
  construction? The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 18(1):63–87.

Fischel, W. A. (1987). The economics of zoning laws: A property rights approach to
  American land use controls. JHU Press.

Fuss, M. and McFadden, D. (1978). Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory
  and Applications. New York: North Holland.




                                           27
Gabriel, S. A. and Rosenthal, S. S. (2004). Quality of the business environment versus
  quality of life: do firms and households like the same cities? Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 86(1):438–444.

Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2003). The impact of building restrictions on housing
  affordability. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 9:21–29.

Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of
  political economy, 113(2):345–375.

Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J., and Saks, R. (2005a). Why is manhattan so expensive? regula-
  tion and the rise in housing prices. The Journal of Law and Economics, 48(2):331–369.

Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J., and Saks, R. E. (2005b). Urban growth and housing supply.
  Journal of Economic Geography, 6(1):71–89.

Glaeser, E. L. and Ward, B. A. (2009). The causes and consequences of land use regulation:
  Evidence from greater boston. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(3):265–278.

Gyourko, J., Mayer, C., and Sinai, T. (2013). Superstar cities. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 5(4):167–199.

Gyourko, J., Saiz, A., and Summers, A. (2008). A new measure of the local regulatory
  environment for housing markets: The wharton residential land use regulatory index.
  Urban Studies, 45(3):693–729.

Gyourko, J. and Tracy, J. (1991). The structure of local public finance and the quality of
  life. Journal of political economy, 99(4):774–806.

Hamilton, B. W. (1975). Zoning and property taxation in a system of local governments.
  Urban studies, 12(2):205–211.

Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estima-
  tors. Econometrica, 4:1029–1054.

Ihlanfeldt, K. R. (2007). The effect of land use regulation on housing and land prices.
   Journal of Urban Economics, 61(3):420–435.

Johnson, D. W., Picard, P. R., and Quinn, B. (1974). Churches & church membership in
  the United States, 1971. Glenmary Research Center.

                                           28
Kleibergen, F. and Paap, R. (2006). Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
  decomposition. Journal of econometrics, 133(1):97–126.

Levine, J. (2005). Zoned Out: Regulation, Markets, and Choices in Transportation and
  Metropolitan Land Use. Resources for the Future.

Lindbeck, A. and Snower, D. J. (2017). Insiders versus outsiders. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 15(1):165–188.

McDonald, J. F. (1981). Capital-land substitution in urban housing: A survey of empirical
 estimates. Journal of urban Economics, 9(2):190–211.

McGranahan, D. A. et al. (1999). Natural amenities drive rural population change, volume
 781. US Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Economics Division, Economic
 Research Service Washington DC.

Melo, P. C., Graham, D. J., and Noland, R. B. (2009). A meta-analysis of estimates of urban
 agglomeration economies. Regional science and urban Economics, 39(3):332–342.

Muth, R. A. (1969). Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

of the Census, B. (1982). Local government in metropolitan areas. 1982 Census of Gov-
  ernments, 5.

Quigley, J. M. and Rosenthal, L. A. (2005). The effects of land use regulation on the price
  of housing: What do we know? what can we learn? Cityscape, 8(1):69–137.

Rappaport, J. (2008). A productivity model of city crowdedness. Journal of Urban Eco-
  nomics, 63(2):715–722.

Roback, J. (1982). Wages, rents, and the quality of life. Journal of political Economy,
  90(6):1257–1278.

Rose, L. A. (1992). Land values and housing rents in urban japan. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 31(2):230–251.

Rosenthal, S. S. and Strange, W. C. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglom-
  eration economies. Handbook of regional and urban economics, 4:2119–2171.

Saiz, A. (2010). The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3):1253–1296.

                                            29
Shapiro, J. M. (2006). Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of
  human capital. The review of economics and statistics, 88(2):324–335.

Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical change and the aggregate production function. The review
  of Economics and Statistics, pages 312–320.

Summers, L. H. (2014). The inequality puzzle. Democracy: A Journal of Ideas, 33:65–73.

Thorsnes, P. (1997). Consistent estimates of the elasticity of substitution between land and
  non-land inputs in the production of housing. Journal of Urban Economics, 42(1):98–
  108.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of political economy,
  64(5):416–424.

Waier, P. R., Babbitt, C., Baker, T., Balboni, B., and Bastoni, R. (2009). Rsmeans: Building
 construction cost data 2010.

Waights, S. (2015). The welfare economics of heritage conservation areas: Quality of life
 vs. housing productivity. mimeo.

Wooldridge, J. M. (1995). Score diagnostics for linear models estimated by two stage
 least squares. Advances in econometrics and quantitative economics: Essays in honor
 of Professor CR Rao, pages 66–87.

Yinger, J. (1998). The incidence of development fees and special assessments. National
  Tax Journal, 51(1):23–41.




                                             30
    Table 1: Indices for Selected Metropolitan Areas, Ranked by Housing-Price Index:
                                       2005-2010

                                                                                                                   Wharton
                                                                     Hous-                             Wages        Regula-         Geo
                                                                      ing        Land       Const.     (Const.        tory       Unavail.
                                 Name of Area        Population      Price       Value      Price       Only)      (z-score)     (z-score)
                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)

                     Metropolitan Areas:
                      San Francisco, CA               1,785,097       1.35        1.74       0.24        0.22         1.72         2.14
             Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA                 256,218       1.19        0.69       0.14        0.23         0.82         2.07
                           San Jose, CA               1,784,642       1.13        1.47       0.19        0.22        -0.05         1.68
                  Stamford-Norwalk, CT                  361,024       1.02        1.07       0.14        0.23        -0.56         0.55
                     Orange County, CA                3,026,786       0.98        1.32       0.06        0.12         0.08         1.14
 Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc, CA                   407,057       0.97        0.71       0.08        -0.04        0.59         2.76
           Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA                 9,848,011       0.92        1.31       0.08        0.12         0.88         1.14
                         New York, NY                 9,747,281       0.91        1.99       0.29        0.26        -0.17         0.55

                          Boston, MA-NH               3,552,421        0.64       0.73        0.18       0.10         1.30         0.24
             Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV                  5,650,154       0.41        1.07       -0.03       0.19         0.89         -0.73
             Riverside-San Bernardino, CA             4,143,113       0.26        0.12        0.06       0.12         0.64         0.43
                               Chicago, IL            8,710,824        0.19       0.61        0.18       0.07        -0.54         0.53
                       Philadelphia, PA-NJ            5,332,822        0.07       0.25        0.16       0.05         0.69         -0.91
                        Phoenix-Mesa, AZ              4,364,094        0.00       0.41       -0.10       0.00         1.00         -0.73
                               Atlanta, GA            5,315,841       -0.29      -0.05       -0.08       0.04         0.08         -1.21
                              Detroit, MI*            4,373,040       -0.28      -0.33        0.04       -0.02       -0.25         -0.22
                                Dallas, TX            4,399,895       -0.43      -0.40       -0.17       0.01        -0.67         -0.96
                              Houston, TX             5,219,317       -0.50      -0.30       -0.14       0.04        -0.07         -1.00

                         Rochester, NY*               1,093,434       -0.53      -1.43        0.03       -0.05       -0.55         0.07
                       Utica-Rome, NY*                  293,280       -0.66      -1.95       -0.03       -0.32       -1.42         -0.55
          Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI*                 390,032       -0.59      -2.05       -0.01       -0.14       -0.18         -0.61

                   Metropolitan Population:
                         Less than 500,000 31,264,023                 -0.23      -0.66       -0.36       -0.09       -0.06         -0.04
                      500,000 to 1,500,000 55,777,644                 -0.19      -0.43       -0.29       -0.06       -0.16         -0.05
                    1,500,000 to 5,000,000 89,173,333                  0.10       0.20        0.15       0.02         0.14         0.01
                                5,000,000+ 49,824,250                  0.36       0.87        0.22       0.12         0.01         0.09

          Standard Deviations (pop. wtd.)                             0.52        0.86       0.13        0.17         0.96         1.01
 Correlation with Land Values (pop. wtd.)                             0.90        1.00       0.64        0.71         0.48         0.56

Land-value index adapted from Albouy et al. (2018) from CoStar COMPS database for years 2005 to 2010. Wage and housing-price data from
2005 to 2010 American Community Survey 1-percent samples. Wage indices based on the average logarithm of hourly wages. Housing-price in-
dices based on the average logarithm of prices of owner-occupied units. Regulation Index is the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index
(WRLURI) from Gyourko et al. (2008) Geographic Availability Index is the Land Unavailability Index from Saiz (2010). Construction-price In-
dex from R.S. Means. MSAs with asterisks after their names are in the weighted bottom 10% of our sample in population growth from 1980-2010.




                                                               31
                        Table 2: Housing Cost Function Estimates using Aggregate Regulatory and Geographic Indices

                                                                                            Dependent Variable: Housing-Price Index
                                                                                                                                                             Biased Prod.
                                                           Constrained     Constrained      Unconstrained     Constrained    Constrained    Unconstrained    Constrained
                                         Specification    Cobb-Douglas    Cobb-Douglas      Cobb-Douglas       Translog       Translog        Translog        Translog
                                                              (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)

                                  Land-Value Index φ          0.470            0.355             0.335            0.463          0.346           0.320            0.353
                                                             (0.039)          (0.032)           (0.038)         (0.035)        (0.032)         (0.041)          (0.025)
                             Construction-Price Index         0.530            0.645             1.038            0.537          0.654           0.946            0.647
                                                             (0.039)          (0.032)           (0.197)         (0.035)        (0.032)         (0.200)          (0.025)
                           Land-Value Index Squared                                                              0.069          0.075            0.044           0.044
                                                                                                                (0.049)        (0.031)         (0.030)          (0.025)
                    Construction-Price Index Squared                                                             0.069          0.075           -1.506           0.044
                                                                                                                (0.049)        (0.031)         (1.975)          (0.025)
              Land-Value X Construction-Price Index                                                              -0.138         -0.150           0.337           -0.088
                                                                                                                (0.098)        (0.062)         (0.371)          (0.050)
                   Wharton Regulatory Index: z-score                           0.069             0.065                          0.081            0.083           0.088
32




                                                                              (0.016)           (0.018)                        (0.018)         (0.018)          (0.017)
             Geographic Unavailability Index: z-score                          0.100             0.093                          0.093            0.090           0.087
                                                                              (0.023)           (0.021)                        (0.023)         (0.020)          (0.020)
      Reg. Index X Land-to-Construction Price Index                                                                                                              0.057
                                                                                                                                                                (0.021)
      Geo. Index X Land-to-Construction Price Index                                                                                                              0.019
                                                                                                                                                                (0.034)

                           Elasticity of Substitution σ      1.000             1.000            1.000            0.444          0.333                            0.616
                                                                                                                (0.391)        (0.263)                          (0.214)

                                Adjusted R-squared           0.808             0.853            0.859            0.818          0.864           0.870            0.870
                             Number of Observations          1103              1103             1103             1103           1103            1103             1103
                                 Number of MSAs               230               230              230              230            230             230              230

                 p-value for Homogeneity Constraints         0.010             0.041                             0.083          0.286                            0.153
                           p-value for CD Constraints        0.160             0.017            0.412
                           p-value for All Constraints       0.002             0.007

     All regressions are estimated by ordinary least squares. Dependent variable in all regressions is the housing price index. Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA,
     reported in parentheses. Data sources are described in Table 1. Restricted model specifications require that the production function exhibits homogeneity of degree
     one. Cobb-Douglas (CD) restrictions impose that the squared and interacted index coefficients equal zero (the elasticity of substitution between factors equals 1). All
     regressions include a constant term.
                             Table 3: Constrained Housing Cost Function Estimates: Sensitivity Analyses

                                                                             Dependent Variable: Housing-Price Index
                                                                                All-Use Unwtd.       Raw     2005-2007        2008-2010
                                                                        Constr.  Land      Land     House       Boom            Bust
                                            Specification    Baseline   Wages Values Values Prices             Sample          Sample

                                                               (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)

             Land-to-Construction Price (Wage) Index φ        0.346      0.341     0.213     0.249     0.381       0.353         0.338
                                                             (0.032)    (0.028)   (0.024)   (0.026)   (0.040)     (0.034)       (0.032)
      Land-to-Construction Price (Wage) Index Squared         0.075      0.062     0.012     0.030     0.036       0.063         0.088
                                                             (0.031)    (0.028)   (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.036)     (0.034)       (0.032)
                     Wharton Regulatory Index: z-score        0.081      0.058     0.105     0.116     0.094       0.091         0.071
33




                                                             (0.018)    (0.016)   (0.018)   (0.015)    (0.02)     (0.018)       (0.019)
               Geographic Unavailability Index: z-score       0.093      0.108     0.115     0.093     0.048       0.106         0.080
                                                             (0.023)    (0.024)   (0.025)   (0.028)   (0.029)     (0.025)       (0.022)

                              Elasticity of Substitution σ    0.333      0.452     0.859     0.678     0.691       0.452         0.214
                                                             (0.263)    (0.237)   (0.211)   (0.181)   (0.294)     (0.284)       (0.264)

                                     Adjusted R-squared       0.864     0.844     0.835      0.841     0.831       0.864         0.868

     Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. Regressions correspond to the restricted specification in column
     4 of Table 2. Column 2 replaces the construction price with wages in the construction sector. All-use land values allow for prediction
     adjustments based on all land uses, as explained in Albouy et al. (2018). Unweighted land values do weight census tracts by land area
     rather than the number of housing units. Raw house price does not control for observed housing characteristics. Building permits
     information is taken from City and County Data Books.
      Table 4: Constrained Housing Cost Function Estimates: Instrumental Variables

                                                               Dependent Variable: Housing-Price Index
                                                                                                             Biased
                                                                                     Translog              Translog
                                                   Cobb-   Cobb-                     - Limited             - Limited
                                  Specification    Douglas Douglas Translog Translog    IVs                   IVs
                                                     (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)                   (6)

           Land-to-Construction Price Index φ       0.496       0.357     0.491     0.404       0.317        0.530
                                                   (0.094)     (0.063)   (0.097)   (0.076)     (0.085)      (0.116)
    Land-to-Construction Price Index Squared                              0.007     0.056       0.093        0.010
                                                                         (0.086)   (0.044)     (0.038)      (0.106)
           Wharton Regulatory Index: z-score        0.030       0.164     0.032     0.135       0.169        0.142
                                                   (0.036)     (0.077)   (0.035)   (0.066)     (0.075)      (0.100)
     Geographic Unavailability Index: z-score       0.061       0.080     0.062     0.063       0.085        0.055
                                                   (0.037)     (0.027)   (0.037)   (0.028)     (0.027)      (0.041)
    Reg. Index X Land-to-Constr. Price Index                                                                 0.549
                                                                                                            (0.196)
    Geo. Index X Land-to-Constr. Price Index                                                                 -0.252
                                                                                                            (0.140)

                    Elasticity of Substitution σ   1.000       1.000      0.942     0.535       0.137        0.917
                                                                         (0.689)   (0.365)     (0.418)      (0.850)

                         Adjusted R-squared        0.779       0.764     0.783      0.796       0.797        0.273
                      Number of Observations        229         217       229        217         217          217

            Instrument for Land-Value Index?        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
             Instrument for Regulatory Index?       No          Yes       No         Yes         Yes          Yes

         p-value for Homogeneity Restrictions      0.680       0.509     0.520     0.729        0.685        0.252
    p-value of Kleibergen-Paap Under-ID Test       0.019       0.046     0.035     0.018        0.035        0.079
                      p-value of Over-ID Test      0.543       0.035     <.001     <.001        0.269        0.569
             p-value of OLS Consistency Test       0.005       0.010     0.014     <.001        0.034        <.001

 All regressions are estimated by two-stage least squares. Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in
parentheses. All specifications are constrained to have constant returns to scale. Columns 1 and 2 correspond to the
OLS specification in Table 2, Column 2. Columns 3 through 5 correspond to the OLS specification in Table 2, Col-
umn 5. Column 6 corresponds to the OLS specification in Table 2, Column 8. In columns 1 and 3, the land-value
index (and index squared) are treated as endogenous, and in the other columns the regulatory constraint index is also
treated as endogenous. The instrumental variables used in columns 1 and 3 are the inverse distance to the sea, USDA
natural amenities score; column 3 includes their squares and interaction. Columns 2 and 4 also include the nontradi-
tional Christian share in 1971 and the share of local expenditures devoted to protective inspections in 1982; column 4
includes relevant interactions. Column 6 uses squares and interactions of the predicted land-value minus construction
cost index and regulatory constraint index from the first-stage regressions as instruments. Tables A2 and A3 display
all first-stage regressions. The null hypothesis of the Kleibergen-Paap test is that the model is underidentified. The
overidentifying restrictions test is a J-test of the null hypothesis of instrument consistency. Test of OLS consistency
is a Hausman-style test comparing consistent (IV) and efficient (OLS) specifications.




                                                          34
   Table 5: Estimates using Disaggregate Regulatory and Geographic Indices

                       Dependent Variable      Reg. Index   Geog. Index   Hous. Price
                                                Wharton     Geographic    Constrained
                                               Regulatory    Unavail.      Translog
                                                Index on     Index on       using
                              Specification    Subindices   Subindices    Subindices
                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)

       Land-to-Construction Price Index φ                                    0.332
                                                                            (0.029)

 Land-to-Construction Price Index Squared                                    0.054
                                                                            (0.025)

                  Approval Delay: z-score        0.399                        0.018
                                                    -                       (0.013)
           Local Political Pressure: z-score     0.332                        0.024
                                                    -                       (0.013)
       State Political Involvement: z-score      0.398                        0.058
                                                    -                       (0.018)
                      Open Space: z-score        0.164                       -0.014
                                                    -                       (0.013)
                         Exactions: z-score      0.023                       -0.022
                                                    -                       (0.014)
           Local Project Approval: z-score       0.167                        0.018
                                                    -                       (0.014)
                  Local Assembly: z-score        0.124                        0.014
                                                    -                       (0.008)
              Density Restrictions: z-score      0.194                        0.018
                                                    -                       (0.015)
               Supply Restrictions: z-score      0.087                        0.015
                                                    -                       (0.007)
          State Court Involvement: z-score       -0.059                       0.042
                                                    -                       (0.019)
           Local Zoning Approval: z-score        -0.036                      -0.009
                                                    -                       (0.011)
                  Flat Land Share: z-score                    -0.491         -0.084
                                                              (0.034)       (0.022)
                 Solid Land Share: z-score                    -0.790        -0.068
                                                              (0.054)       (0.023)
                  Number of Observations         1103          1103           1103
                       Adjusted R-squared        1.000         0.846          0.895
                Elasticity of Substitution σ                                  0.509
                                                                            (0.214)
Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. Regressions include
constant term. Data sources are described in table 1; constituent components of Wharton
Residential Land Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI) are from Gyourko et al (2008). Con-
stituent components of geographical index are from Saiz (2010).

                                          35
Table 6: Housing and Trade Productivity, and Regulatory Cost Indices for Selected
                        Metropolitan Areas, 2005-2010

                                                                          Trade
                                           Housing      Regulatory     Productivity
                                         Productivity   Cost Index    (Wage Index)
                                             (1)           (2)             (3)
               Metropolitan Areas:
       Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA           -0.902        0.095           0.177
                San Francisco, CA           -0.527        0.187            0.182
                     San Jose, CA           -0.455        0.037            0.182
               Orange County, CA            -0.437        0.060            0.080
                Bergen-Passaic, NJ          -0.376        0.024           0.136
      Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA            -0.385        0.121           0.080
                  Boston, MA-NH             -0.284        0.213           0.086
      Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV               -0.035        0.047           0.119
                Phoenix-Mesa, AZ             0.041        0.128           -0.002
                    New York, NY             0.076        0.006            0.136
               Philadelphia, PA-NJ           0.088        -0.007          0.059
                       Chicago, IL           0.114        -0.092           0.053
                        Dallas, TX           0.144        -0.094          -0.002
                       Atlanta, GA           0.184        -0.011          -0.002
                      Detroit, MI*           0.165        0.031            0.002
                      Houston, TX            0.272        -0.071           0.017
                Las Vegas, NV-AZ             0.320        -0.122           0.061
     McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX            0.645        -0.118          -0.186

            Metropolitan Population:
                  Less than 500,000         -0.006        -0.014          -0.055
               500,000 to 1,500,000          0.020        -0.020          -0.042
             1,500,000 to 5,000,000         -0.034        0.020            0.016
                         5,000,000+          0.012        0.005            0.073

                        United States       0.226         0.094          0.088
                                         standard deviations (population weighted)
    MSAs are ranked by inferred housing productivity. Housing productivity in col-
    umn 1 is calculated from the specification in column 4 of table 5, as the negative
    of the sum of the regression residual plus the housing price predicted by the WR-
    LURI and Saiz subindices. The Regulatory Cost Index is based upon the pro-
    jection of housing prices on the WRLURI subindices, and is expressed such that
    higher numbers indicate lower productivity. Trade productivity is calculated as
    0.8 times the overall wage index.




                                           36
                                             Table 7: Urban Economies And Diseconomies of Scale

                                                                                             Productivities Weighted by Income Share
                                                                         Minus                                                  Total: Trade
                                           Trade         Housing       Regulatory                                  Total: Trade and Housing
                 Dependent Variable     Productivity   Productivity    Cost Index    Trade Only Housing Only and Housing (RCI Only)
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)

      Panel A: Population

                   Log of Population        0.052         -0.063         -0.025         0.033          -0.011           0.023           0.029
                                           (0.004)        (0.021)        (0.007)       (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)

                 Adjusted R-squared        0.653           0.145         0.116          0.653          0.145            0.502           0.618
37




      Panel B: Population Density

         Weighted Log Pop. Density          0.055         -0.054         -0.026         0.035          -0.010           0.027           0.031
                                           (0.004)        (0.026)        (0.009)       (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.002)

               Adjusted R-squared          0.386           0.053         0.066          0.386          0.053            0.349           0.366
            Number of Observations          230             230           230            230            230              230             230
     Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. Trade and housing productivity indices and regulatory cost index are
     calculated as in table 6. Weighted productivities in columns (4) and (5) are weighted by the housing share, 0.16, and the traded share, 0.64,
     respectively. Total productivity in column (6) is calculated as 0.16 times housing productivity plus 0.64 times trade productivity. Weighted
     density index is calculated as the population density at the census-tract level, weighted by population. Total productivity (RCI Only) in col-
     umn 7 is defined as the traded goods share, 0.64, times trade productivity minus the housing share, 0.16, times the Regulatory Cost Index.
               Table 8: The Welfare Consequences of Land-Use Regulation

                                                                         Nat.                        Nat.
                                Amenity Controls      None      Nat.    & Art.   None     Nat.      & Art.
                                                       (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)        (6)

 Panel A                                                      Dependent Variable: Quality of Life

                       Total Housing Productivity    -0.25      0.01     0.04
                                                     (0.04)    (0.03)   (0.04)
             Minus Regulatory Cost Index (RCI)                                   -0.46    -0.04      0.05
                                                                                 (0.10)   (0.04)    (0.04)

                              Adjusted R-squared      0.36      0.75     0.85    0.22     0.75      0.85

 Housing Share of Consumption (Direct Benefit)        0.16      0.16     0.16    0.16     0.16      0.16
      Elasticity of Social Welfare with respect to
 Increasing Housing Productivity/Reducing RCI         -0.09     0.17     0.20    -0.30    0.12      0.21



 Panel B                                                       Dependent Variable: Land Value

                       Total Housing Productivity    -1.72      0.29     0.62
                                                     (0.33)    (0.25)   (0.28)
             Minus Regulatory Cost Index (RCI)                                   -3.74    -0.86      0.26
                                                                                 (0.89)   (0.48)    (0.41)

                              Adjusted R-squared      0.23      0.60     0.83    0.20     0.61      0.83


                  Controls for Natural Amenities                 X        X                 X         X
                 Controls for Artificial Amenities                        X                           X
                        Number of Observations         230      225      216      230      225       216

Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, in parentheses. Regulatory cost index presented in table
6. Natural controls: quadratics in heating and cooling degree days, July humidity, annual sunshine, an-
nual precipitation, adjacency to sea or lake, log inverse distance to sea, geographic constraint index, and
average slope. Artificial controls include eating and drinking establishments and employment, violent
crime rate, non-violent crime rate, median air quality index, teacher-student ratio, and fractions with
a college degree, some college, and high-school degree. Both sets of controls are from Albouy et al.
(2016b) and Albouy (2016). Elasticity of Social Welfare is calculated as expenditure share of housing,
0.18, plus elasticity of Willingness-to-Pay with respect to Housing Productivity or minus RCI.



                                                38
          Figure 1: House Prices and Land Values across Metropolitan Areas, 2006-10


                                                                                                San Francisco
                                            Linear Fit: Slope = 0.532 (0.037)
          1.2

                                            Quadratic Fit:
                                                                                               San Jose
                                            Slope at Zero = 0.519 (0.030),
                                            Elasticity of Sub = 0.467 (0.405)        Orange County
                                                                                        Los Angeles       New York
                                                                                    Oakland
                                                                                Ventura
          0.8




                                                                                  San Diego

                                                                              Boston
                                                                          Newark*
Housing−Price Index




                                                                                    Seattle
             0.4




                                                                                  Washington
                                                                                       Miami
                                                              Riverside
                                            Hartford              Portland,Chicago
                                                                            OR
                                                                Philadelphia
                                                                   Denver
   0.0




                                                             MinneapolisPhoenix Las Vegas
                                                                       Tampa
                                                                        Orlando
                                                           Salt Lake City
                                                             Jacksonville
                                                        Albuquerque
                                                 Colorado
                                                 Ann ArborSprings
                                                 Raleigh−Durham
                                 Albany          New  Orleans*
                                                      Nashville
                                             St. Louis Detroit*
                                                            Austin
                                                              Atlanta
          −0.4




                                           Baton Rouge
                                                    Columbus
                                                    Cleveland*
                                                     Cincinnati
                                              Akron*
                                       Kansas
                                   Birmingham    City Dallas
                                         Knoxville
                          Toledo* Little     Rock
                                            Indianapolis
                                      Pittsburgh*      Houston
                        Rochester*
                             Oklahoma Memphis
                                        CityFort Worth
                                    Buffalo*
                                      Amarillo
                              Syracuse*
                        Evansville

                                               El Paso
          −0.8




                                                McAllen

                      −2.0      −1.5        −1.0         −0.5   0.0     0.5                 1.0           1.5        2.0
                                                          Land−Value Index




                                                               39
                                          Figure 2: Construction Prices and Land Values, 2006-10


                                                          Linear Fit: Slope = 0.090 (0.017)

                                                          Construction−Price Index. equals Land−Value Index

                                                          Input Cost Level Curve: Low

                                                          Input Cost Level Curve: High

                                                          Elasticity of Substitution = 0.453 (0.415)
                                                          Land Share at National Avg. Land Values = 0.474 (0.038)
                           0.3
     Construction−Price Index




                                                                                                                        New York

                                                                                                              San Francisco
                    0.2




                                                                                      Chicago                San Jose
                                                                                          Boston
                                                                          PhiladelphiaNewark* Oakland
                                                                        Minneapolis
                                                         Hartford
              0.1




                                                                                              Ventura
                                                                                              LasSan Diego
                                                                                                      Los Angeles
                                                                                                  Vegas
                                                                                                     Seattle
                                                 Buffalo*                     Riverside              Orange County
                                                    KansasSt. Louis
                                                              City Detroit*
                                     Rochester* Pittsburgh*   AnnCleveland*
                                                                   Arbor          Portland, OR
       0.0




                                       Toledo*Albany
                                           Syracuse*       Akron*
                                                                 Columbus       Denver           Washington
                                     Evansville          Indianapolis
                                                                  Cincinnati
                                                              Colorado Springs                         Miami
                                                                                     Orlando
                                                                           Atlanta Tampa
                  −0.3 −0.2 −0.1




                                                                      Albuquerque
                                                BirminghamNew Orleans*
                                                                   Nashville
                                                                        Salt Lake CityPhoenix
                                                   Memphis
                                                       Baton
                                                  Little  RockRouge       Jacksonville
                                                                    Houston
                                          Oklahoma   CityFort Worth
                                                   Amarillo
                                                     Knoxville      Dallas
                                                                         Austin
                                                              Raleigh−Durham
                                                               El Paso
                                                                McAllen




                                   −2.0      −1.5        −1.0        −0.5   0.0     0.5                   1.0           1.5        2.0
                                                                      Land−Value Index


Note: Input cost level curves plot combinations of construction-price and land-value indices that produce housing costs 50 percent lower
and higher than the national average holding productivity in the housing sector at the national average level. The estimated elasticity of
substitution and average land share differ very slightly from table 2, column 4, because they are estimated over time-averaged input and
output prices, while the table uses measures that vary by year.




                                                                             40
                                         Figure 3: Housing Cost Surface with φ = 0.47 and σ = 0.45



                        1
Housing-Price Index




                      0.5


                        0


                      -0.5


                       -1
                      0.3
                             0.2
                                   0.1
                                           0                                                                            2
                                               -0.1                                                           1   1.5
                                                      -0.2                                   0          0.5
                                                                                -1    -0.5
                                                             -0.3   -2   -1.5
                       Construction-Price
                                                                                     Land-Value Index
                                    Index




                                                                           41
Figure 4: Estimated Effects of Restrictions on Housing Productivity using a Calibrated
Cost Function




Note: Solid surfaces show estimated effects of regulatory and geographic restrictions on housing costs for
various cost shares of land and elasticities of substitution. Translucent surfaces show estimated two standard
error bands. Black triangles show OLS estimates of effects of restrictions at estimated cost share and elasticity
of substitution using constrained translog cost function in column 2 of table 5.
                                                      42
                               Figure 5: Productivity in the Traded and Housing Sectors


                              McAllen
              0.6
              0.4




                               El Paso
                                                       Buffalo*                   Las Vegas
                                               Pittsburgh*
                                                  Syracuse*              Houston
                                                     Indianapolis
                                                    Cleveland*
                        0.2




                                                       Kansas  CityFort Worth
                                                           Cincinnati
                                    Amarillo Evansville  Columbus
                                                   Rochester*         Atlanta
                                    Oklahoma City Orlando    MemphisDetroit*
                                                        Akron*          Dallas
                                                                         Minneapolis
                                                                                 Chicago
   Housing Productivity




                                            Little Rock
                                                     Toledo*
                                                       Tampa St.Austin
                                                                Louis          Philadelphia
                                             Salt  Lake City                                    New York
                                      ColoradoAlbuquerque
                                                Springs Nashville
                                                     Jacksonville
                                                      Birmingham
                                                    Baton Rouge       Phoenix
                                         KnoxvilleNew Orleans* Ann Arbor
                0.0




                                                              Miami
                                                    Raleigh−Durham
                                                         Portland, OR                       Washington
                                                                     Denver         Seattle
                                                                   Albany
       −0.2




                                                                                     Riverside
                                                                                          Boston Newark*
                                                                                        Hartford
−0.4




                                                                                   LosDiego
                                                                                  San  Angeles
                                                                                 Orange County           Oakland
                                                                                                         San Jose
                                                                                                     San Francisco
                                                                                       Ventura
              −0.6
              −0.8




                                            Total Prod. at National Avg.: Slope = −4.0

                                            Linear Fit: Slope = −1.550 (0.216)


                                 −0.2                 −0.1          0.0                           0.1                0.2
                                                          Trade Productivity




                                                                  43
                           Figure 6: The Regulatory Cost Index and Population Density

             0.40
                                                                 Manchester
                                            Log−linear Fit: Brockton,
                                                            Slope = 0.026
                                                                      MA(0.010)


                                                  Lawrence, MA−NH
                    0.20




                                                                                  Boston
                                                                                  San Francisco
Regulatory Cost Index




                                                                          Seattle
                                                                       Ventura
                                                                       Phoenix Los Angeles
                                                              Memphis  San Diego
                                                                Riverside
                                                        Jacksonville
                                                      Ann Arbor Austin
                                                                          Oakland
                                                                         Orange
                                                                         Denver   County
                                                          SaltHartford
                                                               LakeWashington
                                                                     City    San  Jose
                                                  Albuquerque          Detroit*
                                                                            Newark*
 0.00




                                                  Raleigh−Durham    Tampa
                                                              Orlando                             New York
                                                                Atlanta Philadelphia
                                                     Nashville Minneapolis
                                                                Portland, OR       Miami
                                                   Knoxville Rochester*
                                                         Colorado Springs
                                                  Birmingham
                                                         Evansville El Paso
                                                          Pittsburgh*Houston
                                             Oklahoma City
                                                      Albany St.  Louis
                                                               Akron*
                                                                FortBuffalo*
                                                                       Dallas Chicago
                                                                     Worth
                                                        Indianapolis
                                                     KansasMcAllen
                                                             City
                                                            Cincinnati
                                 Amarillo                            Las Vegas
                                                                Cleveland*
                                                               Columbus
                                                           Syracuse*
             −0.20




                                                                 Toledo*
                                                       Baton Rouge
                                               Little Rock
                                                               New Orleans*

                            50            200         800        3200        12800                           51200
                                       Average Population Density per Square Mile




                                                              44
Figure 7: The Uni-variate Relationship of Quality of Life and Housing Productivity


                                          San Francisco
                                                                                               Linear Fit: Slope = −0.253 (0.043)
                                                                                    New York
                    0.20


                                               Orange County
                                                   San Angeles
                                                   Los Jose


                                                     San Diego
 Quality of Life (Willingness−to−Pay)




                                                                                   Miami
                                               Ventura
                                                                                Seattle
                             0.10




                                                   Oakland       Boston


                                                                          Portland, OR
                                                                          Washington Chicago
                                                             Newark*
                                                                                           Orlando Las Vegas
                                                                                          Tampa
                                                                                 Salt Lake City
               0.00




                                                                                   Philadelphia
                                                                                  Albuquerque
                                                                                Denver
                                                                                     Phoenix
                                                                              Colorado Springs
                                                                                      Minneapolis
                                                                  Riverside       Jacksonville

                                                                             New Orleans* Cleveland*
                                                          Hartford                 Nashville
                                                                      Raleigh−DurhamSt. Louis
                                                                                         Columbus
                                                                                Ann ArborCincinnati
                                                                                      Austin
                                                                                          Detroit*
                                                                                         Akron*
                                                                                            Atlanta
                                                                                KnoxvilleKansas  City
                                                                                           Amarillo
                                                                                              Pittsburgh*
                                                                              Baton Rouge
                                                                                  Oklahoma Indianapolis
                                                                                            City         El Paso
                                                                           Albany Little Rock
−0.10




                                                                                      Toledo*       Buffalo*              McAllen
                                                                               BirminghamEvansville
                                                                                               Syracuse*
                                                                                        Rochester*
                                                                                          Dallas
                                                                                        Memphis Houston
                                                                                          Fort Worth
                    −0.20




                                        −0.8      −0.6        −0.4   −0.2     0.0     0.2                          0.4         0.6
                                                                 Housing Productivity




                                                                              45
    Appendix
A     Housing Productivity and Factor Bias
Consider the case in which housing productivity is factor specific. Suppressing the super-
script Y , the production function for housing is Yj = F (L, M ; Aj , Bj ) = F (ALj L, AMj M ; 1).
Further consider the case of Hicks-neutral (total factor) productivity so that Aj = AM
                                                                                    L
                                                                                           j =
Aj . The biases are captured by the ratio BjY = ALj /AM j . It is convenient to express these in
                                 L             M                 L    M
the log-linear case as Âj ≡ φÂj + (1 − φ)Âj and B̂j ≡ Âj − Âj .
    For exposition, consider efficiency units of land and materials, L∗ ≡ ALj L, M ∗ ≡
                                                             L ∗
AM                                                                         M
  j M . The prices of these efficiency units are r̃ ≡ r/A , v = v/A . Further, drop the
                                                    ∗ ∗      ∗     ∗
subscripts on the prices. Because rL + vM = r L + v M , an equivalent cost function
can be written as

                 C ∗ (r∗ , v ∗ , Y ) ≡ min
                                       ∗  ∗
                                            {r∗ L∗ + v ∗ M ∗ : F (L∗ , M ∗ ) = Y }        (A.1)
                                    L ,M

Because of constant returns to scale, the unit cost function is then

                     c∗ (r∗ , v ∗ ) ≡ min
                                      ∗ ∗
                                          {r∗ l∗ + v ∗ m∗ : F (l∗ , m∗ ) = 1}             (A.2)
                                    l ,m


where l ≡ L/Y and m ≡ M/Y are input-output ratios. According to Shepard’s Lemma,
the first derivatives of the cost function with respect to the first and second arguments are
written
                              ∂c∗         L∗              ∂c∗          M∗
                      c∗r ≡       = l ∗
                                        =    ,    c∗v ≡        = m ∗
                                                                     =                    (A.3)
                              ∂r∗         Y               ∂v ∗         Y
Taking the logarithm of the cost function, and then the first derivatives:
               ∂ ln c∗    c∗r r∗   rL            ∂ ln c∗    c∗v v ∗   vM
                      ∗
                        =     ∗
                                 =    = φ,              ∗
                                                          =     ∗
                                                                    =    =1−φ             (A.4)
               ∂ ln r       c      cY            ∂ ln v       c       cY
where the last line follows from factor exhaustion. Assuming the equilibrium condition
ln p = ln c = ln c∗ holds, then we have the first-order approximation:

             p̂j = φr̂∗ + (1 − φ) v̂ ∗ = φr̂j + (1 − φ) v̂j −φÂLj − (1 − φ) ÂM
                                                                               j          (A.5)
                                                            |        {z          }
                                                                       −ÂY
                                                                          j


The first-order approximation is Cobb-Douglas, and does not allow us to disentangle factor
bias as both ÂLj and ÂM
                        j are only in the residual. To consider factor bias, we need the




                                                 46
second derivatives. Because of Young’s Theorem, only a single mixed derivative is needed

                   ∂ 2 ln c∗      c∗r r∗ vcrv vc∗v
                                                  
                                 = ∗          −      = −φ (1 − φ) (1 − σ)          (A.6)
                ∂ ln r∗ ∂ ln v ∗    c     c∗r   c

The mixed derivative is the negative of the second-order pure derivatives, which are equal
due to symmetry:

        ∂ 2 ln c∗ c∗r r∗       c∗r r∗ c∗rr r∗                         ∂ 2 ln c∗
                                             
                  =        1 −       −          = φ (1 − φ) (1 − σ) =            .   (A.7)
        ∂ 2 ln r∗   c∗           c∗      c∗r                          ∂ 2 ln v ∗

The second-order pure derivatives are the first-order derivatives of the function describing
the cost shares. How the cost-share, φj , should vary over cities, can be derived directly by
taking a first-order Taylor expansion of it in its arguments r∗ and v ∗ .35 This yields:

                          φj = φ + φ (1 − φ) (1 − σ) (r̂j − v̂j + ÂM − ÂL )                     (A.8)
                                                                  | j {z j}
                                                                            −B̂j


which is equation (4) in the main text. When σ = 1, the cost share is constant across cities.
If σ < 1, the cost share of land rises with the relative price of land and falls with its relative
productivity. Thus, a factor bias against land raises its cost share.
    The symmetry between the pure and mixed partial derivatives leads to the following
second-order log-linear approximation of the cost function:

               ĉj = φ(r̂j − ÂLj ) + (1 − φ)(v̂j − ÂLj )
                  + (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j − ÂLj + ÂM
                                                              j )
                                                                 2


                  = φr̂j + (1 − φ)v̂j + (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j − B̂j )2 + Âj ,

which provides the formulation in equation (3) in the main text.
   Productivity and bias are not observed directly, but must be inferred. We write overall
productivity and factor bias as linear functions of a vector of restrictions Z:

                                            Âj = −Zj δA − ξAj                                   (A.9a)
                                            B̂j = −Zj δB − ξBj                                   (A.9b)

The linear terms in Zj δ account for the (linear) observed components of total productivity
and factor biases; the ξj terms account for the unobserved components or non-linearities.
   Substituting in these expressions, multiplying out the quadratic term, and subtracting
  35
       This first-order approximation follows from how equations (A.4), (A.6), and (A.7) imply

                      ∂φ      ∂ 2 ln c∗       ∂ 2 ln c∗          ∂φ
                           ∗
                             = 2      ∗
                                        =−                  =−          = φ (1 − φ) (1 − σ)
                    ∂ ln r    ∂ ln r       ∂ ln r∗ ∂ ln v ∗    ∂ ln v ∗



                                                      47
the construction price index, creates the series of terms:

                   p̂j − v̂j = φ(r̂j − v̂j )                                                  (A.10a)
                             + (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j )2                              (A.10b)
                             + Zj δA                                                          (A.10c)
                             + ξAj                                                            (A.10d)
                             + φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(r̂j − v̂j )Zj δB                               (A.10e)
                             + (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(Zj δB )2                                   (A.10f)
                             + ξBj φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(Zj δB + r̂j − v̂j + ξBj /2)                (A.10g)

The first four lines describe the main productivity model. The term on line (A.10a) iden-
tifies the cost-share terms from log-linear price differences. The term on the second line,
(A.10b), identifies the elasticity of substitution from the square of log-linear price differ-
ences. The third term, (A.10c) gives the observed productivity effect, while the fourth,
(A.10d) gives the unobserved component.
     The last three lines account for factor bias. The term (A.10e) estimates factor bias in
δB through the interaction of the observable shifters Zj , and the price difference, r̂j − v̂j .
The term (A.10f) provides an alternative method of estimating factor bias that relies on the
linearity imposed in (A.9a) and (A.9b). However, it is unlikely that the relationships are
truly linear. Moreover, Z lacks the cardinal properties of the price indices, r̂j and v̂j . Thus,
we group it and the remaining terms in an error term along with (A.10g).
     Based on the above discussion, we collect the coefficients as

                                β1   =φ
                                β3   = (1/2)φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)
                                γ1   = δA
                                γ2   = φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)δB = 2β3 δB

to create a reduced-form equation that contains all of the structural constraints:

      p̂j − v̂j = β1 (r̂j − v̂j ) + β3 (r̂j − v̂j )2 + γ1 Zj + γ2 Zj (r̂j − v̂j ) + ζj + εj    (A.11)

where the error term consist of two components: the first component is driven mainly by
unobservable determinants of productivity and bias,

      ζj = ξAj + ξBj φ(1 − φ)(1 − σ)(Zj δB + r̂j − v̂j + ξBj /2 + (Zj δB )2 /2).               (A.12)

The second component, εj , captures sampling, specification, and measurement error in the
price index. The ζj component must be heteroskedastic unless δB = ξBj = 0, in which
case ζj = ξAj .
    The constrained reduced-form equation is embedded inside of a more general uncon-


                                                   48
strained equation:

 p̂j = β1 r̂j + β2 v̂j + β3 (r̂j )2 + β4 (v̂j )2 + β5 (r̂j v̂j ) + γ1 Zj + γ2 Zj r̂j + γ3 Zj v̂j + ε0j (A.13)

The constrained model then imposes the following four testable constraints on the coeffi-
cients in (A.13):

                                                 β1 = 1 − β2                                             (A.14a)
                                                      β3 = β4                                            (A.14b)
                                                 β3 = −β5 /2                                             (A.14c)
                                                    γ2 = −γ3                                             (A.14d)

The first three constraints apply to the standard cost function, while the fourth applies only
to factor bias.36
    The elasticity of housing supply is derived from Shepard’s Lemma for land (A.3) by
taking the differential:

                        L̂ + ÂL − Ŷ = d ln c∗r                                                          (A.15)
                                                                                       
                                          = −σ (1 − φ) r̂j − ÂLj − v̂j + ÂM
                                                                            j                             (A.16)

where the last line obtains from a first-order approximation. Now, from the first-order
equilibrium condition for housing costs, (A.5), it follows that:
                                               p̂j − v̂j          1−φ M
                                 r̂j − v̂j =             + ÂLj +    Âj .
                                                   φ               φ
Combining the last two equations to eliminate r̂j and rearranging, we are left with a general
supply equation:
                                          1−φ                     
                        Ŷ = L̂ + ÂL + σ          p̂j − v̂j + ÂM
                                                                 j                     (A.17)
                                            φ
The formula in (5a) comes from substituting in ÂL = Â + (1 − φ) B̂ and ÂM = Â − φB̂
and rearranging.
     The derivation of the estimate of trade productivity in equation (7) is parallel to the
first-order derivation above. The mobility
                                          condition for workers requires
                                                                          differentiating the
log expenditure function for workers ln e(pj ; Qkj , ūk ) = ln wjk + I k . The expression in
  36                                                                                                       2
    It is possible to test if the elasticity of substitution varies with Zj by adding the term (r̂j − v̂j ) Zj γ3 .
However, we do not find interactions for the quadratic interaction to be significant and thus have left a het-
erogeneous elasticity of substitution out of the formulation.




                                                       49
(6) follows from:

                                    ∂ ln(w + I)        w
                                                 =         ≡t
                                       ∂ ln w        w+I
                                              ∂ ln e    py
                                                     =     ≡s
                                              ∂ ln p     e
                                          ∂ ln e     Q ∂e
                                                 =         =1
                                          ∂ ln Q     e ∂Q
where the last line follows from the normalization of Q described in section 2.2.


B     Simultaneity and Omitted Variable Bias Formulas
First consider a simplified Cobb-Douglas case without factor bias (σ = 1 and B̂jY = 0),
using wages as in (8), imposing Q̂X         Y
                                   j = Q̂j , and where trade productivity is orthogonal to
quality of life and housing productivity. Then the expectation of the OLS estimator of φ in
(11), φ∗ , is:
                               (                                            )
                                          Y
                                        s   var(ζj ) + cov(Q̂j , ζj + ε j )
                    E[φˆ∗ ] = φ 1 − sY                                        .     (A.18)
                                                var(Q̂j + sζj )
The term svar(ζj ) determines the downward simultaneity bias if not all housing productiv-
ity shifts are accounted for. High housing productivity raises land values but not housing
prices, attenuating the cost-share estimate. Indeed, if variation in land prices were driven
entirely by unobserved housing productivity, then φ̂∗ would be zero.
    The term cov(Q̂j , ζj + εj ) determines a standard omitted variable bias. If, as indeed
we find, metro areas with high quality of life tend to have low housing productivity, this
bias will be upwards. The net effects depend largely on how ζj varies relative to Q̂j . Better
measures of Z should lower variation in ζj , reducing the bias in φ∗ , which is properly
identified from variation in Q̂j .
    To consider the role of trade productivity, the full formula is given by:
                                                                                                   
                      cov(Q̂ + ÂY, 0 ÂY 0 )var(ÂX0 ) − cov(Q̂ + ÂY 0 , ÂX0 )cov(ÂY 0 , ÂX0 ) 
               
                                                                                                   
   E[φˆ ] = φ 1 −
        ∗
                                                             h                       i2
                              var(Q̂ + ÂY 0 )var(ÂX0 ) − cov(Q̂ + ÂY 0 , ÂX )
               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                 (A.19)
          k0    k k
where Â = s Â , k ∈ {X, Y }.




                                                  50
    For Online Publication Only
C     Wage and Housing Price Indices
The wage and housing price indices are estimated from the 2005 to 2010 American Com-
munity Survey, which samples 1% of the United States population every year. The indices
are estimated with separate regressions for each year. For the wage regressions, we include
all workers who live in an MSA, were employed in the last year, and reported positive wage
and salary income. We calculate hours worked as average weekly hours times the midpoint
of one of six bins for weeks worked in the past year. We then divide wage and salary
income for the year by our calculated hours worked variable to estimate an hourly wage.
We regress the log hourly wage on a set of MSA dummies and a number of individual
covariates, each of which is interacted with gender:

    • 16 indicators of educational attainment;

    • a quartic in potential experience and potential experience interacted with years of
      education;

    • 9 indicators of industry at the one-digit level (1950 classification);

    • 9 indicators of employment at the one-digit level (1950 classification);

    • 5 indicators of marital status (married with spouse present, married with spouse ab-
      sent, divorced, widowed, separated);

    • an indicator for veteran status, and veteran status interacted with age;

    • 5 indicators of minority status (Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, and other);

    • an indicator of immigrant status, years since immigration, and immigrant status in-
      teracted with black, Hispanic, Asian, and other;

    • 2 indicators for English proficiency (none or poor).

    This regression is first run using census-person weights. From this regression, a pre-
dicted wage is calculated using individual characteristics alone, controlling for MSA, to
form a new weight equal to the predicted wage times the census-person weight. These
new income-adjusted weights allow us to weight workers by their income shares. The new
weights are then used in a second regression, which is used to calculate the city-wage in-
dices from the MSA indicator variables, renormalized to have a national average of zero
each year. In practice, this weighting procedure has only a small effect. The wage regres-
sions are at the CMSA, rather than PMSA, level to reflect the ability of workers to commute
to jobs throughout a CMSA.

                                               i
    The traded sector wage index is calculated excluding workers with occupations in the
construction trades. To calculate the construction wage index, we drop all non-construction
workers and follow the same procedure as above. We define the construction sector as
occupation codes 620 through 676 in the ACS occupation codes. In our sample, 4.5% of
all workers are in the construction sector.
    As noted in section 4.1, the construction price index is taken from RS Means company.
For each city in the sample, RS Means reports construction costs for a composite of nine
common structure types. The index reflects the costs of labor, materials, and equipment
rental, but not cost variations from regulatory restrictions, restrictive union practices, or
regional differences in building codes. We renormalize this index as a z−score with an
average value of zero and a standard deviation of one across cities.37
    The housing price index of an MSA is calculated in a manner similar to the wage index,
by regressing housing prices for owner-occupied units on a set of covariates. The covariates
used in the housing-price regression are:

    • 10 indicators of building size;

    • 9 indicators for the number of rooms, 5 indicators for the number of bedrooms, and
      number of rooms interacted with number of bedrooms;

    • 2 indicators for lot size;

    • 9 indicators for when the building was built;

    • 2 indicators for complete plumbing and kitchen facilities;

    • an indicator for commercial use;

    • an indicator for condominium status.

     A regression of housing values on housing characteristics and MSA indicator variables
is first run weighting by census-housing weights. A new value-adjusted weight is calculated
by multiplying the census-housing weights by the predicted value from this first regression
using housing characteristics alone, controlling for MSA. A second regression is run using
these new weights on the housing characteristics, along with the MSA indicators. The
housing-price indices are taken from the MSA indicator variables in this second regression,
renormalized to have a national average of zero each year. As with the wage index, this
adjusted weighting method has only a small impact. In contrast to the wage regressions,
the housing price regressions were run at the PMSA level to achieve a better geographic
match between the housing stock and the underlying land.
  37
     The RS Means index covers cities as defined by three-digit zip code locations, and as such there is not
necessarily a one-to-one correspondence between metropolitan areas and RS Means cities. In cases in which
there is more than one three-digit zip code with a construction cost listed for an MSA, we weight the zip
codes by the number of housing units in each zip code in the year 2000. We use the 2010 edition of the RS
Means index.

                                                     ii
                                             Table A.1: Instrumental Variables Estimates, First-Stage Regressions

                                                                 Land Rent      Land Rent                    Land Rent       Land Rent        Land Rent       Land Rent
                                                                   minus          minus       Regulatory       minus            minus           minus            minus        Regulatory
                                                                Construction   Construction     Index:      Construction    Construction     Construction    Construction       Index:
                                        Dependent Variable         Price          Price        z-score         Price        Price Squared       Price        Price Squared     z-score
                                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)            (6)               (7)            (8)

                      Geographic Constraint Index: z-score         0.091          0.038          -0.072         0.108           -0.052           0.115           -0.026          -0.030
                                                                  (0.084)        (0.080)        (0.097)        (0.098)         (0.074)          (0.089)         (0.071)         (0.094)
                      Regulatory Constraint Index: z-score         0.187                                        0.184           -0.139
                                                                  (0.064)                                      (0.053)         (0.057)
               Inverse of Mean Distance from Sea: z-score          0.309           0.314          0.120         0.262            0.019            0.212          -0.049           0.227
                                                                  (0.072)        (0.068)        (0.078)        (0.167)         (0.125)          (0.160)         (0.149)         (0.136)
                           USDA Amenities Score: z-score           0.074           0.097          0.172         0.048           -0.048            0.068          -0.065           0.247
                                                                  (0.031)        (0.029)        (0.033)        (0.034)         (0.031)          (0.033)         (0.029)         (0.046)
            Non-traditional Christian Share (1971): z-score                       -0.116         -0.333                                          -0.189          -0.025          -0.540
                                                                                 (0.050)        (0.077)                                         (0.054)         (0.062)         (0.109)
               Protective Inspections Share (1980): z-score                       0.118          -0.056                                          0.187           -0.101          -0.021
                                                                                 (0.048)        (0.096)                                         (0.054)         (0.063)         (0.075)
                Inverse of MeanDistance from sea: z-score
iii




                                                 squared                                                        0.012           0.124            -0.034          0.136           -0.155
                                                                                                               (0.047)         (0.039)          (0.048)         (0.051)         (0.051)
                  USDA Amenities Score: z-score squared                                                         0.014           0.038            0.009           0.032           -0.029
                                                                                                               (0.006)         (0.009)          (0.006)         (0.011)         (0.013)
         Inverse of Mean Distance from Sea: z-score times
                         USDA Amenities Score: z-score                                                          -0.044          0.003            -0.032          -0.010          0.009
                                                                                                               (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.013)         (0.016)         (0.024)
         Inverse of Mean Distance from Sea: z-score times
           Non-traditional Christian Share (1971): z-score                                                                                       -0.218          -0.011          -0.325
                                                                                                                                                (0.081)         (0.081)         (0.141)
                    USDA Amenities Score: z-score times
            Non-traditional Christian Share (1971): z-score                                                                                      -0.030          -0.043          0.028
                                                                                                                                                (0.027)         (0.034)         (0.052)
         Inverse of Mean Distance from Sea: z-score times
               Protective Inspections Share (1980): z-score                                                                                      0.013           0.078           0.083
                                                                                                                                                (0.063)         (0.088)         (0.099)
          USDA Amenities Score: z-score times Protective
                      Inspections Share (1980): z-score                                                                                          -0.054          0.036           -0.071
                                                                                                                                                (0.021)         (0.025)         (0.035)
                                   Number of Observations           229            217            217            229             229               217            217              217
                                      Adjusted R-squared           0.558          0.548          0.264          0.578           0.364             0.609          0.370            0.342

                        F-statistic of Excluded Instruments         9.4           14.8           18.0           25.8             29.9            44.1             55.0           14.4
       First Stage Regression for the these specifications in
                                                    Table 5:     Column 1       Column 2       Column 2       Column 3        Column 3         Column 4        Column 4       Column 4
      Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. See Table 4 for variable descriptions and data sources. All regressions are first stages for second-stage regres-
      sions reported in columns 1 through 4 of Table 4.
                                 Table A.2: Instrumental Variables Estimates, First-Stage Regressions - Limited Instruments

                                                                                                                                                                           Land Rent
                                                                                                                                                                             minus          Land Rent
                                                                                                                                                                          Construction        minus
                                                                    Land Rent      Land Rent                           Land Rent       Land Rent                           Price times     Construction
                                                                      minus           minus                              minus            minus                           Geographic        Price times
                                                                   Construction   Construction        Regulatory      Construction    Construction        Regulatory       Constraint       Regulatory
                                           Dependent Variable         Price       Price Squared     Index: z-score       Price        Price Squared     Index: z-score        Index            Index
                                                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)

                         Geographic Constraint Index: z-score         0.042          -0.049            -0.058             0.007           -0.076            -0.047           -0.030            0.007
                                                                     (0.080)         (0.070)           (0.089)           (0.073)          (0.073)           (0.093)          (0.066)          (0.062)
                  Inverse of Mean Distance from Sea: z-score          0.366           0.044             0.298             0.440            0.021             0.371           -0.087           -0.030
                                                                     (0.084)         (0.078)           (0.085)           (0.091)          (0.090)           (0.091)          (0.064)          (0.078)
                              USDA Amenities Score: z-score           0.101           0.003             0.186             0.076            0.004             0.165            0.015           -0.032
                                                                     (0.030)         (0.032)           (0.031)           (0.028)          (0.027)           (0.040)          (0.025)          (0.028)
              Non-traditional Christian Share (1971): z-score        -0.118          -0.074            -0.342            -0.140           -0.135            -0.307           -0.089            0.012
iv




                                                                     (0.051)         (0.052)           (0.074)           (0.049)          (0.059)           (0.075)          (0.048)          (0.058)
                  Protective Inspections Share (1980): z-score        0.113          -0.119            -0.076             0.169           -0.106            -0.072           -0.004           -0.106
                                                                     (0.047)         (0.069)           (0.094)           (0.050)          (0.060)           (0.095)          (0.043)          (0.076)
      Predicted Land Rent minus Construction Price Squared           -0.179           0.799            -0.613            -0.708            1.095            -1.312            0.017           -0.578
                                                                     (0.132)         (0.310)           (0.363)           (0.499)          (0.775)           (0.511)          (0.335)          (0.316)
                     Predicted Land Rent minus Construction
            Price times Predicted Regulatory Constraint Index                                                             1.042           -0.013             0.512            0.643            0.851
                                                                                                                         (0.362)          (0.627)           (0.489)          (0.293)          (0.305)
                     Predicted Land Rent minus Construction
                     Price times Geographic Constraint Index                                                              -0.194          -0.178             0.223            0.579            0.461
                                                                                                                         (0.148)          (0.186)           (0.199)          (0.139)          (0.126)
                                       Number of Observations          217             217               217               217              217               217              217              217
                                           Adjusted R-squared         0.552           0.288             0.295             0.594            0.312             0.304            0.590            0.157
                           F-statistic of Excluded Instruments         12.2            7.7               14.6              14.3             8.1               11.5             20.8             10.0
          First Stage Regression for the these specifications in
                                                       Table 5:     Column 5        Column 5          Column 5         Column 6         Column 6          Column 6          Column 6        Column 6
     Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. See Table 4 for variable descriptions and data sources. All regressions are first stages for second-stage regressions reported in
     coulmns 5 and 6 of Table 4.
                  Table A.3: Calibrated IV Cost Function Estimates

                                Calibrated       Calibrated   Calibrated    Calibrated
                  Specification   2SLS             2SLS         2SLS          2SLS
                                 House            House        House         House
             Dependent Variable   Price            Price        Price         Price
                                   (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)

       Regulatory Index: z-score       0.121        0.121        0.071        0.072
                                      (0.028)      (0.033)      (0.021)      (0.027)

      Geographic Index: z-score        0.161        0.192        0.037        0.079
                                      (0.056)      (0.068)      (0.047)      (0.059)

             Adjusted R-squared        0.685        0.667        0.690        0.706

 Land-Value Minus Construction
                     Price Index       0.233        0.233        0.433        0.433
       Elasticity of Substitution      0.000        1.000        0.000        1.000

Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. All regression
specifications correspond to the constrained specification in column 4 of Table 4, and
instrument for the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index using the nontradi-
tional Christian share in 1971 and the share of local expenditures devoted to protective
inspections in 1982.




                                           v
    Table A.4: Housing Cost Function Estimates with Disaggregated Regulatory and
       Geographic Restriction Indices and Non-Neutral Productivity Interactions


                                                                                        Interacted with
                                                                                       Land-Value Diff.
                                        Specification    Base Coefficients   House       minus Cons.
                                                                             Prices       Price Diff.
                                  Dependent Variable                          (1)

         Land-Value Minus Construction Price Index            0.329
                                                             (0.025)
 Land-Value Minus Construction Price Index Squared            0.049
                                                             (0.019)
                             Approval Delay: z-score          0.026                        -0.018
                                                             (0.015)                       (0.021)
                     Local Political Pressure: z-score        0.008                        -0.020
                                                             (0.010)                       (0.022)
                  State Political Involvement: z-score        0.056                         0.027
                                                             (0.018)                       (0.025)
                                 Open Space: z-score         -0.022                        -0.032
                                                             (0.017)                       (0.026)
                                   Exactions: z-score        -0.015                         0.017
                                                             (0.014)                       (0.017)
                     Local Project Approval: z-score          0.038                         0.066
                                                             (0.016)                       (0.023)
                            Local Assembly: z-score           0.012                        -0.004
                                                             (0.010)                       (0.019)
                        Density Restrictions: z-score         0.033                         0.018
                                                             (0.017)                       (0.019)
                         Supply Restrictions: z-score         0.024                         0.027
                                                             (0.007)                       (0.012)
                    State Court Involvement: z-score          0.018                        -0.024
                                                             (0.021)                       (0.027)
                     Local Zoning Approval: z-score          -0.013                         0.000
                                                             (0.014)                       (0.017)
                             Flat Land Share: z-score        -0.081                        -0.065
                                                             (0.023)                       (0.024)
                           Solid Land Share: z-score         -0.069                        -0.049
                                                             (0.020)                       (0.020)

                             Number of Observations                          1,103
                                Adjusted R-squared                           0.910

                            Elasticity of Substitution                        0.558
                                                                             (0.169)
Robust standard errors, clustered by CMSA, reported in parentheses. Regressions include constant term.
Data sources are described in table 1; constituent components of Wharton Residential Land Use Regula-
tory Index (WRLURI) are from Gyourko et al (2008). Constituent components of geographical index are
from Saiz (2010).

                                                  vi
                                          Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                                   Adjusted Indices                             Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                               Geo
                                                                      Cen-                                                                     Un-
                                                                      sus          Land      Land                                  Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                                      Di-          Value     Value    Hous-            Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                          Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing    Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                             Full Name     tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price   (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                                    Metropolitan Areas:
                               San Francisco, CA PMSA     1,785,097   9   1.740    2.613     1.904    1.353    0.216    0.223     1.716       2.137    0.236    -0.527     0.182    0.187    1
                     Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA PMSA      256,218     9   0.693    0.951     0.975    1.193    0.213    0.233     0.820       2.072    0.143    -0.902     0.177    0.095    2
                                     San Jose, CA PMSA    1,784,642   9   1.468    1.565     1.854    1.129    0.216    0.222     -0.054      1.684    0.191    -0.455     0.182    0.037    3
                           Stamford-Norwalk, CT PMSA      361,024     1   1.069    1.405     1.727    1.020    0.175    0.229     -0.564      0.551    0.136    -0.546     0.136    0.002    4
                              Orange County, CA PMSA      3,026,786   9   1.318    1.612     2.245    0.977    0.100    0.122     0.078       1.135    0.064    -0.437     0.080    0.060    5
           Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc, CA MSA       407,057     9   0.709    1.042     0.856    0.966    0.053   -0.037     0.588       2.761    0.079    -0.670     0.066    0.071    6
                    Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA PMSA       9,848,011   9   1.306    1.825     1.614    0.921    0.100    0.123     0.883       1.135    0.081    -0.385     0.080    0.121    7
                                   New York, NY PMSA      9,747,281   2   1.987    3.358     2.714    0.906    0.180    0.256     -0.166      0.551    0.290     0.076     0.136    0.006    8
                                     Oakland, CA PMSA     2,532,756   9   0.983    1.186     1.374    0.887    0.216    0.222     0.589       1.581    0.153    -0.451     0.182    0.064    9
                                  Santa Rosa, CA PMSA     472,102     9   0.585    0.140     0.428    0.861    0.216    0.222     1.322       1.646    0.159    -0.576     0.182    0.226   10
vii




                                      Ventura, CA PMSA    802,983     9   0.742    0.328     0.810    0.849    0.100    0.123     1.701       2.452    0.093    -0.546     0.080    0.143   11
                                        Salinas, CA MSA   410,370     9   0.077    0.097     0.219    0.823   -0.004   -0.292     -0.021      1.797    0.118    -0.746     0.061    0.076   12
      San Luis Obispo-Atascadero-Paso Robles, CA MSA      266,971     9   0.413    0.750     1.291    0.814   -0.007   -0.031     1.435       1.783    0.059    -0.668    -0.001    0.192   13
                                    San Diego, CA MSA     3,053,793   9   0.966    1.075     0.431    0.782    0.079    0.099     0.987       1.666    0.086    -0.385     0.063    0.113   14
                               Bergen-Passaic, NJ PMSA    1,387,028   2   0.849    1.270     1.550    0.753    0.180    0.256     0.366       0.551    0.146    -0.376     0.136    0.024   15
                              Nassau-Suffolk, NY PMSA     2,875,904   2   0.736    0.587     1.300    0.729    0.180    0.256     0.854       0.551    0.240    -0.341     0.136   -0.010   16
                                   Jersey City, NJ PMSA   597,924     2   1.506    2.009     2.580    0.672    0.181    0.263     -0.534      0.231    0.147     0.007     0.136   -0.009   17
                                 Boston, MA-NH PMSA       3,552,421   1   0.734    0.908     0.662    0.641    0.101    0.101     1.301       0.236    0.178    -0.284     0.086    0.213   18
                                      Newark, NJ PMSA     2,045,344   2   0.592    0.993     0.485    0.577    0.181    0.263     0.057       0.071    0.147    -0.296     0.135    0.026   19
                      Vallejo-Fairfield-Napa, CA PMSA     541,884     9   0.424    0.114     0.389    0.573    0.216    0.222     0.895       0.975    0.137    -0.361     0.182    0.112   20
              Middlesex-Somerset-Hunterdon, NJ PMSA       1,247,641   2   0.315    -0.020    0.453    0.497    0.180    0.256     2.208       0.551    0.139    -0.320     0.136    0.085   21
                                         Naples, FL MSA   318,537     5   0.648    0.441     0.500    0.482   -0.037   -0.201     0.176       2.257    -0.098   -0.342     0.006   -0.043   22
                    Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA PMSA     2,692,066   9   0.983    1.271     0.779    0.457    0.056    0.039     1.675       0.707    0.078    -0.059     0.052    0.153   23
                                     Danbury, CT PMSA     223,095     1   -0.036   -0.108    0.153    0.444    0.177    0.249     -0.527      0.551    0.125    -0.421     0.134    0.137   24
                                  Bridgeport, CT PMSA     470,094     1   -0.190   0.232     0.583    0.437    0.178    0.249     0.353       0.551    0.120    -0.438     0.136    0.029   25
                            Monmouth-Ocean, NJ PMSA       1,217,783   2   0.061    -0.140    0.212    0.418    0.180    0.255     2.095       0.551    0.128    -0.349     0.136    0.098   26
                                 Lowell, MA-NH PMSA       310,264     1   0.240    0.119     0.498    0.412    0.106    0.098     2.001       0.236    0.152    -0.253     0.092    0.316   27
                   Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV PMSA           5,650,154   5   1.071    1.599     0.662    0.410    0.150    0.187     0.892       -0.731   -0.030   -0.035     0.119    0.047   28
                                      Trenton, NJ PMSA    366,222     2   0.121    -0.160    0.281    0.347    0.181    0.263     1.744       -0.836   0.134    -0.239     0.136    0.068   29
                              Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                       Adjusted Indices                             Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                   Geo
                                                          Cen-                                                                     Un-
                                                          sus          Land      Land                                  Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                          Di-          Value     Value    Hous-            Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                              Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing    Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                 Full Name     tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price   (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                            Miami, FL PMSA    2,500,625   5   1.075    1.344    1.115     0.347   -0.053   -0.070      0.707      2.306    -0.055   -0.001    -0.042   -0.007   30
                  Dutchess County, NY PMSA    293,562     2   -0.412   -0.856   -0.990    0.346    0.183    0.247      0.220      0.551    0.183    -0.372     0.141   -0.029   31
                         Brockton, MA PMSA    268,092     1   -0.251   -0.723   -0.367    0.343    0.097    0.077      2.852      0.236    0.141    -0.355     0.087    0.394   32
                    Lawrence, MA-NH PMSA      413,626     1   -0.012   -0.072    0.090    0.343    0.107    0.115      1.842      0.236    0.134    -0.273     0.089    0.337   33
              New Haven-Meriden, CT PMSA      558,692     1   -0.010   0.095     0.279    0.312    0.180    0.256     -0.576      0.774    0.121    -0.262     0.136   -0.003   34
                     Stockton-Lodi, CA MSA    674,860     9   0.127    -0.216    0.449    0.266    0.094    0.174      0.150      -0.823   0.100    -0.187     0.062    0.130   35
               Boulder-Longmont, CO PMSA      311,786     8   0.021    -0.260    0.157    0.261   -0.004    0.012      4.038      0.684    -0.054   -0.314    -0.007    0.290   36
                  Medford-Ashland, OR MSA     201,286     9   -0.494   -0.606   -0.438    0.260   -0.168   -0.188      0.917      1.973    0.025    -0.422    -0.138    0.049   37
         Riverside-San Bernardino, CA PMSA    4,143,113   9   0.124    -0.489   -0.283    0.256    0.100    0.122      0.644      0.429    0.059    -0.215     0.080    0.104   38
       West Palm Beach-Boca Raton, FL MSA     1,279,950   5   0.867    1.034    1.144     0.247    0.014    0.058      0.358      1.695    -0.105   -0.006     0.002   -0.023   39
                Atlantic-Cape May, NJ PMSA    367,803     2   -0.148   -0.009   -0.058    0.242    0.068    0.060      0.333      1.751    0.122    -0.231     0.060    0.027   40
viii




                   Fort Lauderdale, FL PMSA   1,766,476   5   0.913    0.999    1.297     0.222   -0.053   -0.071      0.932      2.262    -0.068    0.050    -0.041    0.019   41
                        Baltimore, MD PMSA    2,690,886   5   0.238    0.092    0.305     0.215    0.150    0.187     -0.601      -0.347   -0.045   -0.186     0.119    0.065   42
                              Reno, NV MSA    414,820     8   0.149    0.056    -0.737    0.213   -0.028   -0.138     -0.428      1.308    -0.002   -0.186     0.001   -0.047   43
                           Hartford, CT MSA   1,231,125   1   -0.684   -0.826   -0.572    0.201    0.097    0.099      0.342      -0.279   0.119    -0.341     0.082    0.048   44
                           Chicago, IL PMSA   8,710,824   3   0.615    1.114     0.407    0.190    0.063    0.069     -0.543      0.532    0.180     0.114     0.053   -0.092   45
                    Worcester, MA-CT PMSA     547,274     1   -0.194   -0.303   -0.386    0.185    0.101    0.102      2.430      0.236    0.131    -0.181     0.086    0.268   46
                       Bremerton, WA PMSA     240,862     9   -0.183   -0.245   0.208     0.180    0.046    0.009      0.078      1.107    0.065    -0.231     0.048    0.069   47
        Portsmouth-Rochester, NH-ME PMSA      262,128     1   -0.610   -0.501   -0.040    0.179    0.104    0.119      1.035      0.236    -0.028   -0.405     0.085    0.251   48
          Portland-Vancouver, OR-WA PMSA      2,230,947   9   0.447    0.408    0.063     0.176   -0.043   -0.062      0.015      0.412    0.033    -0.029    -0.032   -0.014   49
                 Sarasota-Bradenton, FL MSA   688,126     5   0.424    0.001    0.278     0.163   -0.088   -0.053      1.563      1.822    -0.074   -0.090    -0.082    0.076   50
                       Manchester, NH PMSA    212,326     1   -0.417   -0.509   -0.287    0.162    0.111    0.146      2.637      0.236    -0.018   -0.332     0.087    0.406   51
                           Modesto, CA MSA    510,385     9   0.008    -0.260   0.059     0.161    0.048    0.049     -0.156      -0.715   0.100    -0.123     0.041    0.017   52
                             Fresno, CA MSA   1,063,899   9   -0.100   -0.640   -0.565    0.129   -0.009   -0.024      1.219      -0.783   0.102    -0.132    -0.004    0.173   53
                          Tacoma, WA PMSA     796,836     9   0.393    0.146    0.034     0.122    0.056    0.037     -0.158      0.371    0.063     0.030     0.052    0.116   54
                           Portland, ME MSA   256,178     1   -0.422   -0.345   -0.236    0.120   -0.077   -0.025      0.888      0.989    -0.062   -0.325    -0.077    0.179   55
                 Eugene-Springfield, OR MSA   351,109     9   -0.388   -0.627   -0.866    0.085   -0.166   -0.206      0.202      1.622    0.021    -0.207    -0.132   -0.029   56
                         Olympia, WA PMSA     250,979     9   0.098    -0.437   -0.160    0.081    0.057    0.040      0.671      0.458    0.052    -0.036     0.052    0.106   57
                   Philadelphia, PA-NJ PMSA   5,332,822   2   0.249    0.381    0.028     0.074    0.066    0.053      0.689      -0.915   0.158    0.088      0.059   -0.007   58
                     Grand Junction, CO MSA   146,093     8   -0.108   -0.501   -0.266    0.073   -0.221   -0.383      0.504      0.690    -0.070   -0.176    -0.151   -0.022   59
                    Newburgh, NY-PA PMSA      444,061     2   -0.296   -1.043   -0.713    0.071    0.183    0.255     -0.479      0.045    0.138    -0.097     0.139   -0.111   60
                                       Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                                 Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                              Geo
                                                                    Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                                    sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                                    Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                        Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                          Full Name      tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                                   Yuba City, CA MSA    165,539     9   -0.707   -0.671   -0.963     0.071   -0.006   -0.023     -0.707      -0.734   0.098    -0.248    -0.002    0.057   61
                                 Springfield, MA MSA    609,993     1   -0.321   -0.283   0.034      0.056   -0.031   -0.048     0.108       -0.095   0.072    -0.134    -0.023    0.127   62
                                    Denver, CO PMSA     2,445,781   8   0.119    0.320    -0.227     0.050   -0.004    0.012     1.335       -0.597   -0.021   -0.050    -0.007    0.058   63
                      Fort Collins-Loveland, CO MSA     298,382     8   -0.344   -0.672   -0.262     0.036   -0.134   -0.226     0.873       0.107    -0.065   -0.216    -0.093   -0.007   64
                                     Merced, CA MSA     245,321     9   -0.144   -0.557   -0.342     0.026    0.062    0.290     0.649       -0.915   0.100    -0.036     0.001    0.090   65
                 Wilmington-Newark, DE-MD PMSA          635,430     5   0.040    -0.502   -0.199     0.018    0.066    0.054     0.750       -0.697   0.045    -0.003     0.059    0.119   66
     Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VA- MSA       1,667,410   5   -0.123   -0.417   -0.237     0.006   -0.062   -0.032     -0.167      1.489    -0.104   -0.138    -0.059    0.054   67
                               Las Vegas, NV-AZ MSA     2,141,893   8   0.869    0.579     0.222    -0.002    0.046   -0.049     -1.453      0.147    0.080     0.320     0.061   -0.122   68
                               Hagerstown, MD PMSA      145,910     5   -0.315   -0.827   -1.106    -0.003    0.148    0.176     0.188       -0.499   -0.077   -0.196     0.119    0.027   69
                               Phoenix-Mesa, AZ MSA     4,364,094   8   0.414    -0.082   -0.626    -0.004   -0.002    0.000     1.003       -0.731   -0.104   0.041     -0.002    0.128   70
                      Fort Myers-Cape Coral, FL MSA     586,908     5   0.183    -0.082   0.583     -0.005   -0.078   -0.070     -0.494      1.168    -0.098   -0.043    -0.068   -0.094   71
                     Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI PMSA        1,559,667   3   -0.398   -0.695   -0.472    -0.014   -0.021   -0.008     -0.455      0.618    0.066    -0.090    -0.021    0.039   72
ix




                                    Madison, WI MSA     491,357     3   0.105    0.031    -0.340    -0.023   -0.092   -0.171     0.374       -0.858   0.013     0.048    -0.061    0.060   73
                  Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI MSA       3,269,814   4   0.101    0.102    -0.201    -0.031    0.028    0.000     0.155       -0.475   0.139    0.130      0.030   -0.013   74
                   Visalia-Tulare-Porterville, CA MSA   429,668     9   -0.327   -0.409   -0.568    -0.032   -0.017   -0.033     0.371       -0.465   0.087    -0.011    -0.011    0.073   75
                                      Tucson, AZ MSA    1,020,200   8   -0.256   -0.534   -0.664    -0.035   -0.126   -0.166     0.250       -0.289   -0.113   -0.153    -0.098    0.122   76
                                   Asheville, NC MSA    251,894     5   -0.460   -0.842   -0.483    -0.047   -0.196   -0.263     0.149       1.863    -0.243   -0.291    -0.151   -0.014   77
                                     Salem, OR PMSA     396,103     9   -0.272   -0.427   -0.308    -0.049   -0.043   -0.063     0.626       0.195    0.026    -0.044    -0.032    0.019   78
                   Fort Pierce-Port St. Lucie, FL MSA   406,296     5   0.025    -0.215   0.096     -0.053   -0.096   -0.166     0.347       1.739    -0.105   -0.050    -0.066   -0.039   79
                                 Bakersfield, CA MSA    807,407     9   -0.508   -0.640   -1.106    -0.061    0.004   -0.108     -0.316      -0.234   0.077    -0.063     0.029    0.024   80
                           Fort Walton Beach, FL MSA    178,473     5   -0.152   -0.001   0.463     -0.066   -0.146   -0.213     -0.465      1.435    -0.116   -0.110    -0.109   -0.035   81
            Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL MSA     2,747,272   5   0.287    0.074    0.047     -0.076   -0.095   -0.136     0.003       0.611    -0.072   0.096     -0.071    0.016   82
                                     Orlando, FL MSA    2,082,421   5   0.369    -0.077   -0.056    -0.082   -0.087   -0.110     0.131       0.344    -0.071    0.135    -0.069    0.005   83
                                   Kenosha, WI PMSA     165,382     3   -0.215   -0.977   -0.653    -0.100    0.063    0.069     1.863       0.914    0.038     0.028     0.053    0.093   84
               Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA MSA       706,374     2   -0.111   -0.813   -0.571    -0.108   -0.015    0.083     0.459       -0.396   0.071     0.092    -0.035   -0.068   85
                       Richmond-Petersburg, VA MSA      1,119,459   5   -0.508   -0.906   -0.595    -0.114   -0.025   -0.069     -0.796      -0.980   -0.104   -0.139    -0.011   -0.022   86
                Charleston-North Charleston, SC MSA     659,191     5   -0.235   -0.066   -0.450    -0.120   -0.094   -0.077     -1.187      1.522    -0.167   -0.098    -0.084   -0.091   87
             Melbourne-Titusville-Palm Bay, FL MSA      536,357     5   0.131    -0.534   0.019     -0.135   -0.096   -0.058     0.400       1.707    -0.056   0.105     -0.090    0.001   88
                                     Racine, WI PMSA    200,601     3   -0.723   -1.196   -0.916    -0.149   -0.019    0.022     -1.269      1.215    0.037    -0.060    -0.025    0.040   89
                       Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT MSA     1,567,650   8   0.091    0.075    0.729     -0.152   -0.105   -0.158     -0.451      2.082    -0.108    0.085    -0.078    0.044   90
                             Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                       Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                    Geo
                                                          Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                          sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                          Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                              Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                Full Name      tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                      Jacksonville, FL MSA    1,301,808   5   0.054    -0.513   -0.045    -0.161   -0.079   -0.118     0.746       0.886    -0.133   0.060     -0.058    0.087    91
                  Daytona Beach, FL MSA       587,512     5   -0.148   -0.432   -0.018    -0.162   -0.152   -0.181     -0.783      1.526    -0.082    0.039    -0.123   -0.076    92
                       Gainesville, FL MSA    243,574     5   -0.607   -0.655   -0.607    -0.166   -0.146   -0.157     -0.181      -0.661   -0.108   -0.120    -0.122   -0.054    93
                    Albuquerque, NM MSA       841,428     8   -0.085   -0.167   -0.169    -0.167   -0.113   -0.185     0.998       -0.843   -0.078    0.067    -0.080    0.033    94
               Colorado Springs, CO MSA       604,542     8   -0.226   -0.247   -0.049    -0.188   -0.122   -0.133     0.289       -0.328   -0.048    0.061    -0.102   -0.025    95
                         Lancaster, PA MSA    507,766     2   -0.489   -0.859   -0.660    -0.199   -0.121   -0.263     0.082       -0.830   -0.036    0.007    -0.070   -0.109    96
                    Ann Arbor, MI PMSA*       630,518     3   -0.491   -0.855   -1.109    -0.205   -0.003   -0.023     1.273       -0.937   0.026     0.038     0.001    0.078    97
     Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill, NC MSA       1,589,388   5   -0.222   -0.663   -0.427    -0.208   -0.042   -0.035     1.146       -1.014   -0.210   -0.029    -0.038    0.012    98
                          Spokane, WA MSA     468,684     9   -0.655   -0.379   -0.436    -0.219   -0.123   -0.128     0.799       -0.083   -0.032   -0.011    -0.103    0.051    99
                    Myrtle Beach, SC MSA      263,868     5   -0.588   -0.634   -0.576    -0.220   -0.169   -0.097     -0.940      1.590    -0.228   -0.147    -0.159    0.037   100
                   New Orleans, LA MSA*       1,211,035   7   -0.360   -0.105   -0.307    -0.231   -0.090   -0.167     -2.352      2.222    -0.102    0.029    -0.059   -0.254   101
       Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY MSA        906,208     2   -1.219   -1.195   -1.566    -0.233   -0.035   -0.074     -0.186      -0.277   0.011    -0.114    -0.021   -0.082   102
x




                               York, PA MSA   428,937     2   -0.502   -0.920   -0.420    -0.254   -0.055   -0.098     0.879       -0.821   0.001     0.079    -0.038   -0.020   103
                     Provo-Orem, UT MSA       545,307     8   0.256    0.149     0.449    -0.254   -0.132   -0.168     -0.513      1.480    -0.112    0.244    -0.123    0.054   104
                         Boise City, ID MSA   571,271     8   -0.327   -0.387   0.126     -0.257   -0.154   -0.192     -1.029      0.354    -0.090    0.060    -0.122   -0.074   105
                         Nashville, TN MSA    1,495,419   6   -0.333   -0.535   -0.176    -0.264   -0.074   -0.094     -1.066      -0.785   -0.097   0.067     -0.058   -0.007   106
                             Yuma, AZ MSA     196,972     8   -1.081   -1.239   -1.615    -0.266   -0.134   -0.203     -0.458      -1.078   -0.079   -0.121    -0.098    0.061   107
                         Greeley, CO PMSA     254,759     8   -0.457   -0.841   -0.744    -0.267   -0.004    0.010     -0.635      -0.919   -0.117    0.020    -0.007   -0.054   108
                         Savannah, GA MSA     343,092     5   -0.418   -0.958   -0.655    -0.278   -0.101   -0.147     -0.224      1.506    -0.158    0.024    -0.076    0.024   109
                         Detroit, MI PMSA*    4,373,040   3   -0.332   -0.504   -0.344    -0.285   -0.003   -0.024     -0.253      -0.219   0.040     0.165     0.002    0.031   110
              Austin-San Marcos, TX MSA       1,705,075   7   -0.173   -0.515   -0.466    -0.285   -0.042   -0.057     1.075       -1.225   -0.189   0.079     -0.032    0.081   111
                           Atlanta, GA MSA    5,315,841   5   -0.046   -0.546   -0.373    -0.290    0.007    0.042     0.080       -1.209   -0.080    0.184    -0.002   -0.011   112
                           Reading, PA MSA    407,125     2   -0.022   -0.344   0.015     -0.295   -0.057   -0.043     0.703       -0.609   0.036     0.308    -0.051   -0.051   113
                     St. Louis, MO-IL MSA     2,733,694   4   -0.687   -0.954   -0.527    -0.295   -0.058   -0.128     -1.564      -0.870   0.046     0.092    -0.034   -0.081   114
    Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, NJ PMSA     157,745     2   -0.626   -0.922   -0.624    -0.297    0.075    0.098     1.595       0.326    0.120    0.180      0.058    0.031   115
                          Roanoke, VA MSA     243,506     5   -0.820   -0.915   -0.723    -0.306   -0.113   -0.111     -1.266      0.504    -0.138   -0.061    -0.097   -0.009   116
                           Billings, MT MSA   144,797     8   -0.585   -0.797   -0.701    -0.316   -0.171   -0.298     -0.556      -0.857   -0.073   0.058     -0.162   -0.119   117
     Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlisle, PA MSA      667,425     2   -0.423   -0.594   -0.585    -0.323   -0.059   -0.015     0.643       -0.243   0.009    0.171     -0.061   -0.034   118
          Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL MSA       583,403     5   -0.219   -1.106   -0.707    -0.324   -0.145   -0.197     0.385       0.152    -0.049    0.191    -0.112   -0.016   119
                      Glens Falls, NY MSA     128,774     2   -2.107   -2.775   -2.776    -0.328   -0.139   -0.142     -2.552      0.574    -0.047   -0.199    -0.118   -0.102   120
                                       Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                                Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                             Geo
                                                                   Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                                   sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                                   Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                       Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                          Full Name     tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                                  Green Bay, WI MSA    247,319     3   -0.658   -0.589   -0.460    -0.328   -0.084   -0.068     -0.419      -0.279   -0.008    0.098    -0.075   -0.012   121
                               Baton Rouge, LA MSA     685,419     7   -0.605   -0.794   -0.347    -0.344   -0.065   -0.042     -1.511      0.217    -0.129    0.041    -0.061   -0.225   122
                                  Columbus, OH MSA     1,718,303   3   -0.368   -0.792   -0.708    -0.348   -0.046   -0.024      0.216      -1.286   -0.024    0.181    -0.044   -0.146   123
                 Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria, OH PMSA*     2,192,053   3   -0.306   -0.650   -0.445    -0.349   -0.083   -0.105     -0.704      0.555    0.016    0.228     -0.065   -0.134   124
                         Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN PMSA     1,776,911   3   -0.309   -0.490   -0.619    -0.350   -0.040   -0.036     -1.026      -0.908   -0.046    0.191    -0.035   -0.120   125
                                   Pensacola, FL MSA   455,102     5   -1.076   -0.895   -1.073    -0.356   -0.193   -0.255     -1.495      1.141    -0.116   -0.045    -0.151   -0.165   126
                 Appleton-Oshkosh-Neenah, WI MSA       385,264     3   -1.473   -1.824   -1.522    -0.359   -0.092   -0.081     -0.376      -0.538   -0.035   -0.064    -0.081   -0.010   127
                               Louisville, KY-IN MSA   1,099,588   6   -0.654   -0.798   -0.475    -0.363   -0.114   -0.141     -1.126      -0.792   -0.070    0.094    -0.090   -0.137   128
             Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR MSA    425,685     7   -0.483   -0.775   -0.385    -0.374   -0.130   -0.157     -0.627      -0.005   -0.250    0.012    -0.105   -0.205   129
                Richland-Kennewick-Pasco, WA MSA       245,649     9   -0.556   -0.581   -0.553    -0.375    0.026    0.120      0.832      -0.813   -0.016    0.172     0.001    0.081   130
           Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC MSA     1,937,309   5   -1.233   -2.105   -1.748    -0.377   -0.056   -0.059     -1.288      -1.180   -0.223   -0.156    -0.047   -0.009   131
                                   Akron, OH PMSA*     699,935     3   -0.709   -1.242   -0.627    -0.379   -0.083   -0.105     -0.026      -1.095   -0.005    0.134    -0.065   -0.087   132
xi




                                  St. Cloud, MN MSA    189,148     4   -0.977   -1.231   -1.125    -0.380   -0.130   -0.268     -0.404      -0.409   0.125     0.172    -0.079   -0.034   133
                                 Des Moines, IA MSA    536,664     4   -1.074   -1.224   -1.103    -0.388   -0.063   -0.006     -1.475      -1.108   -0.090    0.000    -0.066   -0.131   134
                             Benton Harbor, MI MSA*    160,472     3   -1.438   -1.518   -0.967    -0.398   -0.132   -0.088     -1.088      1.024    -0.035   -0.023    -0.122   -0.009   135
     Greensboro–Winston Salem–High Point, NC MSA       1,416,374   5   -0.708   -1.109   -0.614    -0.400   -0.137   -0.185     -0.752      -1.256   -0.221    0.009    -0.105    0.023   136
                          Champaign-Urbana, IL MSA     195,671     3   -0.517   -0.789   -0.991    -0.403   -0.153   -0.228     -0.836      -1.337   0.067     0.284    -0.113   -0.161   137
                                       Gary, IN PMSA   657,809     3   -0.225   -0.210   -0.098    -0.403    0.063    0.069     -1.399      0.121    0.056     0.337     0.053   -0.056   138
                            Kansas City, MO-KS MSA     2,005,888   4   -0.718   -0.976   -0.774    -0.411   -0.062   -0.083     -1.382      -1.125   0.045     0.208    -0.048   -0.112   139
                                Birmingham, AL MSA     997,770     6   -0.907   -1.052   -0.598    -0.412   -0.061   -0.050     -0.417      -0.712   -0.093    0.043    -0.054   -0.037   140
                                  Knoxville, TN MSA    785,490     6   -0.788   -1.069   -0.442    -0.412   -0.143   -0.148     -0.864      0.460    -0.180    0.021    -0.120   -0.021   141
                       Lansing-East Lansing, MI MSA    453,603     3   -1.273   -1.415   -1.535    -0.414   -0.099   -0.049     -0.553      -1.075   0.009     0.062    -0.096    0.048   142
                    Hamilton-Middletown, OH PMSA       363,184     3   -0.360   -1.020   -0.089    -0.418   -0.040   -0.037     -0.580      -1.069   -0.067   0.223     -0.035   -0.204   143
                              La Crosse, WI-MN MSA     132,923     3   -0.576   -0.493   -0.421    -0.418   -0.185   -0.262     -0.406      0.327    -0.014    0.198    -0.140    0.056   144
                                     Dallas, TX PMSA   4,399,895   7   -0.405   -0.556   -0.275    -0.429   -0.001    0.008     -0.666      -0.963   -0.173    0.144    -0.002   -0.094   145
           Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI MSA       1,157,672   3   -1.174   -1.083   -0.966    -0.435   -0.110   -0.129     -0.463      -0.958   -0.089   0.018     -0.089   -0.017   146
                                   Columbia, SC MSA    627,630     5   -0.907   -0.977   -0.876    -0.436   -0.144   -0.182     -1.110      -0.669   -0.214   -0.005    -0.114   -0.007   147
                Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC MSA       365,364     5   -0.878   -1.483   -1.004    -0.437   -0.203   -0.188     -0.915      -0.391   -0.281   -0.052    -0.175   -0.072   148
                                  Lynchburg, VA MSA    232,895     5   -1.155   -1.399   -0.891    -0.441   -0.170   -0.197     -0.919      -0.325   -0.131   -0.006    -0.139   -0.002   149
                           Chattanooga, TN-GA MSA      510,388     6   -0.500   -0.612   -0.628    -0.446   -0.149   -0.218     -1.326      -0.156   -0.137    0.178    -0.111   -0.027   150
                                   Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                            Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                         Geo
                                                               Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                               sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                               Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                   Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                      Full Name     tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                              Huntsville, AL MSA   406,316     6   -0.324   -0.809   -0.335    -0.446   -0.085   -0.186     -2.306      -0.228   -0.133   0.225     -0.049   -0.039   151
                           State College, PA MSA   146,212     2   -1.283   -1.550   -1.504    -0.447   -0.191   -0.219      1.122      -0.808   -0.030    0.040    -0.156   -0.007   152
                                 Mobile, AL MSA    591,599     6   -1.192   -1.409   -1.200    -0.457   -0.173   -0.269     -2.682      0.013    -0.133    0.002    -0.126   -0.085   153
                                 Lincoln, NE MSA   281,531     4   -0.496   -0.755   -0.706    -0.461   -0.200   -0.172      0.793      -1.330   -0.095    0.225    -0.176    0.052   154
                       Janesville-Beloit, WI MSA   160,155     3   -0.418   -0.808   -0.615    -0.467   -0.114   -0.128     -0.703      -1.175   0.003    0.321     -0.093   -0.003   155
                  Bryan-College Station, TX MSA    179,992     7   -1.240   -1.519   -1.346    -0.478   -0.262   -0.522      0.363      -1.096   -0.175   -0.003    -0.165    0.013   156
          Little Rock-North Little Rock, AR MSA    657,416     7   -0.866   -0.988   -0.530    -0.480   -0.124   -0.144     -1.819      -0.743   -0.136   0.105     -0.101   -0.240   157
                            Indianapolis, IN MSA   1,823,690   3   -0.574   -0.992   -0.635    -0.483   -0.073   -0.107     -1.730      -1.337   -0.044    0.245    -0.054   -0.100   158
       Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson, SC MSA     1,096,009   5   -1.021   -1.397   -0.854    -0.485   -0.124   -0.152     -1.574      -0.784   -0.231   -0.002    -0.099   -0.062   159
                   Dayton-Springfield, OH MSA*     933,312     3   -0.737   -0.940   -0.506    -0.485   -0.127   -0.162     -1.482      -1.357   -0.069    0.198    -0.100   -0.220   160
                  Duluth-Superior, MN-WI MSA*      242,041     4   -0.820   -1.200   -1.324    -0.485   -0.184   -0.399     -0.860      0.261    0.077     0.280    -0.108   -0.061   161
xii




                             Lexington, KY MSA     554,107     6   -0.441   -0.482   -0.180    -0.490   -0.116   -0.051     -0.098      -1.121   -0.098    0.255    -0.113   -0.038   162
                                Toledo, OH MSA*    631,275     3   -1.465   -1.721   -1.434    -0.493   -0.113   -0.192     -2.216      -0.488   0.011     0.104    -0.078   -0.203   163
                           Cedar Rapids, IA MSA    209,226     4   -1.111   -1.310   -0.924    -0.500   -0.112   -0.093     -1.365      -1.236   -0.067    0.111    -0.100   -0.083   164
                Kalamazoo-Battle Creek, MI MSA     462,250     3   -1.334   -1.475   -1.178    -0.502   -0.118   -0.136     -0.929      -0.929   -0.029    0.104    -0.097    0.033   165
                              Houston, TX PMSA     5,219,317   7   -0.305   -0.523   -0.579    -0.503    0.025    0.044     -0.070      -1.000   -0.142    0.272     0.017   -0.071   166
                                 Wausau, WI MSA    131,612     3   -1.368   -1.787   -1.441    -0.504   -0.121   -0.150     -0.669      -0.833   -0.038    0.092    -0.097   -0.015   167
                     Canton-Massillon, OH MSA*     408,005     3   -0.874   -1.186   -0.855    -0.510   -0.116   -0.031     -1.105      -0.798   -0.044   0.196     -0.118   -0.175   168
                             Omaha, NE-IA MSA      799,130     4   -0.683   -0.736   -0.617    -0.512   -0.102   -0.051     -0.433      -1.245   -0.076    0.228    -0.098   -0.033   169
                   Waterloo-Cedar Falls, IA MSA*   129,276     4   -0.920   -0.946   -0.556    -0.514   -0.306   -0.821     -1.470      -1.256   -0.186    0.091    -0.144   -0.120   170
                             Pittsburgh, PA MSA*   2,287,106   2   -0.809   -0.941   -1.124    -0.516   -0.098   -0.102     -0.077      0.048    0.029     0.279    -0.083   -0.063   171
                           Peoria-Pekin, IL MSA*   357,144     3   -1.519   -1.816   -1.708    -0.519   -0.075   -0.101     -0.528      -1.166   0.065    0.168     -0.058   -0.073   172
            Biloxi-Gulfport-Pascagoula, MS MSA     355,075     6   -0.870   -1.109   -0.962    -0.526   -0.145   -0.159     -1.131      1.116    -0.156    0.124    -0.120   -0.099   173
                                Rockford, IL MSA   409,058     3   -0.812   -1.557   -1.440    -0.526   -0.059   -0.002     -1.038      -1.301   0.124     0.360    -0.063   -0.188   174
                     Augusta-Aiken, GA-SC MSA      516,357     5   -1.136   -1.257   -0.832    -0.528   -0.066    0.031     -1.614      -0.902   -0.136    0.091    -0.078   -0.069   175
                             Sioux Falls, SD MSA   224,266     4   -0.445   -0.710   -0.628    -0.529   -0.122   -0.194     -1.415      -1.244   -0.167    0.252    -0.134   -0.004   176
      Scranton–Wilkes-Barre–Hazleton, PA MSA*      614,565     2   -1.039   -1.473   -1.272    -0.529   -0.165   -0.206     -0.436      -0.012   0.013    0.210     -0.131   -0.087   177
                      Memphis, TN-AR-MS MSA        1,230,253   6   -0.921   -1.180   -0.443    -0.529   -0.048   -0.071      1.525      -0.817   -0.126   0.147     -0.036    0.109   178
      Davenport-Moline-Rock Island, IA-IL MSA*     362,790     4   -1.180   -1.377   -1.275    -0.531   -0.088    0.022     -1.818      -1.185   -0.006    0.183    -0.100   -0.116   179
                  Galveston-Texas City, TX PMSA    286,814     7   -0.706   -0.738   -0.176    -0.531    0.022    0.046      0.398      2.232    -0.120    0.212     0.013   -0.042   180
                                    Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                             Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                          Geo
                                                                Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                                sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                                Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                    Popula-     vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                       Full Name     tion       sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                               Rochester, NY MSA    1,093,434   2   -1.425   -1.452   -2.287    -0.533   -0.079   -0.051     -0.554      0.069    0.029    0.174     -0.073   -0.020   181
                   Fort Worth-Arlington, TX PMSA    2,113,278   7   -0.598   -0.759   -0.487    -0.535   -0.001    0.008     -0.420      -1.169   -0.153   0.219     -0.002   -0.094   182
                                Jackson, MS MSA     483,852     6   -1.024   -1.276   -1.297    -0.540   -0.115   -0.126     -2.260      -0.858   -0.131   0.134     -0.096   -0.132   183
                            Montgomery, AL MSA      354,108     6   -1.247   -1.347   -1.102    -0.542   -0.142   -0.150     -1.685      -0.886   -0.182   0.043     -0.119   -0.047   184
                                   Tulsa, OK MSA    873,304     7   -0.763   -0.877   -1.117    -0.547   -0.105   -0.051     -1.664      -1.102   -0.201   0.171     -0.101   -0.154   185
                     Bloomington-Normal, IL MSA     167,699     3   -0.800   -0.947   -1.017    -0.550   -0.050    0.093     -0.586      -1.339   0.051    0.320     -0.075   -0.136   186
                          Oklahoma City, OK MSA     1,213,704   7   -1.027   -1.238   -1.160    -0.555   -0.173   -0.275     -1.067      -1.288   -0.157   0.130     -0.125   -0.074   187
                                Lafayette, IN MSA   202,331     3   -0.701   -1.185   -0.747    -0.557   -0.171   -0.204     -0.951      -0.146   -0.069   0.274     -0.138   -0.002   188
                                    Tyler, TX MSA   204,665     7   -1.172   -1.532   -1.329    -0.558   -0.156   -0.226     -0.062      -0.918   -0.183   0.065     -0.117    0.113   189
                             Springfield, MO MSA    383,637     4   -0.859   -1.047   -1.097    -0.567   -0.225   -0.275     -1.324      -1.086   -0.077   0.245     -0.180   -0.029   190
       Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA MSA    503,010     6   -0.900   -1.248   -0.764    -0.567   -0.207   -0.267     -1.498      1.272    -0.197   0.144     -0.163   -0.024   191
xiii




                               Brazoria, TX PMSA    309,208     7   -1.018   -1.529   -1.020    -0.567    0.032    0.057     -0.808      -1.000   -0.135   0.160      0.021   -0.125   192
                  Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY MSA*    1,123,804   2   -0.994   -0.949   -0.978    -0.576   -0.076   -0.066     -1.147      -0.484   0.053    0.308     -0.066   -0.088   193
                                  Sumter, SC MSA    104,495     5   -1.239   -1.752   -1.207    -0.576   -0.325   -0.629     -1.557      -0.298   -0.214   0.057     -0.207   -0.017   194
                          Elkhart-Goshen, IN MSA    200,502     3   -1.159   -1.558   -1.020    -0.581   -0.098   -0.079     -1.460      -1.086   -0.059   0.202     -0.124   -0.140   195
                                  Flint, MI PMSA*   424,043     3   -1.032   -1.440   -1.031    -0.588   -0.003   -0.024     -0.469      -0.943   0.011    0.276      0.002    0.051   196
                                Amarillo, TX MSA    238,299     7   -0.959   -1.212   -0.999    -0.588   -0.204   -0.282     -0.847      -1.237   -0.160   0.176     -0.156   -0.126   197
             Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI MSA*      390,032     3   -2.051   -2.375   -1.983    -0.590   -0.118   -0.142     -0.181      -0.613   -0.014   0.103     -0.095   -0.033   198
                                    Erie, PA MSA*   280,291     2   -1.416   -1.364   -1.446    -0.596   -0.187   -0.257     -0.916      1.063    -0.021   0.196     -0.143   -0.054   199
                             Fayetteville, NC MSA   315,207     5   -0.961   -1.057   -0.479    -0.599   -0.183   -0.225     -1.559      -0.655   -0.208   0.148     -0.146   -0.192   200
                            San Antonio, TX MSA     1,928,154   7   -0.852   -0.965   -0.759    -0.601   -0.121   -0.119      1.739      -1.254   -0.168   0.205     -0.103    0.060   201
                              South Bend, IN MSA    267,613     3   -0.676   -1.119   -0.748    -0.602   -0.112    0.001     -2.027      -0.896   -0.059   0.332     -0.121   -0.082   202
                              Syracuse, NY MSA*     725,610     2   -1.189   -1.331   -1.921    -0.610   -0.096   -0.102     -1.709      -0.542   0.004    0.265     -0.080   -0.163   203
                Evansville-Henderson, IN-KY MSA     305,455     3   -1.496   -1.485   -1.230    -0.620   -0.159   -0.338     -1.316      -0.987   -0.052   0.171     -0.095   -0.043   204
                                  Macon, GA MSA     356,873     5   -1.264   -1.566   -1.011    -0.626   -0.071   -0.021     -1.660      -1.024   -0.150   0.160     -0.072   -0.123   205
                           Rocky Mount, NC MSA      146,596     5   -0.759   -1.029   -0.587    -0.632   -0.163   -0.273     -0.857      -0.513   -0.290   0.165     -0.114   -0.144   206
                               Lafayette, LA MSA    415,592     7   -1.286   -1.442   -1.224    -0.643   -0.131   -0.154     -1.729      -1.310   -0.169   0.141     -0.106   -0.185   207
                            Lake Charles, LA MSA    187,554     7   -0.888   -0.859   -0.740    -0.646   -0.107   -0.099     -1.928      0.964    -0.142   0.244     -0.093   -0.243   208
                                Lubbock, TX MSA     270,550     7   -1.386   -1.720   -1.182    -0.646   -0.209   -0.239     -1.539      -1.385   -0.187   0.113     -0.171   -0.028   209
                                 Wichita, KS MSA    589,195     4   -1.101   -1.304   -1.001    -0.648   -0.135   -0.185     -1.911      -1.327   -0.155   0.206     -0.104   -0.082   210
                                  Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                            Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                         Geo
                                                               Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                               sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                               Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                  Popula-      vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                     Full Name     tion        sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                             Fort Wayne, IN MSA   528,408      3   -1.255   -1.590   -1.416    -0.655   -0.141   -0.147     -1.540      -1.283   -0.084   0.246     -0.118   -0.098   211
                           St. Joseph, MO MSA*    106,908      4   -1.713   -1.808   -1.517    -0.657   -0.205   -0.354     -2.414      -1.104   -0.028   0.199     -0.174   -0.113   212
                          Utica-Rome, NY MSA*     293,280      2   -1.950   -2.347   -2.233    -0.664   -0.155   -0.322     -1.425      -0.549   -0.026   0.172     -0.094   -0.042   213
                      Sherman-Denison, TX MSA     120,030      7   -1.606   -2.370   -1.933    -0.670      -        -       -1.646      -1.076   -0.222   0.068          -   -0.107   214
                         Corpus Christi, TX MSA   391,269      7   -1.196   -1.266   -1.024    -0.674   -0.168   -0.230     -1.155      0.435    -0.209   0.165     -0.129   -0.176   215
                                Dothan, AL MSA    148,232      6   -1.296   -1.825   -1.451    -0.677   -0.131   -0.001     -1.610      -0.965   -0.217   0.148     -0.140   -0.012   216
                  Fargo-Moorhead, ND-MN MSA       200,102      4   -0.652   -0.846   -0.869    -0.679   -0.211   -0.456     -2.080      -1.264   -0.097   0.376     -0.125   -0.065   217
                  Youngstown-Warren, OH MSA*      554,614      3   -1.782   -2.155   -1.652    -0.709   -0.178   -0.208     -0.780      -0.898   -0.020   0.252     -0.145   -0.141   218
                         Columbus, GA-AL MSA      285,800      5   -0.479   -0.649   -0.481    -0.716   -0.162   -0.175     -1.452      -1.109   -0.151   0.425     -0.135   -0.100   219
                                El Paso, TX MSA   751,296      7   -0.586   -0.495   -0.086    -0.738   -0.200   -0.133     0.398       -1.159   -0.213   0.377     -0.185   -0.042   220
                        Killeen-Temple, TX MSA    358,316      7   -1.382   -1.573   -1.133    -0.741   -0.188   -0.214     -1.838      -1.246   -0.239   0.162     -0.155   -0.070   221
xiv




                Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX MSA*     378,477      7   -1.311   -1.443   -1.389    -0.747   -0.073   -0.104     -1.422      -0.493   -0.155   0.262     -0.055   -0.101   222
                         Binghamton, NY MSA*      244,694      2   -1.358   -1.592   -1.566    -0.754   -0.127   -0.134     -1.423      0.257    -0.015   0.342     -0.106   -0.122   223
                    Longview-Marshall, TX MSA     222,489      7   -1.896   -2.429   -2.098    -0.764   -0.201   -0.412     -2.430      -0.891   -0.266   0.081     -0.123   -0.169   224
                        Fort Smith, AR-OK MSA     225,132      7   -1.633   -1.969   -1.691    -0.784   -0.178   -0.180     -1.764      -0.449   -0.187   0.200     -0.179   -0.163   225
                              Bismarck, ND MSA    106,286      4   -0.925   -1.267   -1.228    -0.837      -        -       -0.446      -1.123   -0.149   0.435          -   -0.075   226
                        Sioux City, IA-NE MSA*    123,482      4   -1.768   -1.755   -1.885    -0.840   -0.060    0.038     -1.863      -1.259   -0.120   0.288     -0.169   -0.080   227
                           Jamestown, NY MSA*     133,503      2   -2.423   -2.738   -2.358    -0.931   -0.241   -0.339     -0.790      0.036    -0.013   0.406     -0.183   -0.110   228
      Brownsville-Harlingen-San Benito, TX MSA    396,371      7   -1.130   -1.171   -0.349    -0.982   -0.246   -0.281     -0.749      -0.069   -0.240   0.471     -0.201   -0.108   229
           McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX MSA       741,152      7   -0.497   -0.735   -0.367    -0.990   -0.230   -0.271     -0.733      -1.362   -0.240   0.645     -0.186   -0.118   230
                              Census Divisions:
                                  New England     9,276,332    1   0.150    0.216     0.270     0.429    0.101    0.114     0.988       0.235    0.130    -0.302     0.083    0.175    4
                               Middle Atlantic    36,776,228   2   0.439    0.767    0.593      0.288    0.083    0.121     0.201       0.075    0.155    -0.002     0.063   -0.013    2
                             East North Central   34,629,706   3   -0.336   -0.415   -0.447    -0.234   -0.031   -0.038     -0.628      -0.301   0.043     0.147    -0.025   -0.068    6
                             West North Central   12,493,078   4   -0.570   -0.732   -0.644    -0.332   -0.064   -0.101     -0.943      -0.892   0.026    0.160     -0.048   -0.062    7
                                 South Atlantic   44,239,778   5   0.090    -0.100   -0.040    -0.049   -0.027   -0.027     -0.006      0.105    -0.102    0.005    -0.023    0.005    5
                             East South Central   9,515,207    6   -0.746   -0.961   -0.578    -0.437   -0.108   -0.129     -0.882      -0.423   -0.124    0.104    -0.087   -0.033    9
                             West South Central   26,109,488   7   -0.616   -0.784   -0.613    -0.520   -0.064   -0.072     -0.467      -0.785   -0.167   0.193     -0.053   -0.085    8
                                     Mountain     15,869,775   8   0.196    -0.006   -0.201    -0.043   -0.043   -0.075     0.335       -0.060   -0.059    0.044    -0.030    0.043    3
                                        Pacific   41,103,383   9   0.795    0.910     0.849     0.652    0.090    0.095     0.713       0.980    0.091    -0.312     0.075    0.099    1
                                              Table A.5: All Metropolitan Indices Ranked By Housing Price Index, 2005-2010
                                                                                       Adjusted Indices                              Raw Indices                     Productivity
                                                                                                                                                    Geo
                                                                          Cen-                                                                      Un-
                                                                          sus          Land      Land                                   Reg.       avail.                               Regula- Hous-
                                                                          Di-          Value     Value    Hous-             Wages      Index       Index    Const.                       tory    ing
                                                             Popula-      vi- Land      (All     (Un-      ing     Wages    (Const.      (z-         (z-    Price    Hous-     Trade-    Cost   Price
                                                Full Name     tion        sion Value   Uses)     wtd.)    Price    (All)     Only)     score)      score)   Index     ing       ables   Index   Rank
                                  Metropolitan Population:
                                        Less than 500,000    31,264,023       -0.661   -0.870   -0.666    -0.228   -0.069   -0.092     -0.359      -0.055   -0.042   -0.006    -0.055   -0.014    4
                                      500,000 to 1,500,000   55,777,644       -0.428   -0.614   -0.398    -0.193   -0.051   -0.058     -0.288      -0.158   -0.045    0.020    -0.042   -0.020    3
                                    1,500,000 to 5,000,000   89,173,333       0.199    0.080    0.097      0.097    0.019    0.017     0.151       0.142    0.008    -0.034     0.016    0.020    2
                                               5,000,000+    49,824,250       0.866    1.321    0.899      0.363    0.093    0.122     0.223       0.011    0.094     0.012     0.073    0.005    1


     See Table 1 and text for explanatory details.
xv
                                                         Figure A: Construction Wages vs. Overall Wages

                           0.3
                                                                                                                          Newark*
                                                                                                                        New   York
                                                                                                                            San Francisco
                                                                                                                                 San Jose
                                                                                                                                 Oakland
                           0.2


                                                                                                                   Washington

                                                                                                        Orange   Ventura
                                                                                                          LosRiverside
                                                                                                               Angeles
                                                                                                                 County
                           0.1




                                                                                                                 Boston
                                                                                                         San Diego
                                                                                                               Hartford
                                                                                                        Chicago
                                                                                                    Philadelphia
                                                                                                 Houston
                                                                                               Atlanta   Seattle
    −0.8 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0




                                                                                             Denver
                                                                                          Fort Worth
                                                                                               Dallas
                                                                                            Phoenix
                                                                                              Minneapolis
                                                                                   Columbus
                                                                            Raleigh−Durham Ann
                                                                                    Cincinnati Arbor
                                                                                            Detroit*
                                                                             Baton  Rouge
                      Construction−Wage Index




                                                                              Birmingham
                                                                            Rochester* Austin
                                                                                Portland, OR       Las Vegas
                                                                               Buffalo*
                                                                                      Miami
                                                                                    Memphis
                                                                                        Albany
                                                                              Kansas  City
                                                                               Nashville
                                                                       Pittsburgh*
                                                                          Syracuse*
                                                                               Akron*
                                                                          Cleveland*
                                                                           Indianapolis
                                                                             Orlando
                                                                           Jacksonville
                                                                                  St. Louis
                                                          El Paso
                                                              Colorado  Springs
                                                                   Little    Tampa
                                                                          Rock
                                                                  Knoxville
                                                                   SaltNew
                                                                        LakeOrleans*
                                                                              City
                                                                   Albuquerque
                                                                         Toledo*

                                                    McAllen
                                                      Oklahoma
                                                       Amarillo City
                                                               Evansville




                                                                                                           Linear Fit: Slope = 1.236 (0.051)


                                                  −0.3          −0.2            −0.1        0.0                        0.1               0.2
                                                                               Overall Wage Index


Note: Wages are estimated at the CMSA level, but the figure plots PMSAs to be consistent with the other
figures. Concentric circles represent multiple PMSAs of different populations in the same CMSA.




                                                                                       xvi
                               Figure B: Construction Prices vs. Construction Wages

             0.3
                                          Linear Fit: Slope = 0.583 (0.090)                       New York


                                                                                             San Francisco
             0.2




                                                                                                   San Jose
                                                                                      Chicago
                                                                                           Boston
                                                                                 Philadelphia      Oakland
                                                                                                      Newark*
                                                                              Minneapolis
                                                                                          Hartford
Construction−Price Index
                     0.1




                                                                                           Ventura
                                                                                      SanAngeles
                                                                                          Diego
                                                                                     Los
                                                                         Las Vegas Seattle
                                                                                   Orange  County
                                                                                         Riverside
                                                                   St.    Buffalo*
                                                                       Louis
                                                                    Kansas  City
                                                                             Detroit*
                                                                     Portland,
                                                                            AnnOR
                                                                   Pittsburgh*
                                                                         Rochester*
                                                                                 Arbor
                                                                   Cleveland*
                                                               Toledo*     Albany
           0.0




                                                                     Syracuse*
                                                                        Akron*
                                                                                  Denver
                                                                           Columbus        Washington
                                                                  Indianapolis
                                                                          Cincinnati
                                                  EvansvilleColorado Springs
                                                                           Miami
                                                          Albuquerque  Orlando
                                                                     Tampa
                                                                                   Atlanta
−0.1




                                                                        Birmingham
                                                                       Nashville
                                                           New  Orleans*
                                                           Salt Lake  City      Phoenix
                                                                         Memphis
                                                                        Baton
                                                                 Jacksonville  Rouge
                                                                Little Rock       Houston
                                                  Oklahoma City
                                                       Amarillo              Fort Worth
                                                                 Knoxville        Dallas
             −0.2




                                                                            Austin
                                                                   Raleigh−Durham
                                                                     El Paso
                                                         McAllen
             −0.3




                           −0.8 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0                          0.1     0.2     0.3
                                             Construction−Wage Index




                                                            xvii
                                                Figure C: Residential vs. All-Use Land Values


                                                                                                                        New York
                                                          Linear Fit: Slope = 1.310 (0.062)
                 3.0

                                                          45−degree line

                                                                                                              San Francisco
                            2.0




                                                                                                     Los Angeles
                                                                                                    Orange County
                                                                                                Washington
   All−Use Land−Value Index




                                                                                                             San Jose
                                                                                                      Miami
                                                                                                    Seattle
                                                                                                  Oakland
                                                                                         ChicagoSan
                   1.0




                                                                                                    Diego
                                                                                         Newark*
                                                                                             Boston

                                                                                          Las Vegas
                                                                              Portland, OR
                                                                         Philadelphia
                                                                            Denver        Ventura
                                                                      Minneapolis
          0.0




                                                                    Salt Lake City
                                                                                Tampa
                                                           New Orleans*          Orlando
                                                                                  Phoenix
                                                                  Albuquerque
                                                           Colorado Springs
                                                                 Cincinnati
                                                              El Paso
                                                                   Detroit*  Riverside
                                                                         Jacksonville
                                                                   DallasAustin
                                                                   Houston
                                                                  Nashville
                                                                          Atlanta
                                                                Cleveland*
                                                             Raleigh−Durham
                                                         Fort
                                                       Baton   McAllen
                                                              Worth
                                                                Columbus
                                                              Rouge
                                                          Hartford
−1.0




                                                             Ann  Arbor
                                                  Pittsburgh*
                                                Buffalo*
                                                   Kansas
                                                 Little  St.
                                                         RockLouis
                                                             City
                                                        Indianapolis
                                               Birmingham
                                                     Knoxville
                                         Oklahoma Memphis
                                             Albany
                                                  Amarillo
                                                    City Akron*
                                          Syracuse*
                                    Rochester*
                                    Evansville
                                      Toledo*
                 −2.0




                                  −2.0                   −1.0            0.0            1.0                                        2.0
                                                            Residential Land−Value Index




                                                                            xviii
