                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DEMOCRACY AND REFORMS:
                             EVIDENCE FROM A NEW DATASET

                                          Paola Giuliano
                                           Prachi Mishra
                                        Antonio Spilimbergo

                                        Working Paper 18117
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18117


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




This paper was also published as IMF Working Paper 10/173. Alessandro Prati provided invaluable
comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Paola Conconi, Francesco Giavazzi,
Dennis Quinn, Guido Tabellini, the seminar participants at the 2007 IMF seminar on structural reforms,
the 2008 Annual Meetings of the American Economic Association in Atlanta, the 2008 North-Eastern
Universities Development Conference in Boston, the 2008 IMF seminar on structural reforms, and
the 2010 annual meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics for helpful comments. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, its
board of directors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Paola Giuliano, Prachi Mishra, and Antonio Spilimbergo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Democracy and Reforms: Evidence from a New Dataset
Paola Giuliano, Prachi Mishra, and Antonio Spilimbergo
NBER Working Paper No. 18117
June 2012
JEL No. E6,O57

                                            ABSTRACT

Empirical evidence on the relationship between democracy and economic reforms is limited to few
reforms, countries, and periods. This paper studies the effect of democracy on the adoption of economic
reforms using a new dataset on reforms in the financial, capital and banking sectors, product markets,
agriculture, and trade for 150 countries over the period 1960–2004. Democracy has a positive and
significant impact on the adoption of economic reforms but there is scarce evidence that economic
reforms foster democracy. Our results are robust to the inclusion of a large variety of controls and
estimation strategies.


Paola Giuliano                                     Antonio Spilimbergo
Anderson School of Management                      International Monetary Fund
UCLA                                               700 19th Street, N.W.
110 Westwood Plaza                                 Washington, DC 20431
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall                            aspilimbergo@imf.org
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Prachi Mishra
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, HQ1-9-718
700, 19th Street NW
Washington DC
20431
pmishra@imf.org
   1. Introduction
       Political and economic freedoms go hand in hand … or do they not? This is one of
the oldest questions in economics and in political science, which is still largely unanswered.
This paper answers this question using a novel dataset on economic reforms, which is the
most exhaustive in the literature in terms of country, year, and reform coverage. This
question is still open because there are very good theoretical arguments and numerous
examples as to why political freedom can either hinder or facilitate economic reforms.
       History offers numerous examples where economic reforms were undertaken by
non-democratic regimes. Take the historical examples of Chile under Pinochet, South Korea
under Park, Mexico in 1986, or Guyana in 1988. In these cases, important economic reforms
were undertaken under non-democratic regimes. Historically, many contemporary
industrialized countries were not democracies when they took off economically (Schwarz,
1992). Most East Asian economies did not develop under fully democratic regimes. In
addition to these historical examples from several regions of the world and different
historical periods, compelling theoretical reasons may explain why less democratic regimes
may favor economic reforms and growth.
       Democracy can hinder reforms if special interests prevail on the general welfare. A
democratic regime can fall prey to interest groups, which put their goals before general well
being. Capitalists entrenched in their rent-seeking positions are often the main opponents of
economic reforms (Rajan and Zingales, 2004). Interest groups can block reforms if there is
uncertainty about the distribution of the benefits (Fernandez and Rodrik, 1991). A
‘benevolent dictator’ can shelter the institutions, avoid that the state becomes captive of any
specific interest group, and allow the state to perform its function in an efficient way. Along
these lines, Haggard (1990) argues “... Institutions can overcome collective-action dilemmas
by restraining the self-interested behavior of groups through sanctions: collective action
problems can be resolved by command.” In addition to pressure from interest groups, wages
are typically higher under democracy (Rodrik, 1999) and democracy can lead to excessive
private and public consumption and lack of sufficient investment (Huntington, 1968).
Dictatorial regimes can also rely on financial repression to increase the domestic saving rate.
Several countries, including the Soviet Union and many East Asian countries, have been able
to increase savings, and ultimately achieve high economic growth rate, thanks to a repressive
political system and an attendant highly regulated financial system.


                                               2
        In conclusion, do the historical examples and the theoretical arguments provide a
compelling case against the role of democracy in fostering economic reforms? The answer to
this question is a resounding no.
        The alternative view that democracy often accompanies economic reforms is also
based on strong theoretical arguments and solid empirical evidence. Secured property rights,
as guaranteed by a democracy, are considered key to economic development (de Soto, 2000).
In general, dictators cannot credibly make commitments because of time-inconsistency; so
no reform can be undertaken (McGuire and Olson, 1996). Autocratic rulers tend to be
predatory, disrupting economic activity and making any reform effort meaningless;
autocratic regimes have also an interest in postponing reforms and maintaining rent-
generating activities for a restricted number of supporting groups (Acemoglu and Robinson,
2012.) On the opposite, democratic rulers should be more sensitive to the interest of the
public, and so more willing to implement reforms, which destroy monopolies in favor of the
general interests. In addition to these theoretical arguments, there is strong empirical
evidence that reforms are highly correlated with democracy.
        The correlation between democracy and economic reforms is very strong both
across time and in a cross section. Figure 1 shows the correlation over time between the
indices of democracy (measured as polity IV and normalized between 0 and 1) and reforms
(all the indices are normalized between 0 and 1, with 0 corresponding to the least reformed
and 1 to the most reformed) in the following six sectors (or areas)—(i) domestic financial, (ii)
capital account, (iii) product markets (electricity and telecommunications), (iv) agriculture, (v)
trade (based on tariffs) and (vi) current account transactions—over time (see below for
description). In all sectors democracy and regulation are strongly correlated, with democracy
usually preceding the deregulation process. Figure 2 shows that the correlation holds very
strongly also when we take a cross section: countries that are more democratic are also more
reformed. However, these correlations in themselves do not show that democracy
necessarily causes economic reforms. The correlation could run in the opposite direction, or
both democracy and economic reforms could be driven by a common third factor.
        The sharp contrast between these opposing views has left the question of the effects
of democracy on economic reforms largely unanswered. The goal of this paper is to address
again this issue using a novel database, which covers almost 150 countries, 6 sectors and
spanning more than 40 years of data.


                                               3
        The main findings are that an increase in the quality of democratic institutions as
measured by the commonly used indices is significantly correlated with the adoption of
economic reforms but there is little evidence of a feedback effect from economic to political
liberalization. These results are robust to controlling for country, reform-specific effects, and
any possible interaction among them. Global reform waves and possible country-time
varying determinants of reforms (including crises, reforms in neighboring countries,
existence of compensation for losers, human capital and bureaucratic quality, and several
political variables) do not weaken these results, which are also robust to using an
instrumental variable strategy.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing
literature on economic reforms and democracy; Section 3 presents the data; Section 4
presents the results on the effects of democracy on reforms, controlling for other possible
determinants of reforms and the possibility of reverse causality and omitted variables;
Section 5 concludes.


    2. Democracy and Reforms: Theory and Empirics
        Economic theory does not give a clear answer on whether political liberalizations
favor or hinder economic reforms or if the relationship could go both ways.1 Democratic
regimes could lead to more economic reforms if reforms create more winners than losers
(Giavazzi and Tabellini, 2005). Democratically elected governments may also have greater
legitimacy to implement and sustain policies bearing short-term costs; similarly institutional
changes—e.g., strengthening an independent legal system or a professional civil service
required to ensure political freedom and democracy—could lead also to successful market
reforms. Finally, democracy could create an environment conducive to economic reforms by
limiting rent-seeking and putting in place a system of checks and balances (Dethier, Ghanem
and Zoli, 1999). In general, Democratic regimes have characteristics that lessen the time-
inconsistency (Quinn 2000). The political liberalization brought about by perestroika and
glasnost in Soviet Union after 1985 created demand for economic freedom. In Eastern
Europe political liberalization usually preceded economic liberalization.



1For the question if economic reforms have an impact on growth see Prati, Onorato, and
Papageogiou, forthcoming.


                                               4
       Alternatively, political liberalization could lead to less economic reforms if the
electoral system creates a pivotal voter with veto power. For instance, it has been argued that
Chile in the late 70s and the 80s implemented several forward-looking economic reforms
because the military regime did not have to respond to a short-sighted electorate. At the
same time, it has been argued that Costa Rica has been a laggard in economic reforms
because the democratic system gives veto power to groups that can lose from reforms. In
fact, uncertainty about the impact of economic reforms at the individual level could also lead
a rational electorate to vote against reforms even if they are known ex ante to benefit a
majority of them (Fernandez and Rodrik, 1991).
       The theoretical predictions about the feedback effect from economic reforms to
democratization are ambiguous as well. For example, economic liberalizations could be
associated with higher quality of democratic institutions if they increase the power of the
middle class (Rajan and Zingales, 2003). On the other hand, liberalization could lower
democracy through increases in income inequality and the associated political strife and
violence (Quinn, 1997, Dixon and Boswell, 1996).
       On the empirical side, a few empirical papers have looked at the relationship
between democracy and reforms. Among the available evidence, Giavazzi and Tabellini
(2005) study the feedback effects between economic and political liberalizations. Economic
liberalization is defined as the event of becoming open, where openness is defined as in
Wacziarg and Welch (2008). Political liberalization is the event of becoming a democracy;
where democracy is defined by strictly positive values of polity2. Using a panel of 140
countries over 1960–2000 (with country and year fixed effects), they find evidence of a
positive and significant relationship between democratizations and trade reforms; they find
that the feedback effect could run in both directions although the causality is more likely to
run from political to economic reforms. Similarly, Persson (2005) shows that the forms of
democracy (e.g. parliamentary, proportional and permanent ones) explain variation in trade
reforms (measured by the Wacziarg and Welch index and an index of property rights
protection). Banerji and Ghanem (1997), and Milner and Kubota (2005) also look at trade
reforms. The former presents cross-country evidence to show that authoritarian regimes are
associated with higher protectionism (measured by an index of protectionism from Dollar
(1992)), while the latter show that regime changes towards democracy are associated with
greater liberalization (measured by tariff rates and Sachs Warner indices). Banerji and


                                              5
Ghanem (1997) also find evidence that more authoritarian regimes are associated with
greater wage distortions, as measured by the ratio of manufacturing wage rate to the
nonmanufacturing value added per worker. Amin and Djankov (2009) show that democracy
(measured by Freedom House or Polity IV scores) is good for micro-reforms (as defined in
the World Bank’s Doing Business Database). Eichengreen and Leblang (2008) find evidence
of a positive two-way relationship between democracy and globalization defined as trade and
capital account liberalization. They, however, find that these effects are not uniform across
time and space.2
        Quinn (2000) examines the relationship between democracy and international
financial liberalization. He measures international financial regulation through changes in
current and capital account openness created using the Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions from the IMF. Democracy is measured by changes in polity2. Quinn uses both
panel data techniques and individual country VARs for 40–50 countries over 1950–97 and
finds evidence that democracies liberalize international finance, especially capital accounts.
Unlike this paper, he also finds evidence of feedback effects from financial liberalization to
democratizations whereby capital account liberalization is associated with decreases in
democracy 6 to 15 years later. Mulligan, Gill and Sala-i-Martin (2004) do not look specifically
at reforms, but analyze the effect of democracy on public spending and taxes. They do not
find any significant relationship between democracy and total government consumption,
education or social spending; but find that democracies are associated with flatter income
taxes (or less income redistribution). Finally, Olper, Falkowski and Swinnen (2009) study the
effect of regime transitions from autocracy to democracy on agricultural policy distortions,
measured by indicators of government transfers to the agriculture sector. They find that
while agriculture protection increases after a country’s transition to democracy, there is no
effect when the regime shifts from democracy to autocracy.
        Other papers examine the relationship between economic and political liberalizations
in the context of post-communist countries. For example, Fidrmuc (2003) in a sample of
25 transition countries over 1990-2000 finds a positive relationship between the indices of
liberalization and democracy. Liberalization is measured by an average of various reform
indicators developed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development covering

2See also Alesina, Ardagna, and Trebbi (2005), Abiad and Mody (2005), Drazen and Easterly (2001),
and Lora (1998).


                                               6
privatization, governance and enterprise restructuring, price liberalization, trade and foreign
exchange, competition policy, and banking and securities markets. Democracy is measured
by an average of the indicators of political rights and civil liberties reported by the Freedom
House. In a similar vein, Dethier, Ghanem, and Zoli (1999) also find that political freedom
and civil liberties facilitated economic liberalization in the 25 post-communist countries
between 1992 and 1997. Milner and Mukerjee (2009) find evidence that democracy fosters
trade and capital account liberalization, but also that the impact of openness of democracy is
quite weak in developing countries. Grosjean and Senik (2011) using a survey conducted in
2006 by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank in 28
post-transition countries find a significant effect of democracy (measured by the Freedom
House democracy score) on market liberalization, but no evidence of a feedback effect. In
addition to the statistical analysis, some papers (Bates and Krueger, 1993) have focused on
case studies. This approach takes into account the complexity and the country specificity of
the interaction between democracy and economic reforms.
        To summarize, while there are many theoretical predictions about the relationships
between political and economic liberalizations, empirical evidence on the subject is limited to
reforms in particular sectors, in particular international trade and finance, micro-reforms, or
specific countries over a short period.
        Our study is the first one to combine a comprehensive coverage of reforms in
different sectors, a significant coverage of countries and a long time period. In particular, the
dataset used in this paper spans six sectors, and both developing and developed countries
from the 1960 up until 2004.


    3. Data
        3.1. Data on reforms
        Our analysis is based on a completely new and extensive dataset, compiled by the
Research Department of the IMF, describing the degree of regulation for a sample of 150
industrial and developing countries. The new dataset thus has significant advantages over
existing data sources, which cover a narrower set of reforms and countries. Reform
indicators cover six sectors, including both financial and real sectors. Financial sector reform
indicators include reforms pertaining to domestic financial markets and the external capital
account, while real sector structural reform indicators include measures of product and


                                               7
agriculture markets, trade, and current account reforms. Each indicator contains different
sub-indices summarizing different dimensions of the regulatory environment in each sector.
The sub-indices are then aggregated into indices and normalized between 0 and 1. We
construct all the measures of reform in each sector so that higher values represent greater
degrees of liberalization.
        Table 1 presents a brief definition and sources of the reform indicators used in this
paper. IMF (2008) describes all data sources and full details of the construction of the
indicators.
        3.1.1. Financial sector reforms in the domestic financial market
        The dataset contains two measures of financial sector reforms, one for the domestic
financial sector and the other regarding the extent of capital account liberalization. The
domestic financial sector liberalization indicator in turn includes measures of securities markets
and banking sector reforms. The securities markets sub-index assesses the quality of the market
framework, including the existence of an independent regulator and the extent of legal
restrictions on the development of domestic bond and equity markets. The banking sub-
index captures reductions or removal of interest rate controls (floors or ceilings), credit
controls (directed credit and subsidized lending), competition restrictions (limits on branches
and entry barriers in the banking market, including licensing requirements or limits on
foreign banks), and public ownership of banks. The banking index also captures a measure
of the quality of banking supervision and regulation, including the power and independence
of bank supervisors, the adoption of Basel capital standards, and the presence of a
framework for bank inspections.
        3.1.2. Capital account liberalization
        The second measure of reform in the financial sector pertains to the extent of the
external capital account liberalization. The index contains information on a broad set of
restrictions including, for example, controls on external borrowing between residents and
non-residents, as well as approval requirements for foreign direct investment (FDI).
        3.1.3. Product market reforms
        Turning to the real sector, the product market indicator covers the degree of
liberalization in the telecommunication and electricity markets, including the extent of
competition in the provision of these services, the presence of an independent regulatory
authority, and privatization.


                                                8
        3.1.4. Agricultural market reforms
        The agricultural sector indicator captures intervention in the market for the main
agricultural export commodity in each country. It measures the extent of public intervention
in the market going from total monopoly or monopsony in production, transportation or
marketing (i.e., the presence of marketing boards), the presence of administered prices,
public ownership of relevant producers or concession requirement to free market.
        3.1.5. Trade reforms
        Trade reforms are captured by using two different indicators: one based on tariffs
and the other measuring the extent of current account liberalization. The indicator based on
tariff liberalization is meant to capture distortions in international trade and is measured by
average tariffs.
        3.1.6. Current account liberalization reforms
        The second indicator for measuring reform in the trade sector broadly measures the
extent of current account liberalization. It captures the extent to which a government is
compliant with its obligations under the IMF’s Article VIII to free from government
restriction the proceeds from international trade in goods and services.
        Additional details on the sources and specifics of each indicator can be found in IMF
(2008) and Table 1.
        3.2. Aggregation and normalization
        For each of our six sectors, we construct an aggregate index by averaging the sub-
indices for that particular sector (for the cases in which we do have multiple sub-indices, like
product market or the financial sector). Each sectoral indicator is then normalized between 0
and 1, where 1 indicates a higher degree of liberalization. “Reform” in any sector is then
defined as an annual change in the index. Table 2 reports the pair wise correlations between
different types of reforms. Financial sector, trade, current, and capital account reforms are
strongly correlated among themselves, and less so with agricultural and product market
reforms (with the exception of the financial sector reform which is strongly correlated to
product market reforms). Overall the correlations indicate that once the process of reform in
a country starts, it probably spreads over to several sectors. This paper does not consider the
issue of sequencing among different types of reforms. For an analysis of sequencing see IMF
(2008), showing that trade reforms tend to precede financial and capital account reforms. We
run most of our regressions at the sector-country and year level; however as one of our


                                               9
robustness checks we also aggregate the six reform indicators using a principal component
analysis.
        3.3. Other data
        Democracy is measured using the standard, well-established measure of democracy
taken from the Polity IV database. In particular, we use the combined polity2 index ranging
from -10 to 10 (-10=high autocracy; 10=high democracy). We also check our results using
the Freedom House Index and the index proposed by Przeworski, Alvarez, Cheibub, and
Limongi (1993). Note that the trend toward more democratic regimes has not been linear.
Significant retrenchment of democracy has not only been observed in isolated countries but
also in several regions of the world. The examples include the general decrease in democracy
in Asia in the 1950s and 1960s, the marked decline in Latin America in 1960s and 1970s, and
the prolonged stasis in Africa since the 1960s (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). We
normalize the index so that 1 indicates the most democratic country and 0 the least
democratic regime.
        We also include in our specifications the following controls:
       Initial level of regulation (as measured by the lagged level of the regulation index):
        this variable can be a proxy for important incentives in favor and against the
        implementation of structural reforms. Excessive government regulation and/or
        market failures may be perceived as more costly when the economy is least reformed.
        At the same time, the beneficiaries of existing large rents may oppose reforms.
       Economic crisis: According to a widely held view, economic crises foster economic
        reforms by making evident the cost of stagnation and backwardness. The opposite
        view maintains that it is easier to implement reforms during periods of economic
        growth when potential losers can find other opportunities in a booming economy or
        when countries become richer and have more resources to compensate the losers. In
        order to test this hypothesis, we use several measures of crisis: a dummy equal to 1 if
        the country is experiencing inflation larger than 40 percent in that year, a measure for
        recession (as summarized by a dummy indicating negative growth in per-capita
        GDP), terms of trade shocks, and banking and debt crisis. The data on banking and
        debt crises come from Reinhart and Rogoff (2008).
       Public expenditures/GDP and real devaluation: Compensation schemes can
        offset costs associated with reforms. A large government may compensate losers

                                              10
    from reforms than a very lean government with a small budget. We use public
    expenditures/GDP as a proxy of the size of social safety nets. As an alternative
    measure of compensation, we also control for real devaluation, which could promote
    exports and therefore help compensate losers from reforms. For instance, some
    important reforms happened together with large devaluation and in the context of
    IMF-supported programs.
   Human capital and effectiveness of bureaucracy could also facilitate reforms
    (Besley and Personn, 2007). We use enrollment in tertiary education from Barro and
    Lee (2001) as a measure of human capital and bureaucratic quality from the
    International Country Risk Guide. The measure of bureaucratic quality from ICRG
    is scored between 0-6. High scores indicate “autonomy from political pressure” and
    “strength and expertise to govern without drastic changes in policy or interruptions
    in government services”; also existence of an “established mechanism for recruiting
    and training.”
   Reforms in neighboring countries or in trading partners may affect the adoption
    of domestic reforms through peer pressure and imitational effects. We use the
    weighted average of reforms in neighboring countries, where the weights are given
    by two concepts of distance defined by geography and trade. The source for
    geographic distance is http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm and for
    bilateral trade flows, the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics.
   The ideology of the ruling government and the form of government may
    determine the adoption of reforms. Alesina and Roubini (1992) argue that right-wing
    governments are normally considered more inclined to market-oriented reforms;
    Persson and Tabellini (2002) finds that a presidential system facilitates reforms as
    they are more able to overcome the resistance of small interest groups. We capture
    the ideological orientation of the executive with the indicator left, which is equal to 1
    if the executive belongs to a party of the left and 0 if it belongs to a right-wing,
    centrist or other party. The form of government is proxied by the variable presidential,
    which takes the value of 1 if the system is directly presidential and 0 if the president
    is elected by the assembly or parliamentary. The source for these two variables is the
    Database of Political Institutions from the World Bank. We also included in the
    regressions additional political variables such as number of executive constraints, the

                                           11
        presence of legislative or executive elections, the number of years left in the current
        term for the executive and the presence of an absolute majority in the legislature by
        the party of the executive. The results are robust to the inclusion of these additional
        political variables.
Table A1 provides the summary statistics for the key variables used in the empirical analysis.


    4. Empirical strategy
        The unit of analysis is a sector-country-year observation (there are 6 sectors, 150
countries, and 45 years); the resulting dataset is a panel of 20,123 observations. We define
reform as a change over time in the index of regulation for each of the six sectors, s, in
country c at time t:
         reforms ,c ,t  Indexs ,c ,t  Indexs ,c ,t 1 ,

Our baseline specification is as follows:
                    , ,                   , ,                    ,        ,

                                 , ,                                               (1)
        where  s ,  c and  t are sector, country, and year fixed effects, respectively, and

X ct 1 are country-specific and time-varying controls to be described below.                   and

        are the interactions between country and sector fixed effects; and sector and time
fixed effects respectively.
        We also control for the lagged level of the index to identify the existence of
convergence toward some possible country specific levels of regulation. Being bounded
between zero and one, the reform variables do not have a unit root; however, they can still
exhibit a trend within the bounds. In Table A5 we report standard panel unit root tests for
each reform indicator and for the democracy index. We reject the null of unit roots for
polity2 at the 10 percent level; in addition most of our reform indices do not show evidence
of unit roots; hence we use the level of the reform index, reform s ,c ,t  Index s ,c ,t  as the

dependent variable.
        The dependent variable (reform in a country) is highly persistent; for this reason the
error terms in specification (1) may also exhibit serial correlation. We allow for first-order
serial correlation in the error terms:  t   t 1  ut . The Durbin-Watson statistic for the



                                                            12
transformed regression is 1.94 indicating that there is little evidence of serial correlation in
the transformed error terms. 3
        Our first specification includes only sector, country, and time fixed effects (Table 3,
column 1). The coefficient on the lagged level of the index is negative and significant at the 1
percent level, indicating convergence toward country specific levels of regulation. The
coefficient on the lagged level of democracy is significant at the 1 percent level. The
magnitude of the estimated effect implies that a one standard deviation increase in the
democracy index explains 7 percent variability in reforms. In addition, moving to a complete
                                                        
democracy in the long-run is associated with a 0.22     increase in the index of reform
                                                        
(using the coefficients of column 1).
        We then add country-sector specific effects, and sector-year specific effects and both
of them (column 2, 3 and 4 respectively).4 The interactions between country and sector fixed
effects take into account that reforms are inherently different across countries, e.g., trade
sector reforms in India have different characteristics than banking reforms in Brazil
(Specification 2). The interactions between sector and year effects account for the possibility
of global reform waves across all countries (Specification 3). Specification 4 is the most
demanding because it includes all the individual fixed effects and possible two-way
interactions. Notice that we cannot control for country-time effects, since the main variable
of interest, which is democracy, is country-time varying. The results are very similar across
specifications. The magnitude of the coefficients on the democracy variable ranges from .02
to .03 in columns 2-4.
    The results in Table 3 show that the correlation between (lagged) democracy level and
the adoption of reforms is not driven by country or sector-fixed characteristics or by the fact
that there was a worldwide movement toward reforms and democracy, or any interactions
between country-sector and sector-time fixed characteristics.
    If the correlation between economic reforms and democracy is not due to spurious
correlation owing to a common trend, could it be driven by other country-time varying


3 We also test the robustness of our results by clustering the error terms at the country-reform and

country level. See Section 4.4 for details.
4 In specifications (2) and (4), we allow the serial correlation coefficient in the error term to be

country-sector specific. In specifications (1) and (3), the serial correlation coefficients are country-
specific.


                                                  13
omitted variables? The next subsection checks whether this correlation is robust to the
inclusion of several variables, which (current theories suggest) may explain both economic
reforms and democracy, i.e., the possible bias deriving from country-sector-time varying
omitted variables.
    4.1. Additional controls
        Reforms may be triggered by a wide range of factors other than democracy.
Following the theoretical literature reviewed above, in Table 4 we control for the following
possible determinants of reforms: measures of crisis (a dummy equal to 1 if the country
experiences inflation larger than 40 percent, we include alternative measures of crisis in
Table 7b), public expenditure/GDP and real devaluation, human capital and bureaucratic
quality, reforms in neighbors, and political variables (Columns 1-5). Column 6 includes all
the controls simultaneously. The results on the coefficients of our controls go in the
expected direction but are often not significant. For example, episodes of hyperinflation
appear to reduce the probability of reforming (Column 1), but the effect disappears when all
the other controls are added to the specification. Reforms in neighboring countries appear
to spur domestic reforms. This result, which extends the results of IMF (2004) on OECD
countries, is also in line with Buera, Monge, and Primiceri (2008), who find a spillover effect
from beliefs in neighboring countries. The variable however also looses significance when all
the controls are included. 5
        Democracy is the only variable which remains consistently significant across all
specifications. We also look at the standardized beta coefficients for democracy across the
different regressions and find them to be remarkably similar.
        The inclusion of the different controls changes the sample size in each column of
Table 4. To check that our results are not driven by the specific sample, we also estimate the
basic specification (Table 3, column 4) for each column of Table 4. The results shown in
Table 4 do not appear to be driven by sample selection. The results on the various restricted
samples of Table 4 are reported in the Table A4 in the Appendix.
    4.2. Endogeneity


5 In additional robustness, we also include dummies for WTO, EU, and OECD accessions (=1 in

years following the accession) and for the existence of an IMF program. The coefficient on
democracy remains positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The coefficients on EU,
OECD and IMF program dummies are significant in the specification without any controls, but lose
their significance when included along with other controls in Table 4, Column 6.


                                                  14
        Another source of bias derives from the fact that reforms themselves may have an
effect on democracy. In order to deal with this issue we have two approaches: 1) we use
instrumental variables, and 2) we check if reforms cause democracy (in the final section of
the paper).
        While an ideal source of exogenous variation of democracy is difficult to find, we use
democracy in neighboring countries as an instrument where we use the concept of political
distance to define the neighbors. The idea behind this instrument is that democracy in
political allies has influence on domestic democracy but no direct impact on a country’s
ability to reform. For instance, the political alliance between the U.S. and Western Europe
had surely an effect on democracy in Western Europe but not a direct effect on the reform
level in Europe. The idea underlying this instrument is based on Persson and Tabellini
(2009), who use democracy in neighboring countries as a proxy for democratic capital. In
addition, building on this concept, we also tried different measures of distance, including
geographical distance between countries and commercial distance defined as the (inverse of)
trading flows between countries. These measures, which are highly correlated, confirm the
result of political distance reported here.
        Table 5A shows the regressions using lagged democracy in political neighbors as an
instrumental variable. The coefficient of lagged democracy in the first stage (Table 5B)
confirms the relevance of democracy in neighbors in promoting the democratic process in
the domestic economy. The results in our second stage show that, consistent with the OLS
specification, there is evidence for a strong and positive effect of democracy on reforms.
The estimated effect is not statistically significant in the specification which includes all the
controls (column 1c). The magnitude of the estimated effect is, however, not significantly
different from Column 1b, which uses a larger sample and a restricted set of controls
suggesting that the statistical insignificance in specification 1c is likely to be driven by the
large standard errors from the smaller sample. The regression in column 1d, where the
sample is the same as column 1c but without the inclusion of controls, indeed confirms that
this is the case.
    4.3. Regressions by sector
        Does democracy have a differential effect across sectors? Alternatively, are the
results presented above driven by a particular sector? We explore this possibility by looking
at the impact of democracy on reforms in different sectors. Table 6 presents one


                                               15
specification without any control except country and year fixed effects (this is analogous to
the specification in Table 3) and one specification with control variables, including indicators
of crisis, devaluation, public expenditure as a share of GDP, bureaucratic expenditure,
tertiary enrollment, reforms in neighboring countries, dummy for parties for the left in
power, and dummy for presidential form of government (this is analogous to column (6) in
Table 4).
        The results in Table 6 show that democracy promotes reforms in all sectors with the
exception of product markets in the specification with controls. In most cases the coefficient
on democracy is significant at one percent level despite the reduced number of observations.
        We prefer the general specification that encompasses all sectors in order to maximize
the number of observations so that we can control for country, reform, and year fixed
effects and (most importantly) their interactions as shown in Table 3.
    4.4 Other robustness checks
        Structural reforms and democratization sometimes come in waves. For instance,
several countries in Central and Eastern Europe became more democratic and implemented
economic reforms in few years after 1989. In this section we control to which extent the
inclusion of a group of countries in our sample drives the results. The results are reported in
Table 7a. In columns 1a–1b and 2a–2b, the sample is restricted to non-communist and
developing countries respectively (we estimate two regressions for each subsample with and
without the inclusion of controls).
        Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) use a zero-one definition of democracy (where
democracy=1 if polity2 has positive values) because the degree of democracy can be difficult
to quantify using a cardinal measure. Following this line, we repeat our baseline regression
using a zero-one definition of democracy. Columns 3a-3b of Table 7a reports the results.
The results do not change in the baseline regression but are weaker when we include all the
controls because the sample size is much smaller, in column 3c we indeed show that the
impact of democracy on reform on the restricted sample but without the inclusion of
controls is also not significant. For each specification with controls in Table 7a, we also
estimate the basic specification (Table 3, column 4) without any controls on the restricted
sample (not shown). We do this to analyze the effect of adding controls on a consistent
sample. The results in Table 7a are not driven by sample selection.




                                              16
        Assumptions on the error terms are key to evaluate the significance of the
coefficients. So far we have allowed for an AR(1) term in the model. Column 1 in Table 7b
presents the basic specification without controls in which the standard errors are clustered at
the country-reform level. The results are similar if we cluster at the country rather than
country-reform level.
        Reforms in trading partners (Column 2 of Table 7b) and reforms in other sectors
(Column 3 of Table 7b) also do not alter our main conclusion, and the results are also robust
to a variety of crisis definitions (negative per-capita GDP growth, banking and debt crises
and terms-of-trade shocks-columns 4 to 7 of Table 7b).
        By including the lagged level of reform, the specifications so far have assumed that
there is (conditional) convergence in the reform adoption. By including country fixed effects,
we assume a country specific long run level of reforms. However, unlike growth regressions,
there is no theoretical reason why we should expect convergence in the level of regulation.
In order to test if our results depend on this assumption, we replicate the specification in
Table 3 without the lagged reform index using the following specifications:


      ∆         , ,                  ,                                        , ,     (2)


        Column (8) in Table 7b reports the results from estimating Equation (2). The
estimated coefficient on lagged (democracy) is positive and statistically significant at the
1 percent level. The magnitude of the estimated coefficient (β= 0.011) is smaller than in
Table 3. This is consistent with a positive correlation between (lagged) democracy and the
lagged reform index, and a negative relationship between reform and the lagged reform
index. This coefficient, however, is not comparable to the coefficient in the previous
regressions in Table 3 given that the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on democracy in
this regression can be interpreted only as the effect of democracy on the rate of adoption of
structural reforms rather than on the steady-state level. Unlike Equation (1), the specification
in Equation (2) has the drawback that the steady state level of the index is undefined; hence
the long-run effect of democracy on the reform index cannot be estimated. In effect, we are
assuming that a certain level of democracy is associated only with a rate of growth of the
reform index.



                                              17
           Democracy could have a non linear effect on reforms if reforms start only when a
certain level of democracy is reached. To check this hypothesis, we replicate our baseline
regression (with different combinations of fixed effects) for different levels of democracy.
These regressions reported in Table 8 show some evidence for non-linear effects of
democracy on reforms: the more democratic the country is initially, the easier it is to reform.
           We also explore whether democracy affects the probability of reversal in reforms
(defined as a decrease in the level of index). Reform reversals constitute 8 percent of the
observations in our sample. We do not find any evidence for this hypothesis (see Table A6).
           4.5. The feedback effect
           In this section, we check whether economic reforms foster democracy. We test for
the possibility of a feedback effect from reforms to democracy by estimating the following
regression:


Δ                   ,                      ,                         ,                  ,    (3)


           In order to estimate the feedback effect, we need to collapse our data at the country
level. The term “average reform” in equation 3 now refers to the arithmetic average of the
reform indices.
           Overall, we find little evidence that reforms promote the democratic process (Table
9a 6 . Our results therefore do not support a reverse causality story. Since income is
considered an important determinant of democratization, we also test robustness to
including per capita income in the regressions (results available upon request). Including the
lagged level of the index, rather than the change as in Table 9a, also does not alter the
findings in Table 9a. We also repeat the same exercise reform by reform (Table 9b) and find
little evidence of feedback (we find evidence of a feedback effect for the agricultural sector
but only in the specification in which all controls are included).
           4.6. Difference-in-difference approach
           In this section we use a different empirical strategy to test for the presence of a
feedback effect. Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) look at the relationship between democracy
and reforms in the trade sector using a difference-in-difference approach. They interpret


6   The results are similar when we use longer lags.


                                                       18
reforms as a ‘‘treatment’’ administered to some countries but not others, and estimate the
causal effect of the treatment through a difference-in-difference estimation. They estimate
the following regressions in the whole sample of treated and control countries,
                                                                                     (4)
where      denotes the measure of performance, a and b are country and year fixed effects,
respectively,     is a set of other control variables,                is a dummy variable taking a
value of 1 in the years after the reform in the treated countries and 0 otherwise (i.e.,
            is 0 in the treated countries before the reform and in the control countries) and
    is an unobserved error term. In their regressions to study the interactions between
political and economic liberalizations (Table 5 in their paper), reform variable is either
political or economic. Political reform is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 in the years
after democratization, where democratization is defined as the event of becoming a
democracy (defined by discrete jumps in polity2 around zero), given that a country was not a
democracy in the previous year. Similarly, economic reform is a dummy taking a value of 1
in the years after becoming economically open (defined by the Wacziarg and Welch (2003)
openness index). In the regressions of economic on political reform, the dependent variable
is the openness index, and in the feedback regression, the dependent variable is polity2.
        Based on the regressions, they find that the causality is more likely to run from
political to economic reforms. Their approach is a useful alternative way to check both
directions of causality from democratization to introduction of economic reforms and vice
versa. In Table 10, we report the results repeating their methodology on our dataset (the top
panel showing the effect of the `treatment’ democratization on economic reforms; the
bottom panel takes economic reforms as treatment). All regressions control for time and
country fixed effects. Democratization has a positive effect on all economic reforms with
significant effect on finance, agriculture, and trade. However, there is little evidence of the
opposite (i.e. economic reforms do not precede democratization).7 We view our results as
broadly in line with those of Giavazzi and Tabellini.


7 Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) find a coefficient of -0.16 when regressing democracy on trade

reforms (Table 4, Column 1 in their paper). Their coefficient like ours is not significant. To make our
results as comparable as possible to their strategy, we first replicate their estimation on their sample
and their reform measures. The coefficient is very close to the original paper and equal to -0.06. We
then use our trade reform measure on their sample and use their empirical strategy. The coefficient is
in this case equal to 0.39, but is also statistically indistinguishable from zero. Therefore, even using


                                                  19
        4.7. Factor analysis
        In this section, we implement a different approach from the panel analysis presented
above. To take into account the possibility that the reform process is one unique process
common to all sectors, we undertake a factor analysis of our measures of reforms in the six
sectors. In particular, we extract the first principal component from the whole dataset with
all the data on reforms for each sector.8 The results are reported in Table 11. The impact of
democracy seems to be relevant for the overall tendency of a country to reform (the
coefficient on the lagged level of democracy is significant at the 1 percent level): moving to a
complete democracy in the long-run is associated with a 0.03 increase in the index of reform
(the magnitude doubles when we instrument for lagged democracy using lagged democracy
in neighboring countries). On the other hand, we do not find any evidence of a feedback
effect from the impact of the overall tendency of a country to reform on democracy.


    5. Conclusions
        The question of whether democratic countries favor economic reforms is central to
the political economy literature. Political economists study why apparently welfare-enhancing
reforms are postponed or adopted with long delays and the presence (or the absence) of
democracy is one of the main causes investigated. Unfortunately, despite the vast theoretical
literature and limited empirical evidence (unfortunately restricted to some countries, to some
reforms, and to some periods), the answer to this question has been tentative because of
data limitations, which has also limited the techniques that can be used.
        This paper answers this question using a novel dataset on structural reforms, which
encompasses several sectors and many countries for several years. This dataset allows us to
control for a set of possible omitted variables, including country and reform fixed effects,
possible two-way interactions between the fixed effects and waves of reforms.
        The main conclusions of the papers are that 1) democracy and economic reforms are
positively correlated (after controlling for country and reform-specific characteristics, any
interaction between country and reform characteristics, and global reform waves); 2) this
correlation is robust even after we control for standard factors, which are usually correlated

our trade index on exactly their sample, and replicating their methodology, we fail to find any
significant feedback effects.
8 The variable is then normalized between 0 and 1 to make the results comparable to the remaining

part of the paper.


                                               20
with reforms and democracy, including bureaucratic quality and education, and political
stability; 3) the correlation is also robust to the variables that are usually associated with
reforms (but not necessarily with democracy) such as crises, neighboring country effects, and
compensation schemes; and 4) there is no evidence that economic reforms pave the way for
political reforms.
        The strong correlation between (lagged) democracy and the adoption of economic
reforms, even controlling for many possible factors as well as the finding that (lagged)
economic reforms are not associated with the adoption of democracy point to the fact there
is probably a causal link from democracy to reforms.
        These strong results call for an effort to study the precise mechanisms through
which democracy has an impact on economic reforms.




                                             21
References
Abiad, Abdul, and Ashoka Mody, 2005, “Financial Reform: What Shakes It? What Shapes
       It?” American Economic Review 95, pp. 66–88.
Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel, 2008, “Do Financial Reforms Boost
       the Development of Financial Systems? Evidence from a New Database on Financial
       Reforms,” IMF Working Paper 08/266 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Acemoglou, Daron and James A. Robinson, 2006, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
       Democracy. Cambridge University Press.
Acemoglou, Daron and James A. Robinson, 2012, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power,
       Prosperity, and Poverty. Profile Books.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared, “Income and
       Democracy”, 2008, American Economic Review, 98 (3), 808-842.
Alesina, Alberto, and Nouriel Rubini, 1992, “Political Cycles in OECD Economies,” Review
       of Economic Studies, October, Vol.59, pp.663–88.
Alberto, Alesina, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi, 2005, IMF Staff Papers, 2006, Vol. 53:
       Special Issue, pp. 1–29 (2005 Mundell Fleming lecture)
Amin and Djankov, 2009, “Democracy and Reforms”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7151.
Banerji, A. and Ghanem, H. (1997). “Does the Type of Political Regime Matter for Trade
       and Labor Market Policies?,” World Bank Economic Review 11, 171-194.
Barro, Robert. J., and Jong-Wha Lee, 2001, “International Data on Educational Attainment:
       Updates and Implications,” Oxford Economic Paper No. 53, pp. 541–63.
Bassanini Andrea and Romain Duval, 2006, “Employment Patterns in OECD Countries,
       Reassessing the Role of Policies and Institutions,” OECD Economics Department
       Working Papers No. 486.
Bates, Robert H. and Anne O. Krueger, 1993, Political and Economic Interactions in Economic
       Policy Reform: Evidence from Eight Countries, Basil Blackwell Limited, Cambridge, USA.
Besley, Timothy J. and Torsten Persson, 2007, “The Origins of State Capacity: Property
       Rights, Taxation, and Politics”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6370.
Buera, Paco, Alex Monge, Giorgio Primiceri, 2008, “Learning the Wealth of Nations”
       Cambridge, MA: NBER working paper No. 14595.
Clemens, Michael A., and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2004, “Why Did the Tariff-Growth
       Correlation Reverse after 1950?” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 5-46.


                                                 22
Daveri, Francesco, Guido Tabellini, Samuel Bentolila and Harry Huizinga, 2000,
       “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in Industrial Countries”, Economic Policy, Vol.
       15, No. 30, pp. 47-104.
De Soto, Hernando, 2000, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
       Everywhere Else. Basic Books.
Debreu, G., 1951, “The Coefficient of Resource Utilization,” Econometrica, Vol. 19,
       pp. 273-92.
Dethier, Jean-Jacques, Ghanem, Hafez and Zoli, Edda, 1999, “Does Democracy Facilitate
       the Economic Transition? An Empirical Study of Central and Eastern Europe and
       the Former Soviet Union”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2194.
Dixon, W. J. and T. Boswell, 1996, “Dependency, Disarticulation and Denominator Effects:
       Another Look at Foreign Capital Penetration”, American Journal of Sociology, Volume
       102, No. 2, September, pp. 543-62.
Drazen, A. and William Easterly, 2001, “Do Crises Induce Reform? Simple Empirical Tests
       of Conventional Wisdom,” Economics and Politics, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 129-157.
Eichengreen, B. and M. Bordo, 2003, “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from the Last
       Era of Financial Globalization?” in Paul Mizen (ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rate
       and Financial Markets: Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhard, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
       vol. 2. pp. 52-91
Eichengreen, B. and D. Leblang, 2008, “Democracy and Globalization”, Economics and Politics,
       vol. 20 (3), 289-334.
Färe, R., S. Grosskopf, and C. A. K. Lovell, 1994, Production Frontiers (Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press).
Farrell, M. J., 1957, “The Measurement of Productive Efficiency,” Journal of the Royal
       Statistical Society, pp. 253–81.
Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik, 1991. “Resistance to reform: Status Quo bias in the
       Presence of Individual Specific Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, December,
       Vol. 81, No.55, pp. 1146–55.
Fidrmuc, Ian, 2003, “Economic Reform, Democracy and Growth during Post-communist
       Transition,” European Journal of Political Economy Vol. 19, No. 3, September,
       pp. 583-604.




                                             23
Giavazzi, Francesco; and Guido Tabellini, 2005, “Economic and Political Liberalizations,”
       Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 52, pp. 1297–1330.
Grosjean, Pauline, and Claudia Senik, 2011, “Democracy, Market Liberalization and Political
       Preferences”, Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 93(1), pp. 365-81.
Haggard, Stephan, 1990, “Pathways from Periphery. The Politics of growth in the Newly
       Industrializing Countries,” Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Huntington, Samuel P., 1968, Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven: Yale University
       Press.
International Monetary Fund, 2004, World Economic Outlook. Fostering Structural Reforms, April.
       IMF, Washington DC. April.
International Monetary Fund, 2008, Structural Reforms and Economic Performance in Advanced and
       Developing Countries, forthcoming IMF Occasional Paper (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund)
Lora, Eduardo, 1998, “What makes reforms likely? Timing and Sequencing of Structural
       Reforms in Latin America,” IADB Working Paper No. W-424.
Koopmans, T. C., 1951, “An Analysis of Production as an Efficient Combination of
       Activities,” in Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation, ed. by T. C. Koopmans
       (New York: Wiley).
Milner, H.V. and B. Mukherjee, 2009, “Democratization and Economic Globalization”,
       Annual Review of Political Science, 163-181
Milner, H.V. and Kubota, K., 2005, “Why Move to Free Trade? Democracy and Trade
       Policy in Developing Countries”, International Organization 59, 107-143.
Mulligan C. B., R. Gil and X. Sala-i-Martin, 2004, “Do Democracies Have Different Public
       Policies than Non-democracies?” Journal of Economic Perspectives (March).
Olper, Alessandro, Jan Falkowski and Johan Swinnen, 2009, “Political Reforms and Public
       Policies: Evidence from Agricultural Protection”, LICOS Discussion Paper No.
       251/2009.
McGuire, Martin C. and Mancur Olson, 1996, “The Economics of Autocracy and Majority
       Rule: The Invisible Hand and the Use of Force,” Journal of Economic Literature.
       Vol. 34, pp. 72–96.
Persson, Torsten. “Forms of Democracy, Policy and Economic Development.” National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., NBER Working Papers: No. 11171, 2005.


                                                24
Persson, T. and Guido Tabellini, 2002, “Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy”,
        MIT Press.
Persson, T. and Guido Tabellini, 2006, “Democracy and Development: The Devil in the
        Details”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 96, No. 2, May.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, 2009, “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and
        Economic Change”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2), pp. 88-126.
Polity IV. Political regime characteristics and transitions, 1800–2002 [Data Project]. College Park:
        University of Maryland, 2002 _http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/_.
Prati, Alessandro, Massimiliano Onorato, and Chris Papageorgiou, forthcoming, “Which
        Reforms Work and under What Institutional Environment: Evidence from a New
        Dataset on Structural Reforms,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Przeworski, A., and Limongi, F., 1993, “Political Regimes and Economic Growth,” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives Vol. 7, pp. 51–70.
Przeworski, A., and Limongi, F., 2000, Democracy and Development: Political Regimes and Well-
        Being in the World, 1950–1990. Cambridge (UK), Cambridge University Press.
Quinn, Dennis P., 1997, “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,”
        American Political Science Review, Vol. 91, pp. 531–51.
Quinn, Dennis, 2000, “Democracy and International Financial Liberalization”, mimeo,
        Georgetown University
Quinn, Dennis P., and A. Maria Toyoda, “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to
        Economic Growth?” Forthcoming. Review of Financial Studies.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
        Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 69, pp. 5–
        50.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists:
        Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2008, “This Time is Different: a Panoramic View of Eight
        Centuries of Financial Crises”, NBER WP 13882
Rodrik , Dani, 1999, “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
        114, No. 3, pp. 707–38.




                                                   25
Sala-i-Martin, X. 2006, “The World Distribution of Income, Falling Poverty and ...
      Convergence, Period”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 351-97.
Schwarz, Gerhard, 1992, “Democracy and Market-Oriented Reform: A Love-Hate
      Relationship?” Economic Education Bulletin 32.
Seiford, L. M., and R.M. Thrall, 1990, “Recent Developments in DEA: The Mathematical
      Programming Approach to Frontier Analysis,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 46,
      pp. 7-38.
Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch, 2008, “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
      Evidence", World Bank Economic Review, 22(2), 187-231.




                                             26
                                                                 Figure 1. Regulation and Democracy Over Time




                                 .8




                                                                                  .8

                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                      .8

                                                                                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                      .7




                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                  .6
                                 .7




                                                                                       .7




                                                                                                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                      .5

                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                  .4
                                 .6




                                                                                       .6




                                                                                                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                  .2
                                 .5




                                                                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                       1970   1980        1990    2000     2010              1970   1980    1990     2000      2010             1960   1970   1980 1990   2000
                                                          year                                              year                                               year

                                               Polity 2          Finance, right axis                 Polity 2        Capital, right axis                Polity 2   Product, right axis




                                                                                       .75
                                  .8




                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                           .9




                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                       .7
                                  .7




                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                   .7
                                                                                                                                      .7
                                                                                       .65
                                  .6




                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                       .6
                                  .5




                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                       .55
                                  .4




                                                                                  .2

                                                                                       .5




                                                                                                                                      .4

                                                                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                       1960   1970   1980 1990           2000                1960   1970   1980 1990        2000                1960   1970   1980 1990   2000
                                                      year                                                  year                                               year

                                               Polity 2           Agri, right axis                   Polity 2        Trade, right axis                  Polity 2   Current, right axis



Notes to Figure 1: This figure shows the correlation over time between the indices of democracy on the y-axis (measured as polity IV and normalized between 0 and 1)
and reforms on the x-axis (all the indices are normalized between 0 and 1, with 0 corresponding to the least reformed and 1 to the most reformed) in the following
eight sectors (or areas) – (i) domestic financial, (ii) capital account, (iii) product markets (electricity and telecommunications), (iv) agriculture, (v) labor, (vi) trade (based
on tariffs) and (vii) current account transactions.




                                                                                                                27
                                                                                                  Figure 2. Democracy and Reforms, 2000




                                            1




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                              FRA G20                            AZE ZWE G05 G06                   G09 G12 G14 G15
                                                                               SGP               NGA EST LVA G19                                                                                                                                                              SLV BRA G27
                                                                               JOR                      VEN G15 G18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GTM G26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                 GEO          G14 G17




                                            .8
                                                                                           TZA          G08 G13 G16                                                                                                                                                           VEN G20 AUT
                                                                  EGY KAZ                               G07 G12 URY                                     G02 G04                MYS CIV G11 G13 CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SGP         GHA          COL ARG DEU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                  Finance




                                                                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Product
                                                                                                                        Capital
                                                                  MAR G03                  MYS G04 G06 G11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UGA                     GEO ECU G19 G25
                                                                        G02 KEN                  ALB G05 GTM




                                            .6
                                                                  G01 DZA                                     G10                                                                                                                        PAK                           CIV G14 G18 BEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                              G09 CRI                                                                                                                          KGZ                     ARM G13 G17 G24
                                                                                                                                           UZB G01 PAK G03                     G07 G08 G10 ROM
                                                           BLR                             GHA          BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G04         JOR               NGA HRV G16 HUN




                                            .4
                                                           AZE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                     UZB CHN                         ETH                                                                                                                                          BTN MAR G06              ZMB         ALB G12 G15 G23

                                                           VNM                                                                                                                                                              UZB          EGY GAB G07 G08 G09 LKA G11 LVA G22
                                                                                                        NPL
                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G01 G02 G03 G05 TJK SLE KHM G10 IDN THA G21




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                        ETH                  DOM

                                                 0           .2           .4          .6           .8           1                      0           .2        .4           .6         .8        1                        0           .2          .4          .6           .8           1
                                                                          Polity2                                                                             Polity2                                                                            Polity2
                                            1




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                           AZE          G06          ZMB         G11 G15 G18 G22                           TKM                    SGP                              CHE                                   EGY UGA SGP                          G05 G010G013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KEN                      VEN G09 G012
                                                                                                                                                 MMR       G06 G09                 ARM G16 G19 G21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COL         G011
                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                                                                 G02 G03 BFA G08 G11 G13 G14 G15 G18 G20                                                                         MYS                G08

                                                     G02          MAR          G08         G09 G10 G14 G17 G21                                                                                                                                                   TZA G02 G04              HUN
                                                                                                                                                 G01 ZWE G05 G07 G10 G12 CAF                 G17 MUS
                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Current
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ECU BGR CZE




                                                                                                                        Trade
                                  Agri




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                                        PAK G04                    NGA BGD                                                                       GHA NGA NPL G07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAK G01                              MOZ IND
                                            .4




                                                                                                                                           UZB          EGY TUN         ETH IRN              IND
                                                           VNM G04                   ETH GHA            G13 LVA G20                                                                                                               AZE                                         G03 G06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                 SYR MAR                                                                                 MAR                           CIV
                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                  BDI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                  .2
                                            0




                                                     G01 G03 GMB G05 G07 SLE                     CAF G12 G16 G19                                                                                                                                                                    BRA

                                                 0           .2           .4          .6           .8           1                      0           .2        .4           .6         .8        1                        0           .2          .4          .6           .8           1
                                                                          Polity2                                                                             Polity2                                                                            Polity2



Notes: This figure shows the correlation in 2000 between the indices of democracy on the y-axis (measured as polity IV and normalized between 0 and 1) and reforms
on the x-axis (all the indices are normalized between 0 and 1, with 0 corresponding to the least reformed and 1 to the most reformed) in the following eight sectors (or
areas) – (i) domestic financial, (ii) capital account, (iii) product markets (electricity and telecommunications), (iv) agriculture, (v) labor, (vi) trade (based on tariffs) and
(vii) current account transactions. The country codes and groups used in this figures are described in Tables A2 and A3.




                                                                                                                                                            28
                                                           Table 1.
                                                      Reform Indicators
                                                                         Financial sector
                     The index of domestic financial liberalization is an average of six subindices, five related to banking and one related to
                     the securities market.
 Banking             The banking subindex is an average of the following 5 indicators: (i) interest rate controls, such as floors or ceilings; (ii)
                     credit controls, such as directed credit and subsidized lending; (iii) competition restrictions, such as limits on branches
                     and entry barriers in the banking sector, including licensing requirements or limits on foreign banks; (iv) the degree of
                     state ownership; and (v) the quality of banking supervision and regulation, including power of independence of bank
                     supervisors, adoption of Basel capital standards, and a framework for bank inspections.
                     The sixth subindex relates to securities markets and covers policies to develop domestic bond and equity markets, including
 Securities market
                     (i) the creation of basic frameworks such as the auctioning of T-bills, or the establishment of a security commission; (ii)
                     policies to further establish securities markets such as tax exemptions, introduction of medium- and long-term
                     government bonds to establish a benchmark for the yield curve, or the introduction of a primary dealer system; (iii)
                     policies to develop derivative markets or to create an institutional investor’s base; and (iv) policies to permit access to the
                     domestic stock market by nonresidents. The subindices are aggregated with equal weights. Each subindex is coded from
                     zero (fully repressed) to three (fully liberalized).
 Data sources        Abiad and others (2008), following the methodology in Abiad and Mody (2005), based on various IMF reports and
                     working papers, central bank websites, and others.
 Coverage            1973–2005; Minimum and maximum number of countries in any year are 72 and 91 respectively.
                                                                            Capital account
                     Qualitative indicators of restrictions on financial credits and personal capital transactions of residents and financial
                     credits to nonresidents, as well as the use of multiple exchange rates. Index coded from zero (fully repressed) to three
                     (fully liberalized).
 Data sources        Abiad and others (2008), following the methodology in Abiad and Mody (2005), based on various IMF reports and
                     working papers, central bank websites, and others.
 Coverage            1973–2005; Minimum and maximum number of countries in any year are 72 and 91 respectively.

                                                                         Product markets
                     The electricity indicators capture (i) the degree of unbundling of generation, transmission, and distribution; (ii) whether
Electricity          a regulator other than government has been established; and (iii) whether the wholesale market has been liberalized; and
                     (iv) privatization. Each subindex is coded from 0 to 1 or from 0 to 2.




                                                                29
                                      The telecommunication indicator captures (i) the degree of competition in local services; (ii) whether a regulator other
                                      than government has been established; (iii) the degree of liberalization of interconnection changes; and (iv) privatization.
Telecommunication                     Each subindex is coded from 0 to 1 or from 0 to 2.
                                      Electricity: Based on various existing studies and datasets as well as national legislation and other official documents.
                                      Telecommunication: Based on IMF commodities data, various existing studies and datasets, and national legislation and
Data sources                          other official documents.
Coverage                              1960–2003; Minimum and maximum number of countries in any year are 106 and 108 respectively.
                                                                                             Agriculture market
                                      The index captures intervention in the market for the main agricultural export commodity in each country. The index
                                      can take four values (i) zero (public monopoly or monopsony in production, transportation, or marketing, e.g., export
                                      marketing boards); (ii) one-third (administered prices); (iii) two-thirds (public ownership of relevant producers or
                                      concession requirements); and (iv) one (no public intervention).
Data sources                          Based on IMF commodities data, various existing studies and datasets, and national legislation and other official
                                      documents.
Coverage                              1960–2003; Minimum and maximum number of countries in any year are 96 and 104 respectively.
                                                                                                     Trade
                                      Trade liberalization is defined by looking at average tariff rates, with missing values extrapolated using implicit weighted
                                      tariff rates. Index normalized to be between zero and unity: zero means the tariff rates are 60 percent or higher, while
                                      unity means the tariff rates are zero.
Data sources                          Various sources, including IMF, World Bank, WTO, UN, Clemens and Willamson, 2004.
Coverage                              1960-2005; Minimum and maximum # of countries in any year are 47 and 142 respectively.
                                                                                               Current account
                                      Current account liberalization is defined with an indicator describing how compliant a government is with its obligations
                                      under the IMF’s Article VIII to free from government restriction the proceeds from international trade in goods and
                                      services. The index represents the sum of two subcomponents, dealing with restrictions on trade in visibles, as well as in
                                      invisibles (financial and other services). It distinguishes between restrictions on residents (receipts for exports) and on
                                      nonresidents (payments for imports). Although the index measures restrictions on the proceeds from transactions,
                                      rather than on the underlying transactions, many countries in practice use restrictions on trade proceeds as a type of
                                      trade restriction. The index is scored between zero and 8 in half-integer units, with 8 indicating full compliance.
Data sources                          Based on the methodology in Quinn (1997) and Quinn and Toyoda (2007), drawing on information contained in the
                                      Fund's AREAER database (Annual Reports on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions).
Coverage                              1960–2005; Minimum and maximum number of countries in any year are 50 and 65 respectively.
This table presents brief description of the reform indicators used in the paper. For a full description of all variables, data and sources refer to IMF (2008).




                                                                                     30
                              Table 2 . Correlation Between Reform Indicators

                     Agriculture         Prod. Mkt         Trade    Cap. Acc.   Curr. Acc.   Finance

Agriculture                1
Prod. Mkt               .30***                 1
Trade                   .32***              .35***            1
Cap. Acc.               .40***              .46***         .57***       1
Curr. Acc.              .42***              .47***         .63***    .77***          1
Finance                 .44***              .63***         .62***    .73***       .71***        1
*** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                         31
                                          Table 3
                                Reforms and democracy
Dependent variable: reform in country, sector, year
                                              (1)      (2)                       (3)            (4)
Lagged democracy                           .016***  .017***                   .033***        .017***
                                            [.003]   [.003]                    [.003]         [.003]

Lagged level of index                           -.073***       -.124***      -.047***       -.131***
                                                  [.003]         [.004]        [.002]         [.004]

Country FE                                         Y              Y              Y              Y
Sector FE                                          Y              Y              Y              Y
Year FE                                            Y              Y              Y              Y
Country*Sector FE                                                 Y                             Y
Sector*Year FE                                                                   Y              Y

Observations                                     20,123        20,123         20,123         20,123


Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term.
Standard errors are denoted in parentheses.***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10
percent respectively.




                                                 32
                                                       Table 4
                                Reforms and democracy, robustness to controls
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                         (1)      (2)     (3)                      (4)         (5)         (6)
Lagged democracy                                      .011***  .014**  .048***                  .011***     .014***     .045***
                                                       [.004]   [.006]  [.014]                   [.003]      [.004]      [.016]

Lagged level of index                                      -.149***    -.205***    -.401***    -.135***     -.173***    -.412***
                                                             [.004]      [.006]      [.011]      [.004]       [.005]      [.012]

Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                -.005*                                                       -.003
                                                            [.003]                                                       [.006]

Lagged real devaluation                                                  .007                                            -.009
                                                                        [.005]                                           [.008]

Lagged public expenditure to GDP                                        -.000                                            -.001*
                                                                        [.000]                                           [.001]

Lagged bureaucratic quality                                                           .003                               .006*
                                                                                     [.003]                              [.003]

Lagged tertiary enrollment                                                            .006                               -.003
                                                                                     [.028]                              [.029]

Lagged reforms in geographical neighbor                                                         .055***                   .044
                                                                                                 [.021]                  [.054]

Lagged dummy for left                                                                                         .003       -.004
                                                                                                             [.002]      [.004]

Lagged dummy for presidential                                                                                -.001        .006
                                                                                                             [.004]      [.017]
Observations                                                17,235      10,128       6,111      18,400       14,776       5,252
Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions control for
country sector, year fixed effects and country*sector and sector*year interactions. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses.
***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                               33
                                                    Table 5A
                      Reforms and democracy: Instrumental variables second stage
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                               (1a)     (1b)      (1c)                          (1d)
Lagged democracy                                             .078***  .151***     0.19                          .141
                                                              [.016]   [.043]    [.124]                        [.090]

Lagged level of index                                               -.135***      -.180***      -.281***     -.281***
                                                                      [.007]        [.012]        [.024]       [.024]

Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                                       -.005         -.010
                                                                                   [.005]        [.008]

Lagged real devaluation                                                             .008          .003
                                                                                   [.006]        [.010]

Lagged public expenditure to GDP                                                    .000         -.001
                                                                                   [.000]        [.001]

Lagged bureaucratic quality                                                                       .004
                                                                                                 [.003]

Lagged tertiary enrollment                                                                        .023
                                                                                                 [.033]

Lagged reforms in geographical neighbors                                            .056          .053
                                                                                   [.045]        [.078]

Lagged dummy for left                                                              -.001         -.001
                                                                                   [.002]        [.003]

Lagged dummy for presidential                                                      .029**         .049
                                                                                    [.013]       [.035]
Observations                                                         18,970        10,007        5,252         5,252
First stage F-stat                                                   764.59        229.09        36.47         50.77
p-value of F test                                                    0.000          0.000        0.000         0.000

Note. Lagged democracy is instrumented by (lagged) democracy in neighboring countries. All regressions control for
country sector, year fixed effects and country*sector and sector*year interactions. Standard errors are denoted in
parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                          34
                                                    Table 5B
                        Reforms and democracy: Instrumental variables first stage
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                                  (1a)        (1b)                          (1c)         (1d)
Lagged democracy in neighboring countries                       .014*** .009***                           .005***      .006***
                                                                 [.002]      [.001]                        [.001]       [.001]

Lagged level of index                                                              .022       -.016        -.008        -.005
                                                                                  [.028]      [.028]       [.020]       [.021]

Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                                                  -.015         .013
                                                                                              [.014]       [.008]

Lagged real devaluation                                                                       -.011        .020**
                                                                                              [.009]        [.009]

Lagged public expenditure to GDP                                                               .001        -.002
                                                                                              [.002]       [.002]

Lagged bureaucratic quality                                                                                -.003
                                                                                                           [.007]

Lagged tertiary enrollment                                                                                -.199***
                                                                                                            [.045]

Lagged reforms in geographical neighbors                                                       .052       .198***
                                                                                              [.064]       [.060]

Lagged dummy for left                                                                          .001        -.009*
                                                                                              [.010]       [.005]

Lagged dummy for presidential                                                                -.226***     -.238***
                                                                                               [.029]       [.037]
Observations                                                                     18,970       10,007        5,252       5,252


Note. All regressions control for country sector, year fixed effects and country*sector and sector*year interactions.
Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                              35
                                                                     Table 6
                                                         Reforms and democracy: by reform
Dependent variable: reform in (country, year)
                                                                       (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                                    Finance       Cap. Acc.       Prod. Mkt       Agricult.       Trade        Curr. Acc.
Panel A: no controls

Lagged democracy                                                      .001           .025            .008**        .023***         .013*          .017*
                                                                     [.007]         [.018]            [.004]         [.007]       [.008]          [.009]
Lagged level of index                                               -.188***       -.258***         -.044***       -.074***      -.179***       -.157***
                                                                     [.012]         [.014]            [.006]         [.007]       [.009]          [.011]

Observations                                                          2,437         2,437            5,092          3,853          3,664          2,640

Panel B: with controls

Lagged democracy                                                     .067***       .182***           -.026         .202***        .075***        .179***
                                                                      [.024]         [.060]          [.033]          [.041]        [.022]         [.046]
Lagged level of index                                               -.379***       -.521***        -.278***        -.558***      -.420***       -.554***
                                                                      [.028]         [.031]          [.026]          [.030]        [.029]         [.038]

Observations                                                           861           861              975            887            946            722


Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions control for country and year fixed
effects. All regressions in Panel B control for one year lags of the following: indicators of crisis, real devaluation, public expenditure as a raio of GDP,
bureaucratic quality, tertiary enrollment, reforms in geographical neighbors, dummies for party of the executive being left, and dummy for presidential form
of government. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                                         36
                                                   Table 7a. Reforms and democracy
                                                          Robustness checks
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                    (1a)        (1b)       (2a)       (2b)                        (3a)          (3b)           (3c)
Lagged democracy                                  .007**     .070***    .014***    .063***
                                                   [.003]      [.016]     [.004]     [.020]
Lagged level of index                                -.130***       -.463***       -.149***      -.565***     -0.135***      -0.495***      -0.497***
                                                       [.004]         [.013]         [.005]        [.016]       [.004]         [.013]         [.013]
Democracy dummy (polty2>0)                                                                                     .010***          .013            .013
                                                                                                                 [.002]        [.010]          [.009]
Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                          -.002                        -.002                       -.002
                                                                      [.007]                       [.008]                      [.007]
Lagged real devaluation                                               -.006                        -.009                       -.009
                                                                      [.008]                       [.013]                      [.008]
Lagged public expenditure to GDP                                       .000                        -.001                       -.001
                                                                      [.001]                       [.001]                      [.001]
Lagged bureaucratic quality                                          .009**                         .007                       .010**
                                                                      [.004]                       [.005]                       [.004]
Lagged tertiary enrollment                                            -.022                         .024                        .011
                                                                      [.033]                       [.059]                      [.032]
Lagged reforms in geographical neighbors                               .063                         .012                        .025
                                                                      [.055]                       [.065]                      [.052]
Lagged dummy for left                                                 -.005                        -.003                       -.004
                                                                      [.005]                       [.008]                      [.005]
Lagged dummy for presidential                                          .010                         .023                       -.007
                                                                      [.017]                       [.020]                      [.017]

Observations                                           17,301         4,751         15,666         3,683        20,123          5,252          5,252

Note. In Columns 1a-1b and 2a-2b, the sample is restricted to non-communist and developing countries respectively. In Columns 3a-3b, we use a
zero-one definition of democracy (as in Giavazzi and Tabellini, 2005), where democracy=1 if polity2 has positive values. The estimators are within
estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions
                                                                               37 control for country and year fixed effects and country*sector and
sector*year interactions. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.
                                                                        Table 7b. Reforms and democracy
                                                                          Additional robustness checks
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)
Lagged democracy                                             .016***          .065***        .062***         .061***         .066***          .066***         .069***        .011***
                                                               [.004]           [.017]         [.017]          [.017]          [.017]           [.023]          [.023]         [.003]
Lagged level of index                                       -.125***         -.495***        -.510***        -.479***        -.494***         -.523***        -.520***
                                                               [.007]           [.013]         [.013]          [.012]          [.013]           [.014]          [.014]
Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                                    -.003          -.001
                                                                                [.007]         [.007]
Lagged real devaluation                                                         -.009          -.008           -.007           -.009           -.011            -.010
                                                                                [.008]         [.008]         [.008]           [.008]          [.008]           [.009]
Lagged public expenditure to GDP                                                -.001          -.001            .000           -.001           -.001            -.001
                                                                                [.001]         [.001]         [.001]           [.001]          [.001]           [.001]
Lagged bureaucratic quality                                                    .010**         .009**         .010***          .010**           .007*           .008**
                                                                                [.004]         [.004]         [.004]           [.004]          [.004]           [.004]
Lagged tertiary enrollment                                                       .006           .011           .000             .007            .010             .010
                                                                                [.032]         [.032]         [.032]           [.032]          [.033]           [.033]
Lagged reforms in geographical neighbors                                         .038           .029           .036             .026            .063             .058
                                                                                [.054]         [.052]         [.053]           [.052]          [.056]           [.056]
Lagged dummy for left                                                           -.004          -.004           -.005           -.005           -.007            -.008
                                                                                [.005]         [.005]         [.005]           [.005]          [.005]           [.005]
Lagged dummy for presidential                                                    .000           .002           .001             .002           -.001             .003
                                                                                [.017]         [.017]         [.017]           [.017]          [.021]           [.021]
Lagged reform in trade neighbors                                                -.043
                                                                                [.054]
Lagged average reform in other sectors                                                        .122***
                                                                                               [.034]
Lagged crisis (growth<0)                                                                                     -.007**
                                                                                                              [.003]
Terms of trade shocks                                                                                                         -.004
                                                                                                                              [.014]
Lagged crisis (debt)                                                                                                                            .010
                                                                                                                                               [.011]
Lagged crisis (bank)                                                                                                                                          -.016***
                                                                                                                                                                [.006]

Observations                                                 20,123           5,252            5,252          5,234           5,252            4,679            4,679         20,123


Note. The estimators in all columns except (1) are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. In Column (1), instead of explicitly allowing for an
AR(1) term in the model, the standard errors are clustered at the country-reform level. The definition of bank and debt crises are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2008). All
regressions control for country and year fixed effects and country*sector and sector*year interactions. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.                                         38
                                                      Table 8
                              Reforms and democracy - flexible functional form
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                                     (1)        (2)                      (3)         (4)
Lagged democracy (polity2<0.15)                                     .014       .011                    -.005        .014
                                                                   [.040]     [.044]                   [.042]      [.044]

Lagged democracy (0.15<=polity2<0.75)                                         .012**        .009      .036***       .010
                                                                               [.006]      [.006]      [.006]      [.006]

Lagged democracy (polity2>=0.75)                                             .015***      .016***     .038***     .016***
                                                                              [.003]       [.003]      [.003]      [.003]

Lagged level of index                                                        -.073***    -.129***     -.036***    -.135***
                                                                               [.003]      [.004]       [.002]      [.004]

Country FE                                                                      Y            Y           Y            Y
Sector FE                                                                       Y            Y           Y            Y
Year FE                                                                         Y            Y           Y            Y
Country*Sector FE                                                                            Y                        Y
Sector*Year FE                                                                                           Y            Y

Observations                                                                  20,123      20,123      20,123       20,123


Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. Standard errors are
denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                            39
                                            Table 9a
                           Reforms and democracy: feedback effects
Dependent variable: change in democracy (country, year)
                                                     (1)          (2)                                    (3)

                                                                                                   No controls/
                                                          No controls         With controls          sample

Lagged democracy                                              -.132***           -.303***             -.273***
                                                                [.007]             [.019]               [.018]

Lagged reform in (country, year)                               -.001               .056                 .061*
                                                               [.023]             [.034]                [.035]

Observations                                                   5,431              1,550                 1,550


Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All
regressions include country and year fixed effects. The reform variable is measured by averaging across all
sectors at the country-year level. All regressions control for one year lags of the following: indicators of crisis,
real devaluation, tertiary enrollment, democracy in political neighbors and log of per capita income. ***, ** and
* denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                         40
                                                                              Table 9b
                                                                Reforms and democracy: feedback effects
Dependent variable: change in democracy (country, year)
                                                     (1)                         (2)                  (3)                  (4)                   (5)                 (6)
                                                  Finance                     Cap. Acc.            Prod. Mkt             Agricult.              Trade             Curr. Acc.

Panel A: no controls

Lagged democracy                                          -.181***             -.180***              -.131***             -.136***             -.193***             -.166***
                                                            [.012]               [.012]                [.007]               [.009]               [.010]               [.011]

Lagged reform in (country, year)                           -.085**               -.015                -.001                 .008                 .013                -.036
                                                            [.035]               [.012]               [.028]               [.018]               [.019]               [.022]

Observations                                                2,257                2,257                4,864                3,765                 3,399                2,501

Panel B: with controls

Lagged democracy                                          -0.259***            -0.259***            -0.284***            -0.289***            -0.322***            -0.238***
                                                            [.021]               [.021]               [.020]               [.022]               [.021]               [.023]

Lagged reform in (country, year)                            -0.043               0.012                -0.015             0.075***               -0.012               0.037
                                                            [.037]               [.013]               [.029]               [.021]               [.026]               [.027]

Observations                                                1,090                1,090                1,381                1,131                 1,382                935


Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions include country and year fixed effects. All regressions
in Panel B control for one year lags of the following: indicators of crisis, real devaluation, tertiary enrollment, democracy in political neighbors, and log of per capita income.
Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                                                       41
                                                                                Table 10
                                                         Reforms and democracy: Difference-in-Difference Estimator

Dependent variable:                                                                                  Becoming economically open in
                                                      country-sector-
                                                            year                                                              country-year
                                                             (1)                        (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)                 (6)
                                                             All                     Finance         Cap. Acc.         Prod. Mkt       Agricult.            Trade          Curr. Acc.
Political reform                                         .045***                      .051*             .011              .017          .057***             .062**            .018
                                                           [.011]                     [.030]           [.036]            [.018]          [.015]              [.030]          [.033]

Observations                                                22,565                     2,671            2,671             5,863            4,355             4,148             2,857



Dependent variable:                                                                                       Polity2 in (country, year)
                                                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                               All                   Finance         Cap. Acc.        Prod. Mkt          Agricult.          Trade          Curr. Acc.
Economic reform                                               .480                     .214             .054             -.128             .321              .326             .309
                                                             [.310]                   [.223]           [.219]            [.186]           [.304]            [.235]           [.284]

Observations                                                 5,715                     2,437            2,437             5,095            3,950             3,681             2,641



Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions control for country and year fixed effects. Political reform is a
dummy variable taking a value of 1 in the years after democratization. Democratization is defined as the event of becoming a democracy (and staying as a democracy for at least 4 years),
given that a country was not a democracy in the previous year. The economic reform variable in Panel B, column (1), is measured at the country-year level, by averaging across all sectors
. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                                                                          42
                                                            Table 11
                                            Reforms and democracy: Principal component
                                                          Dependent variable: change in reform             Dependent variable: change in
                                                                 index (country, year)                      democracy (country, year)
                                                                   (1)                   (2)                               (3)
                                                                  OLS                    IV

Lagged democracy                                                .001***                .006***                         -.218***
                                                                 [.000]                 [.002]                           [.017]

Lagged level of index (country, year)                          -0.029***              -0.096***
                                                                 [.004]                 [.018]

Lagged reform in (country, year)                                                                                         -1.775
                                                                                                                         [1.220]


Observations                                                      1,418                 1,418                            1,361
First stage F-stat                                                                       41
p-value of F-stat                                                                       0.000



Note. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions include country and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.
In Column (2), lagged democracy is instrumented by (lagged) democracy in neighboring countries.




                                                                             43
Appendix
                                             Appendix Table A1. Summary Statistics

           Variable                                                       Obs     Mean    Std. Dev.   Min   Max

           Change in reform index                                        20,123   0.01      0.08        -1   1
           Lagged democracy                                              20,123   0.59      0.37        0    1
           Lagged reform_index                                           20,123   0.40      0.37        0    1
           Lagged crisis (inflation>40)                                   5,252   0.10      0.30        0    1
           Lagged real devaluation                                        5,252   0.01      0.17      -1.00 1.30
           Lagged public expenditure as a percent of GDP                  5,252   15.06     5.18      2.98 34.39
           Lagged bureaucratic quality                                    5,252   2.54      1.14        0    4
           Lagged tertiary enrollment                                     5,252   0.27      0.22      0.00 0.97
           Lagged reforms in geographical neighbor                        5,252   0.02      0.03      -0.21 0.22
           Lagged dummy for left                                          5,252   0.33      0.47        0    1
           Lagged dummy for presidential                                  5,252   0.55      0.50        0    1
           Lagged democracy in political neighbors                       18,970   1.25      5.12        -9   10
           Lagged crisis (growth<0)                                       5,234   0.26      0.44        0    1
           Terms of trade shocks                                          5,252   -0.01     0.14      -0.70 0.47
           Lagged crisis (debt)                                           4,679   0.01      0.12        0    1
           Lagged crisis (bank)                                           4,679   0.05      0.22        0    1
           Lagged reform in trade neighbors                               5,252   0.01      0.03      -0.21 0.39
           Change in reform index (principal component)                   1,418   0.02      0.04      -0.18 0.31
           Lagged reform index (principal component)                      1,418   0.50      0.25        0   1.00
           Political reform (Giavazzi and Tabellini, 2005)               22,565   0.20      0.40        0    1




                                                              44
                       Table A2. Country Codes in Figure 2
Code   Country          Code       Country                   Code   Country
AFG    Afghanistan      GHA        Ghana                     NLD    Netherlands
AGO    Angola           GIN        Guinea                    NOR    Norway
ALB    Albania          GMB        Gambia                    NPL    Nepal
ARE    UAE              GNB        Guinea-Bissau             NZL    New Zealand
ARG    Argentina        GNQ        Equat Guinea              OMN    Oman
ARM    Armenia          GRC        Greece                    PAK    Pakistan
AUS    Australia        GTM        Guatemala                 PAN    Panama
AUT    Austria          GUY        Guyana                    PHL    Philippines
AZE    Azerbaijan       HND        Honduras                  PNG    Papua New G.
BDI    Burundi          HRV        Croatia                   POL    Poland
BEL    Belgium          HTI        Haiti                     PRT    Portugal
BEN    Benin            HUN        Hungary                   PRY    Paraguay
BFA    Burkina Faso     IDN        Indonesia                 QAT    Qatar
BGD    Bangladesh       IND        India                     ROM    Romania
BGR    Bulgaria         IRL        Ireland                   RUS    Russia
BHR    Bahrain          IRN        Iran                      RWA    Rwanda
BLR    Belarus          IRQ        Iraq                      SAU    Saudi Arabia
BOL    Bolivia          ISR        Israel                    SDN    Sudan
BRA    Brazil           ITA        Italy                     SEN    Senegal
BTN    Bhutan           JAM        Jamaica                   SGP    Singapore
BWA    Botswana         JOR        Jordan                    SLB    Solomon Is
CAF    CAR              JPN        Japan                     SLE    Sierra Leone
CAN    Canada           KAZ        Kazakhstan                SLV    El Salvador
CHE    Switzerland      KEN        Kenya                     SOM    Somalia
CHL    Chile            KGZ        Kyrgyz Rep                SVK    Slovak Rep
CHN    China            KHM        Cambodia                  SVN    Slovenia
CIV    Cote D'Ivoire    KOR        Korea                     SWE    Sweden
CMR    Cameroon         KWT        Kuwait                    SYR    Syria
COG    Congo            LAO        Lao                       TCD    Chad
COL    Colombia         LBR        Liberia                   TGO    Togo
COM    Comoros          LBY        Libya                     THA    Thailand
CRI    Costa Rica       LKA        Sri Lanka                 TJK    Tajikistan
CUB    Cuba             LSO        Lesotho                   TKM    Turkmenistan
CYP    Cyprus           LTU        Lithuania                 TTO    Trinidad Tob
CZE    Czech Rep        LVA        Latvia                    TUN    Tunisia
DEU    Germany          MAR        Morocco                   TUR    Turkey
DJI    Djibouti         MDA        Moldova                   TWN    Taiwan
DNK    Denmark          MDG        Madagascar                TZA    Tanzania
DOM    Dominican Rep    MEX        Mexico                    UGA    Uganda
DZA    Algeria          MKD        Macedonia                 UKR    Ukraine
ECU    Ecuador          MLI        Mali                      URY    Uruguay
EGY    Egypt            MMR        Myanmar                   USA    US
ERI    Eritrea          MNG        Mongolia                  UZB    Uzbekistan
ESP    Spain            MOZ        Mozambique                VEN    Venezuela
EST    Estonia          MRT        Mauritania                VNM    Viet Nam
ETH    Ethiopia         MUS        Mauritius                 YEM    Yemen
FIN    Finland          MWI        Malawi                    ZAF    South Africa
FJI    Fiji             MYS        Malaysia                  ZAR    Zaire
FRA    France           NAM        Namibia                   ZMB    Zambia
GAB    Gabon            NER        Niger                     ZWE    Zimbabwe
GBR    UK               NGA        Nigeria
GEO    Georgia          NIC        Nicaragua




                                      45
                                Table A3 contd. Country Groups in Figure 2.
               Product                                                                Agri
Country                  Code           Group           Country     Code      Group          Country     Code   Group
Oman                     OMN              1             Turkmenist TKM          1            India       IND     15
Turkmenistan             TKM              1             Uzbekistan UZB          1            South Afric ZAF     15
Azerbaijan               AZE              2             Belarus     BLR         2            Chile       CHL     16
China                    CHN              2             China       CHN         2            France      FRA     16
Lao                      LAO              2             Egypt       EGY         3            Jamaica     JAM     16
Viet Nam                 VNM              2             Pakistan    PAK         3            Poland      POL     16
Kenya                    KEN              3             Cameroon    CMR         4            Thailand    THA     16
Chad                     TCD              3             Uganda      UGA         4            Bolivia     BOL     17
Togo                     TGO              3             Burkina Fas BFA         5            Slovak Rep SVK      17
Solomon Is               SLB              4             Tunisia     TUN         5            Australia   AUS     18
Sierra Leone             SLE              4             Kenya       KEN         6            Canada      CAN     18
Benin                    BEN              5             Chad        TCD         6            Czech Rep   CZE     19
Guyana                   GUY              5             Togo        TGO         6            Japan       JPN     19
Mozambique               MOZ              5             Cote D'Ivoi CIV         7            Trinidad To TTO     19
Bangladesh               BGD              6             Nigeria     NGA         7            Belgium     BEL     20
Namibia                  NAM              6             Georgia     GEO         8            Germany     DEU     20
Honduras                 HND              7             Sri Lanka   LKA         8            Denmark     DNK     20
Madagascar               MDG              7             Benin       BEN         9            Spain       ESP     20
Turkey                   TUR              7             Guyana      GUY         9            Finland      FIN    20
Mexico                   MEX              8             Mali        MLI         9            UK          GBR     20
Philippines              PHL              8             Bangladesh BGD         10            Greece      GRC     20
France                   FRA              9             Mozambiqu MOZ          10            Hungary     HUN     20
South Africa             ZAF              9             Namibia     NAM        10            Ireland      IRL    20
Lithuania                LTU             10             Nepal       NPL        10            Lithuania   LTU     20
Trinidad Tob             TTO             10             Colombia    COL        11            Norway      NOR     20
Uruguay                  URY             10             Venezuela   VEN        11            Portugal    PRT     20
Czech Rep                CZE             11             Honduras    HND        12            Sweden      SWE     20
Hungary                  HUN             11             Moldova     MDA        12            Switzerland CHE     21
Japan                    JPN             11             Malawi      MWI        12            Italy        ITA    21
Australia                AUS             12             Ukraine     UKR        12            Mongolia    MNG     21
Belgium                  BEL             12             Indonesia   IDN        13            Netherlands NLD     21
Canada                   CAN             12             Madagascar MDG         13            New Zealan NZL      21
Ireland                   IRL            12             Argentina   ARG        14            Uruguay     URY     21
New Zealand              NZL             12             Bulgaria    BGR        14            US          USA     21
Portugal                 PRT             12             Brazil      BRA        14
US                       USA             12             Guatemala   GTM        14
Denmark                  DNK             13             Mexico      MEX        14
Finland                   FIN            13             Philippines PHL        14
Italy                     ITA            13
Norway                   NOR             13
Sweden                   SWE             13
Spain                    ESP             14
UK                       GBR             14
Netherlands              NLD             14




                                                   46
                              Table A3 contd. Country Groups in Figure 2.
               Labor                                                                Fiscal
Country                Code          Group          Country     Code        Group       Country        Code   Group
Mozambique             MOZ             1            Viet Nam    VNM           1         South Africa   ZAF     14
Bangladesh             BGD             1            Myanmar     MMR           1         Botswana       BWA     14
Croatia                HRV             2            Belarus     BLR           2         Bolivia        BOL     14
Russia                 RUS             2            Azerbaijan  AZE           2         Thailand       THA     15
Indonesia              IDN             3            Algeria     DZA           3         Poland         POL     15
Malawi                 MWI             3            Burkina Fas BFA           3         Israel          ISR    16
Latvia                 LVA             4            Chad        TCD           4         Mauritius      MUS     16
Korea                  KOR             4            Togo        TGO           4         Belgium        BEL     17
South Africa           ZAF             5            Iran        IRN           5         Czech Rep      CZE     17
Chile                  CHL             5            Malaysia    MYS           5         Austria        AUT     18
Italy                   ITA            6            Namibia     NAM           6         Portugal       PRT     18
Denmark                DNK             6            Benin       BEN           6         Lithuania      LTU     18
Ireland                IRL             7            Croatia     HRV           7         Denmark        DNK     18
UK                     GBR             7            Moldova     MDA           7         Ireland         IRL    19
Norway                 NOR             8            Colombia    COL           8         Hungary        HUN     19
Cyprus                 CYP             8            Ukraine     UKR           8         Italy           ITA    19
US                     USA             8            El Salvador SLV           8         US             USA     19
                                                    Russia      RUS           9         Netherlands    NLD     19
                                                    Turkey      TUR           9         Germany        DEU     20
                                                    Venezuela   VEN          10         New Zealand    NZL     20
                                                    Paraguay    PRY          10         Spain          ESP     20
                                                    Madagascar MDG           10         Canada         CAN     20
                                                    Malawi      MWI          11         Greece         GRC     21
                                                    Indonesia   IDN          11         Japan          JPN     21
                                                    Mexico      MEX          12         Sweden         SWE     21
                                                    Guatemala   GTM          12         Australia      AUS     21
                                                    Argentina   ARG          12         Cyprus         CYP     21
                                                    Romania     ROM          12         UK             GBR     22
                                                    Philippines PHL          12         Costa Rica     CRI     22
                                                    India       IND          13         Norway         NOR     22
                                                    Chile       CHL          13         Uruguay        URY     23
                                                    France      FRA          13         Finland         FIN    23




                                                 47
                               Table A3 contd. Country Groups in Figure 2.
                               Trade                                                          Current
Country         Code   Group       Country                     Code          Group   Country     Code   Group
China           CHN      1         Dominican Rep               DOM            14     Indonesia   IDN      1
Viet Nam        VNM      1         Philippines                 PHL            14     Turkey      TUR      1
Congo           COG      2         Latvia                      LVA            15     Guatemala   GTM      2
Mauritania      MRT      2         Nicaragua                   NIC            15     Philippines PHL      2
Gabon           GAB      3         Bolivia                     BOL            16     France      FRA      3
Cameroon        CMR      3         Chile                       CHL            16     Jamaica     JAM      3
Uganda          UGA      4         Jamaica                     JAM            16     Australia   AUS      4
Kazakhstan      KAZ      4         Taiwan                      TWN            16     Costa Rica  CRI      4
Jordan          JOR      5         Panama                      PAN            16     Japan       JPN      4
Kenya           KEN      5         South Africa                ZAF            17     Austria     AUT      5
Togo            TGO      5         Slovak Rep                  SVK            17     Israel       ISR     5
Tanzania        TZA      6         Hungary                     HUN            18     Belgium     BEL      6
Cambodia        KHM      6         Slovenia                    SVN            18     Canada      CAN      6
Cote D'Ivoire    CIV     7         Trinidad Tob                TTO            18     Germany     DEU      6
Niger           NER      7         Uruguay                     URY            18     Denmark     DNK      6
Georgia         GEO      8         Cyprus                      CYP            19     Spain       ESP      6
Sri Lanka       LKA      8         Costa Rica                   CRI           19     Finland      FIN     6
Macedonia       MKD      9         Austria                     AUT            19     UK          GBR      6
Nepal           NPL      9         Czech Rep                   CZE            19     Greece      GRC      6
Benin           BEN      9         Israel                       ISR           19     Italy        ITA     6
Mozambique      MOZ      9         Australia                   AUS            20     Netherlands NLD      6
Ecuador         ECU     10         Belgium                     BEL            20     Norway      NOR      6
Mali            MLI     10         Germany                     DEU            20     New Zealan NZL       6
Guyana          GUY     10         Denmark                     DNK            20     Portugal    PRT      6
Malawi          MWI     11         Spain                       ESP            20     Sweden      SWE      6
Turkey          TUR     11         Finland                      FIN           20     Uruguay     URY      6
Venezuela       VEN     11         UK                          GBR            20     US          USA      6
Croatia         HRV     11         Greece                      GRC            20     Hong Kong HKG        6
Colombia        COL     11         Ireland                      IRL           20     Peru        PER      6
Russia          RUS     11         Italy                        ITA           20
Paraguay        PRY     11         Netherlands                 NLD            20
Moldova         MDA     12         Portugal                    PRT            20
Indonesia       IDN     12         Sweden                      SWE            20
Honduras        HND     12         Canada                      CAN            20
El Salvador     SLV     12         US                          USA            20
Brazil          BRA     13         New Zealand                 NZL            20
Bulgaria        BGR     13         Lithuania                   LTU            20
Romania         ROM     13         Japan                       JPN            20
Korea           KOR     13         Norway                      NOR            20
Argentina       ARG     13




                                                   48
                                                               Table A4
                                 Reforms and democracy, robustness to controls: Sample
Dependent variable: reform in (country, sector, year)
                                                       (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
Lagged democracy                                    0.011***       0.014**     0.044***      0.011***      0.014***      0.039**
                                                      [.004]          [.006]     [.014]        [.003]        [.004]        [.016]

Lagged level of index                              -0.148***      -0.207***    -0.402***     -0.135***     -0.173***     -0.415***
                                                      [.004]          [.006]     [.011]        [.004]        [.005]        [.012]


Observations                                         17,235        10,128        6,111         18,400        14,776        5,252


Note. All regressions are restricted to corresponding samples in Table 4. The estimators are within estimators and allow for first-
order autoregressive disturbance term. All regressions control for country sector, year fixed effects and country*sector and
sector*year interactions. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10
percent respectively.




                                                                 49
                                                                           Table A5 . Panel Unit Root Test (Reform)

                                                                                                                                           Curr.                                         Polity2 (overall
                                                    Agriculture             Prod. Mkt                 Trade             Cap. Acc.          Acc.         Finance            Labor            sample)

Levin-Lin ADF-stat                                       2.93                   1.63                   -2.57                -2.46           -1.39         -1.50             -3.86               -1.53
Im, Pesharan & Shin ADF-stat                             1.71                   -0.63                  -5.91                -3.25           -3.86         -1.70             -6.03               -5.17
Number of countries                                       91                     118                    95                   71              60            71                97                  135
Number of years                                           43                     44                     44                   31              44            31                24                   44
Notes. The missing values for intermediate years have been interpolate to apply the unit root tests. All reported values are distributed N(0,1) under null of unit root or no cointegration. Large negative
values imply rejection of the unit root, with the 5% and 10% critical values being -1.64 and 1.28 respectively.




                                                                                                    50
                                      Table A6
                         Reform Reversals and democracy
Dependent variable: dummy for reform reversal in country, sector, year
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)                  (4)
Lagged democracy                            -.006         -.009        -.008                -.009
                                           [.014]        [.017]        [.014]               [.018]

Lagged level of index                            .118***       .210***       .115***       .212***
                                                  [.013]        [.018]        [.014]        [.020]

Country FE                                          Y             Y             Y             Y
Sector FE                                           Y             Y             Y             Y
Year FE                                             Y             Y             Y             Y
Country*Sector FE                                                 Y                           Y
Sector*Year FE                                                                  Y             Y

Observations                                      20,123       20,123        20,123        20,123



Note. The regressions are estimated by OLS. Reform reversal is defined by a decrease in the level of
the reform index. Standard errors are denoted in parentheses.***, ** and * denote statistical
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent respectively.




                                               51
