                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE INCIDENCE OF AN OIL GLUT:
              WHO BENEFITS FROM CHEAP CRUDE OIL IN THE MIDWEST?

                                           Severin Borenstein
                                             Ryan Kellogg

                                         Working Paper 18127
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18127


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012




This research was supported in part under a research contract from the California Energy Commission
to the Energy Institute at Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Severin Borenstein and Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who Benefits from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?
Severin Borenstein and Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 18127
June 2012
JEL No. L71,L95,Q41

                                              ABSTRACT

Beginning in early 2011, crude oil production in the U.S. Midwest and Canada surpassed the pipeline
capacity to transport it to the Gulf Coast where it could access the world oil market. As a result, the
U.S. “benchmark” crude oil price in Cushing, Oklahoma, declined substantially relative to internationally
traded oil. In this paper, we study how this development affected prices for refined products, focusing
on the markets for motor gasoline and diesel. We find that the relative decrease in Midwest crude oil
prices did not pass through to wholesale gasoline and diesel prices. This result is consistent with evidence
that the marginal gallon of fuel in the Midwest is still imported from coastal locations. Our findings
imply that investments in new pipeline infrastructure between the Midwest and the Gulf Coast, such
as the southern segment of the controversial Keystone XL pipeline, will not raise gasoline prices in
the Midwest.


Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
borenste@haas.berkeley.edu

Ryan Kellogg
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kelloggr@umich.edu
1. Introduction
        It is often said that the crude oil market is “global”. That is, the relative ease with which
oil can be shipped around the world implies that prices for oil in different locations (but of a sim-
ilar grade) will be closely tied by an arbitrage condition. Beginning in early 2011, however, a
substantial, persistent differential arose between the price of crude oil in the United States’ Mid-
west and international prices at “on the water” locations. In particular, the two most well-known
benchmark crude oil prices—Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI)—diverged substantially.
Brent crude oil contracts have a delivery point in the North Sea, and most other on the water
pricing points, including those on the U.S. Gulf Coast, follow Brent closely. WTI is priced at
Cushing, Oklahoma, which is connected to water via pipelines to the Gulf Coast.
        Figure 1 shows spot prices for WTI, Brent, and Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS) crude oil
from 2006 through 2011. The LLS price, set near the Gulf Coast, closely matches Brent through-
out the sample. The WTI price, however, falls significantly below the LLS and Brent prices in
2011, and a gap of 20 to 65 cents per gallon persists to the present (in contrast, LLS and Brent
prices have stayed within 7 cents of one another). This gap is generally attributed to substantial
increases in crude oil production in North Dakota (driven by technological advances in produc-
tion of shale oil such as hydraulic fracturing or “fracking”) and oil from the Canadian tar sands,
combined with constrained pipeline capacity between Cushing and the Gulf Coast.1 The resulting
excess supply of oil in the Midwest has therefore decreased the WTI price relative to on the wa-
ter benchmark locations.
        This paper studies the implications of this unusual spatial crude oil price divergence for
prices of refined products in the U.S., focusing on prices for gasoline and diesel. In theory, a
range of outcomes are possible. At one extreme, regional differences in crude prices might pass
through completely to regional gas and diesel prices, so that wholesale prices for these refined
products in the Midwest are substantially lower than prices along the coast. At the other extreme,
the decrease in Midwest crude oil prices may not be passed through at all. As we discuss below,
the realized outcome depends primarily on the availability and locations of refining capacity and
refined product pipeline capacity.
        We find strong evidence that the decrease in the U.S. Midwest crude oil price has not
been passed through to the price of gasoline or diesel. This result is shown graphically in figure
2, which plots monthly average wholesale gasoline prices for both the Midwest and Gulf Coast
(we will later discuss the source of these data in more detail). These two gasoline price series fol-
1
 See, for instance, “Enbridge, Enterprise to double Seaway pipeline capacity,” Reuters, March 27, 2012,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/03/27/us-enbridge-idUSBRE82Q03520120327.


                                                        1
        Figure 1: Brent, West Texas Intermediate (WTI), and Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS)
                                    Spot Prices for Crude Oil




         Notes: Data plotted are monthly averages of daily s pot prices. Delivery points are Cushing,
                Oklahoma for WTI, North Sea for Brent, and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Source:
                Bloomberg.

low each other closely, and we will later show that, per this figure, there is no evidence that de-
pressed oil prices in the Midwest caused gasoline or diesel prices to decline in the Midwest
relative to other U.S. locations. We show that this lack of pass through is closely related to sever-
al other empirical findings: (1) Midwest refiners are operating at or near their capacity; (2) there
has been no build-up of refined product inventory in the Midwest despite a build-up of crude oil
inventory; and (3) the Midwest continues to be a net importer of refined product from coastal
areas. These facts together are consistent with a model in which Midwest refiners are consuming
as much low-priced Midwest crude oil as they have capacity to handle, yet imports of gasoline
and diesel from the coast are still necessary to satisfy demand for refined products in the Mid-
west.
           Our results have two main implications. First, the lack of pass-through implies that refin-
ers, not consumers, are receiving the rents generated by depressed crude oil prices in the
Midwest.2 This outcome does not imply that Midwest refiners are exerting market power, but
rather that they are operating at a near-vertical part of their supply curve given by their capacity
constraint. Second, concern has been expressed that investments in pipeline capacity intended to


2
    This rent allocation is consistent with press reports. See, for instance, Albert (2012).


                                                              2
      Figure 2: PADD 2 (Midwest) and PADD 3 (Gulf Coast) wholesale gasoline prices




     Notes: Data are PADD-month level prices for “gasoline for resale”. PADD denotes
            Petroleum Administration for Defense District. Source: Energy Information
            Administration (EIA).

allow Midwest crude oil to reach the Gulf Coast will increase not only crude oil prices in the
Midwest but gasoline and diesel prices as well (Verleger 2011). Our analysis indicates that, be-
cause Midwest crude oil price shocks are not passed through to refined product markets, increas-
increasing the price of crude oil in the Midwest will not increase gasoline prices there. Instead,
the increase in crude prices will be borne by Midwest refiners.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional back-
ground and lays out a simple theory of pass through in local crude oil and refined product
markets. Section 3 presents our main evidence that the locally depressed crude oil price in the
Midwest has not been passed through to refined product prices. Section 4 presents supporting
evidence that: (a) the marginal gallon of refined product in the Midwest is imported; (b) refinery
utilization in the Midwest is very high and likely constrained; and (c) while inventories of crude
oil the Midwest have risen, inventories of refined product have not. Section 5 concludes by dis-
cussing implications of our results.




                                                 3
         Figure 3: Map of Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs)




     Source: EIA


2. Institutions and Model
       For most of the last century, the most cost-effective way to transport crude oil and refined
petroleum products to and from landlocked parts of the U.S. has been in pipelines. A complex
web of petroleum pipelines covers the country. For technical reasons, crude oil and refined prod-
ucts must travel in separate pipelines and those pipelines can flow only in one direction. Both of
these attributes can be changed, but doing so requires months or years and costs millions of dol-
lars. Where water borne transport is available, it is quite cost effective, but that is not an option
for transport to landlocked locations. Crude and refined products can also be transported by rail
and truck, but these are much more expensive options and are generally used only for short dis-
tances and in areas with sparse demand.
       During World War II, the U.S. government designated Petroleum Administration for De-
fense Districts (PADDs) to aid in planning and allocation of oil and refined products. The
country was divided up into five PADDs, of which the Northeastern PADD has since been divid-
ed into three sub-PADDs. The result is shown in figure 3. The PADDs correspond roughly to
areas within which transportation is relatively unconstrained and between which bottlenecks or
transport barriers potentially exist. Until recently, however, PADDs 1, 2, and 3 were considered
to be quite well integrated with one another at nearly all times. PADD 3 (New Mexico, Texas and



                                                 4
                       Figure 4: Map of major U.S. crude oil pipelines




     Source: Canada’s National Energy Board (NEB)

most of the Gulf Coast) has been the primary oil production and refining area of the U.S. as well
as the primary receiving point for imported crude oil, receiving about half of all crude imported
to the U.S. Historically, PADD 3 has exported both crude oil and refined products to PADDs 1
and 2, which have had very limited oil production and modest refining capacity. The prices of
crude oil at the major pricing locations across these PADDs have until recently stayed very much
in sync with one another, as shown in figure 1. In fact, the primary crude oil pricing point in the
U.S. and the delivery point for futures contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX) has been Cushing, Oklahoma, in PADD 2, because many pipelines that carry crude
converge at Cushing (figure 4). This location was therefore thought to minimize basis risk due to
its minimal transportation constraints to major oil markets.
       Beginning around January 2011, the tight link between crude oil prices in PADDs 2 and 3
changed with greatly increased oil production from the Bakken oil shale formation in North Da-
kota and the tar sands area of Alberta, Canada. Figure 5 illustrates this production increase and
shows that it accelerated, particularly in North Dakota, in early 2011. The primary transport route
for oil produced in these regions is through pipelines that carry it to Cushing and from there to
the Gulf Coast. The increased production has created a glut of supply at Cushing that exceeds the


                                                 5
                                                           Figure 5: Midwest and Canadian tar sands oil production
                                                    3000
          Crude oil production in barrels per day               Alberta bitumen / heavy oil
                                                    2500        Other Midwest (PADD 2)
                                                                North Dakota
                                                    2000

                                                    1500

                                                    1000

                                                     500

                                                      0



      Notes: U.S. data were sourced from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).
             Canadian data were sourced from the National Energy Board of Canada and include
             upgraded bitumen and heavy crude oil produced from Alberta.

pipeline capacity from there to the Gulf Coast. As a result, the price of crude oil in Cushing has
declined relative to the Gulf Coast (and North Sea) price, as shown in figure 1.3
         We study the economic incidence of this bottleneck, which has caused virtually identical
quality crude oil to be 20 to 65 cents per gallon less expensive at Cushing and elsewhere in
PADD 2 than along the Gulf Coast since the beginning of 2011. While the costs of this bottle-
neck are borne by oil producers, it is not clear a priori who benefits from the reduced price of
crude oil in the Midwest. To the extent that this local price reduction is passed through to prices
for refined products—primarily gasoline and diesel fuel—then Midwest consumers benefit. Oth-
erwise, the benefits are captured by Midwest refiners.



3
  Other modes of transportation—particularly rail transport—that are more expensive than pipeline transportation
may be mitigating the impact of the pipeline bottleneck on the PADD 2 to PADD 3 price differential. Indeed, Peters
and Lefebvre (2011) reports that investment in Midwestern railroad tank car and depot capacity has substantially
increased since early 2011. Because estimates of the cost of railroad transportation ($0.12 to $0.24 per gallon (Peters
and Lefebvre 2011)) are smaller than the observed PADD 2 to PADD 3 price differential, it appears that either rail-
road transportation is capacity constrained or that railroad owners are exerting substantial market power.


                                                                                     6
A simple model of refined product supply and demand
         To see how a broad range of pass-through rates are theoretically possible and to under-
stand how pass-through relates to other observables such as PADD-level trade flows, refinery
throughput, and inventories, we consider a simple two-region model in which production, trans-
portation and refining are all supplied competitively. We call the two regions PADD 2 and ROW,
for rest of world. We assume that the ROW market is very large, so that production and refining
shocks in PADD 2 do not significantly affect ROW prices, even if transportation capacity is un-
constrained. This assumption reflects the fact that the crude oil production of PADD 2 constitutes
only a small share of global crude production.4
         We assume that transportation has a simple technology of sunk pipeline costs and zero
marginal costs, though the qualitative analysis isn’t changed if there are small marginal transport
costs (relative to the value of the product). For a given cost of crude, refineries have essentially
constant marginal cost (MC) for quantities well below their capacity constraint, strictly upward
sloping MC as quantity approaches capacity, and then vertical MC at capacity. For the purpose
of this theoretical discussion, we refer to all refined product output as “gasoline,” though the
term is meant to include diesel and other refined products.
         For given prices of crude in PADD 2 and ROW, four possible equilibrium cases for the
PADD 2 gasoline market are illustrated in figure 6. D2 is the native demand for gasoline in
PADD 2. There is pipeline export capacity for gasoline and a different import capacity. These
capacity constraints are shown as horizontal segments in Dnet, the net demand for gasoline in
PADD 2, accounting for imports and exports. These segments are horizontal because if the price
in PADD 2 is less than the price in ROW, PROW, the export pipeline will be used to capacity and
the net demand for gasoline in PADD 2 will be the native demand shifted out by the capacity of


4
  During 2011, the bottleneck between PADD 2 and the Gulf Coast likely reduced supply outside PADD 2 by an
average of less than 500,000 barrels per day (this value is the total increase in North Dakota’s and Canada’s daily
crude oil production between January and December 2011, according to the EIA and Canada’s National Energy
Board) in a global market of about 90 million barrels per day. The small impact of this supply restriction is unlikely
to be detectable in world oil prices (such as that for Brent crude). Relieving the bottleneck would almost surely re-
duce Gulf Coast and rest-of-world crude prices very slightly and increase the Cushing crude price substantially, until
it was once again very close to the Gulf Coast price. For similar reasons, relieving the bottleneck is also unlikely to
raise overall U.S. (i.e., not just PADD 2) and world gasoline prices. A recent report (Swift 2012) claims that the in-
crease in the PADD 2 oil price following a debottlenecking would reduce PADD 2 refinery utilization, and that
because PADD 2 refineries are particularly tuned to produce large amounts of gasoline (rather than diesel), the re-
sulting decrease in PADD 2 gasoline production will increase overall U.S. gasoline prices by decreasing the world
supply of gasoline. However, as with the crude oil market, the large size of the world gasoline market implies that
the price effect of a decrease in PADD 2 refinery utilization would be very small in magnitude. Moreover, our find-
ings suggest that the change in PADD 2 refinery utilization following debottlenecking would itself be very small, as
utilization increased only slightly when the Midwest oil glut began in 2011 (see figure 9).


                                                          7
the export pipeline. If, on the other hand, P2>PROW, the import pipeline will be fully utilized, and
net demand in PADD 2 will be shifted in by the import pipeline capacity.
        We assume that the constant MC for PADD 2 production quantities well below capacity
is at a level below the ROW price of gasoline. This assumption is likely to hold for two reasons.
First, we are considering only cases in which crude in PADD 2 is as cheap or cheaper than in
ROW. Second, refineries are very capital intensive so that equilibrium prices will typically in-
clude some quasi-rents to capital owners.
        As shown in figure 6, the equilibrium PADD 2 gasoline price and trade flows depend on
where the PADD 2 gasoline supply curve is relative to net demand. In case (a), the gasoline re-
fining capacity in PADD 2 is small relative to demand so that, even utilizing the full import
capacity for gasoline, the gasoline price in PADD 2 is still higher than in ROW. In case (b),
PADD 2 refining capacity is larger so that, even though PADD 2 must still import gasoline, the
import pipeline capacity is unconstrained. In this case, arbitrage implies that the PADD 2 gaso-
line price must equal the ROW price. Case (c) is similar to case (b) in that pipelines are
unconstrained, except now refining capacity is sufficiently large that PADD 2 is a net exporter of
gasoline rather than a net importer. Finally, in case (d) the PADD 2 refining capacity is so large
that the export pipeline is at its capacity. In this case, the PADD 2 gasoline price will be below
the ROW price.
        To see how the different cases have different implications for pass-through, consider an
exogenous shock (such as an improvement in fracking technology) that creates a large increase
in oil production in PADD 2 so that the PADD 2 crude price falls relative to ROW.5 Will this
price decrease be passed through to the PADD 2 gasoline price? The decrease in the PADD 2
crude price will shift down the refiners’ supply curve. Thus, if the market is initially in case (b)
or (c) and remains in one of these two cases following the crude oil shock, then pass-through will
be zero because the PADD 2 gasoline price will remain tied by arbitrage to the ROW price.
PADD 2 refinery throughput may, however, increase to the extent that refiners are on the upward
sloping rather than vertical part of their supply curve.
        If, on the other hand, the market is initially in case (d), there will be at least partial pass-
through: the export pipeline constraint prevents gasoline market arbitrage so that the PADD 2
supply curve shifts down along the downward sloping PADD 2 demand curve, reducing the
PADD 2 gasoline price and increasing PADD 2 refinery throughput. Pass-through will be 100%

5
  We recognize that the realized decrease in the PADD 2 oil price may be partially mitigated by downstream re-
sponses, particularly increases in PADD 2 refinery throughput. That response would not change the qualitative
effect of the increased crude oil supply, however.


                                                      8
        Figure 6: Simple model of four cases for the PADD 2 refined product market

          P2
                    S2a            S2b                    S2c                              S2d




                                                                      Export Capacity



       PROW
        MC2
                                    Import Capacity




                                                                        D2              Dnet


                       K2a            K2b                       K2c                              K2d   Q2


if both the initial and final equilibria are such that refiners are operating on the flat part of their
supply curve (the specific case shown in the figure). Partial pass-through occurs when refiners
are on the upward sloping part of their supply curve (or if the market is initially in case (c) but is
pushed by the supply shock into case (d)).
       If the market is initially in case (a), in which the gasoline import pipeline is capacity con-
strained, there are two possibilities. If, as drawn in figure 6, PADD 2 refineries are also initially
capacity constrained, the decrease in the PADD 2 crude price will not pass through to the PADD
2 gasoline price, nor will refinery throughput be affected. Partial pass-through is possible, how-
ever, to the extent that PADD 2 refineries are initially on the upward sloping portions of their
supply curves. In this case, refinery throughput will increase.
       To summarize, so long as there is unconstrained gasoline pipeline capacity between
PADD 2 and ROW, we would expect to see essentially no pass-through of PADD 2’s decrease in
crude oil prices. If pipeline export of gasoline from PADD 2 is (or becomes) constrained, some
or all of the crude price drop will pass through to PADD 2 gasoline prices. In the final case (a) in



                                                      9
which pipeline imports of gasoline to PADD 2 are constrained, zero or partial pass-through may
occur. In each of these cases, PADD 2 refinery utilization may increase. Thus, an examination of
trade flows will have more power to discern which case is in effect than will an examination of
refinery throughput.
        Finally, the different cases have implications for how PADD 2 gasoline inventories may
be expected to change following the decrease in PADD 2 crude prices. The incentive to inventory
gasoline arises from the difference between the expected future gasoline price and the current
price in PADD 2. If import and export capacities are unconstrained (cases (b) and (c)), then these
prices will be the expected future and current prices in ROW. Thus, in these cases we should ex-
pect that changes in PADD 2 inventories will be similar to changes in ROW. Further, to the
extent that firms hold no-change forecasts of future ROW prices, we should see essentially no
change in inventories.6
        In case (d), however, the decrease in the PADD 2 crude price reduces the PADD 2 gaso-
line price relative to ROW. In this case, the change in PADD 2 inventories will be determined by
beliefs about the future gasoline price in PADD 2. Given a belief that investments in crude export
pipeline capacity will increase the future PADD 2 oil price back toward parity with the ROW
price—increasing the future PADD 2 gasoline price as well—firms will have an incentive to in-
crease their gasoline inventories more in PADD 2 than in ROW. A similar incentive will exist in
case (a) to the extent that the initial decrease in the PADD 2 oil price is passed through to the
PADD 2 gasoline price.


3. Data and Analysis of Pass-through
        In this section, we test directly whether, and to what extent, the decrease in PADD 2 oil
prices was passed through to PADD 2 prices for refined products. Section 4 then examines
PADD 2 trade flows, refinery throughput, and inventories to assess the extent to which they
change in a way that is consistent with the theoretical model discussed above.
        Most of the data for this study come from the U.S. Energy Information Administration
(EIA). Data on wholesale prices for refined products (called “sales for resale” in the EIA data)
are available monthly at both the state and PADD level.7 Spot prices for crude oil were obtained

6
  Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2010) shows that no-change forecasts for crude oil prices generally outperform all
other forecasts, and Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2011) shows that consumers generally have no-change forecasts
of the future price of gasoline.
7
  “Sales for resale” denotes prices for sales on wholesale markets to “purchasers who are other-than-ultimate con-
sumers” according to the EIA. We use the “motor gasoline” price series for gasoline and the “no. 2 distillate” series
for diesel. Monthly average prices are volume weighted.


                                                         10
from Bloomberg; we calculate monthly spot crude oil prices by taking unweighted averages of
the daily raw data.
          Inspection of figures 1 and 2 suggests that pass-through of the post-2010 decrease in
PADD 2 crude oil prices has been very limited. Here, we study pass-through more formally with
two types of regression-based tests. Our first test is that given by specification (1) below, which
examines the extent to which changes in the difference between PADD 2 and PADD 3 crude oil
prices correlate with changes in the difference between PADD 2 and PADD 3 refined product
prices.

                                       G2t  G3t  0  1 (C2t  C3t )   t                                  (1)

          In (1), G2t and G3t denote the average prices of gasoline in PADDs 2 and 3 in month t,
while C2t and C3t denote the WTI and LLS prices, respectively, for crude oil in month t. The pa-
rameter β1 denotes the extent to which changes in the PADD 2 to PADD 3 crude price differential
are passed through to the PADD 2 to PADD 3 gasoline price differential.
          Estimating equation (1) by ordinary least squares raises the issue of the endogeneity of
the crude price differential. If there is a shock to local demand for refined product in PADD 2
relative to PADD 3 that affects the relative refined product prices, then that shock also may
change the relative crude prices between the PADDs. Such endogeneity, however, would clearly
bias estimates in the positive direction. It is hard to see how endogenous crude price could incor-
rectly lead to the conclusion that the pass through is zero. Moreover, given the substantial
increase in crude oil production in PADD 2 during the time period under study, it seems likely
that regional shocks to crude oil markets are much more substantial than regional gasoline mar-
ket shocks during this time. We therefore treat these regressions and those that follow as
measuring the impact of shocks to crude oil differentials on refined product differentials.
          Estimates of specification (1) are given in table 1, column 1. The estimate of β1 is small
in magnitude at -0.003, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated, with a standard error
of 0.026.8 This result accords with figures 1 and 2 and supports the inference that the decrease in
Midwest crude oil prices that began in 2011 has not passed through to gasoline markets.
          One potential concern with the estimate of specification (1) is that it matches PADD-level
averages of gasoline prices to prices for crude oil that are for delivery to very specific locations:
Cushing, Oklahoma and St. James, Louisiana. We address this concern by re-estimating specifi-

8
  Standard errors for specification (1) are Newey-West with 12 lags to account for seasonal correlation in the residu-
als. These standard errors are sometimes smaller and sometimes larger than when only Eicker-White standard errors
are used. For example, the Eicker-White robust standard error for β1 in both columns I and II is 0.031.


                                                         11
Table 1: OLS regressions of PADD 2 to PADD 3 refined product price differentials on PADD
                         2 to PADD 3 crude oil price differentials

                                           I                   II                           III                  IV
                                         Gasoline price differences                         Diesel price differences
                                    PADD 2 minus           Oklahoma minus            PADD 2 minus            Oklahoma minus
Coefficient on covariate:             PADD 3                  Louisiana                PADD 3                   Louisiana
WTI crude price minus                    -0.003                  -0.047                    0.027                   0.048
LLS crude price                          (0.026)                 (0.041)                  (0.026)                 (0.057)
                                          0.043                   0.012                    0.063                    0.069
Constant
                                         (0.010)                 (0.017)                  (0.011)                  (0.026)
  2
R                                        0.0001                   0.012                    0.009                   0.011
N                                          72                       72                       72                      72
Notes : Crude prices are monthly averages of daily spot prices, all in $/gallon. Delivery points are Cushing, Oklahoma for WTI
and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Gasoline and diesel prices are month-level prices for "sales for resale" obtained from the EIA.
Data span 2006-2011. Standard errors are Newey-West with 12 lags.



cation (1) using only gasoline prices for Oklahoma and Louisiana. The results of this regression
are given in column II of table 1. Again, the estimate of β1 is small in magnitude, statistically in-
significant, and precisely estimated, consistent with no pass-through.
         Columns III and IV repeat columns I and II but use prices for diesel rather than prices for
gasoline. In line with our gasoline price results, we find no evidence that low Midwest crude oil
prices have passed through to markets for diesel.
         Our second specification is given by equation (2) below, which studies how PADD 2 gas-
oline prices are determined by PADD 3 oil prices and the difference between PADD 2 and PADD
3 oil prices. We estimate this equation in first differences both because we are interested in the
relationship between gasoline and oil prices in the short-run rather than long-run (when pipeline
construction will tend to arbitrage spatial price differences away) and because oil and gasoline
prices are generally found to be very persistent, so that a unit root cannot be rejected (see, for
example, Borenstein, Cameron, and Gilbert 1997 and Chen, Finney, and Lai 2005).

                                      G2t  0  1C3t  2 (C2t  C3t )   2t                                          (2)

         As with specification (1), C2t is given by the WTI crude oil price, and C3t is given by the
LLS crude oil price. We estimate equation (2) using state-by-month level gasoline prices as the
dependent variable so that the regression uses a panel across the 15 states in PADD 2 over 2006-
2011. We cluster standard errors on month to account for cross-sectional correlation of residuals.


                                                                12
                 Table 2: First-differenced OLS regressions of PADD 2 refined
                       product prices on crude oil prices and differentials

                                                                 I                        II
                 Coefficient on covariate:                Δ(Gasoline price)         Δ(Diesel price)
                                                                  1.074                   1.048
                 Δ(LLS crude price)
                                                                 (0.106)                 (0.058)
                 Δ(WTI crude price minus                         -0.178                   0.180
                 LLS crude price)                                (0.204)                 (0.209)
                   2
                 R                                               0.714                    0.820
                 N                                               1063                     1065
                 Notes : Crude prices are monthly averages of daily spot prices, all in $/gallon. Delivery
                 points are Cushing, Oklahoma for WTI and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Gasoline
                 and diesel prices are state-month level prices in PADD 2 for "sales for resale"
                 obtained from the EIA. Data span 2006-2011. The difference in the number of
                 obeservations between columns I and II is due to a missing gasoline observation for
                 Kansas in 2006. Standard errors are clustered on month-of-sample.


        Results from estimating equation (2) are given in table 2. Column I uses gasoline prices
as the dependent variable, while column II uses diesel prices. While the estimates are somewhat
imprecise, we find in both regressions that changes in the PADD 3 crude oil price pass through
essentially completely to PADD 2 refined products prices (the estimate of β1 is statistically indis-
tinguishable from one) but that pass-through of the difference between PADD 2 and PADD 3
crude prices, β2, is statistically indistinguishable from zero.
        These results are consistent with cases (b) and (c) in section 2, in which Midwest refined
product prices are tightly linked to the Gulf Coast, and therefore to world crude oil prices, be-
cause the pipelines carrying refined products between these areas are not constrained. As a result,
changes in Midwest crude oil prices do not move Midwest refined product prices. Section 4 be-
low provides additional evidence in support of these cases by studying data on product flows,
refinery throughput, and inventories.
        In the appendix, we present additional evidence showing that the pass-through results we
obtained for Midwest refined product prices also hold for PADD 4, the Rocky Mountains area.
Because PADD 4 is connected to the Gulf Coast only through PADD 2, PADD 4 has also experi-
enced a relative decrease in crude oil prices, though not as large a relative decline because PADD
4 crude prices have been lower than elsewhere in the U.S. throughout our sample period. Figures
A1 and A2 and tables A1 and A2 show that this decrease in PADD 4 crude oil prices has not
passed through to PADD 4 prices for refined products.



                                                            13
                    Figure 7: PADD 2 net flows of gasoline and distillate (diesel)




Notes: Data are PADD-month level net imports (by tanker, pipeline, and/or barge) from other PADDs.
       The data do not include international trade. Source: EIA.


4. Why Hasn’t Cheap Crude in the Midwest Lowered Gas Prices?
         Why did the decrease in PADD 2 crude oil prices fail to pass through to PADD 2 gasoline
and diesel prices? To some, this outcome may raise concerns of nefarious behavior on the part of
PADD 2 refiners. The economic evidence, however, supports a benign explanation: figure 7
shows that PADD 2 has been a net importer of refined product for the entire period of our sam-
ple.9 Moreover, net imports to PADD 2 were lower in 2011 than in the previous 5 years,
suggesting that import pipelines were not constrained. This outcome corresponds to case (b)
from section 2: the marginal gallon of refined product sold in PADD 2, both before and after the
PADD 2 oil price decrease, has been produced outside of PADD 2 and therefore reflects the mar-



9
  Flow data for crude oil show that PADD 2 is also a net importer of crude. At first glance, these data appear to con-
tradict the premise that PADD 2 is export-constrained in the crude oil market. However, the PADD 2 crude imports
come from the Permian Basin in West Texas. While this area is technically part of PADD 3, it is economically part
of PADD 2 in that there exists substantial pipeline capacity to carry oil from the Permian Basin to Cushing, Okla-
homa but very little direct capacity to the Gulf Coast (see figure 4). Indeed, the industry broadly considers the price
for Permian crude to be the WTI price at Cushing (see Alpert 2012, for instance). In contrast, the Permian Basin
does not, to the best of our knowledge, export significant quantities of refined product to PADD 2.


                                                         14
           Figure 8: Inventories of gasoline and distillate (diesel) in PADDs 2 and 3




Notes: Data are PADD-month level stocks held at, or in transit to, refineries and bulk terminals, and
stocks in pipelines. Source: EIA.

ginal cost of more expensive crude that is processed elsewhere. The crude oil market has become
separated between the PADDs, but the refined product markets have remained integrated.
        This conclusion is also supported by data on inventories of refined product. Cases (b) and
(c) predict no change in PADD 2 refined product inventories relative to other locations outside
the Midwest, while case (d)—which implies substantial price pass-through—is likely to be ac-
companied by an increase in PADD 2 refined product inventories. Figure 8 shows that both
gasoline and diesel inventories were fairly constant in PADD 2 during 2011, while they rose
somewhat in PADD 3. There is no evidence of a buildup of PADD 2 product inventories in re-
sponse to temporarily depressed product prices, as suggested by case (d).
        The discussion in section 2 indicated that refinery utilization data would not help to dis-
tinguish among the possible cases because utilization could increase in any of them. Figure 9
does not reveal an obvious pattern in PADD 2 utilization versus PADD 3. By the end of 2011,
however, PADD 2 utilization was nearly 5 percentage points higher than in PADD 3, and PADD
2 utilization was higher than it had been in the previous 5 years. This increase in PADD 2 utiliza-
tion is consistent with the increase in PADD 2 refining margins since early 2011.



                                                    15
                     Figure 9: Operable refinery utilization in PADDs 2 and 3




Notes: Data are PADD-month level operable refinery utilization. Source: EIA.

        These observations fit together in a unified picture. The increased production of crude oil
in the upper Midwest and Canada over the past two years has led to a bottleneck in shipping
crude out of PADD 2. PADD 2 has reduced net imports of refined products, but it has not be-
come a net exporter, let alone a large enough net exporter to congest transport of refined product
out of PADD 2. The ability to arbitrage refined product prices, but not oil prices, between
PADDs has resulted in essentially no pass-through of the reduction in the PADD 2 oil price to
PADD 2 product prices. This situation has created very large refining margins in PADD 2 and
also appears to be causing higher utilization of refineries in PADD 2 relative to other parts of the
U.S. This does not imply that refineries in PADD 2 have exercised market power; in fact, the
high utilization of operable capacity suggests that they have responded to the higher margins by
trying to squeeze out more output.10




10
   The story for PADD 4 is similar, except PADD 4 has varied between being a small net importer and a small net
exporter of refined product. In 2011, PADD 4 net flows were close to zero. As in PADD 2, refined product invento-
ries were flat in PADD 4 during 2011.


                                                       16
5. Conclusions and Implications
         Beginning in 2011, increases in crude oil production from North Dakota’s shale resource
and Canada’s tar sands created a transportation bottleneck as the pipelines capable of carrying oil
from the Midwest to the Gulf Coast reached full capacity. This constraint caused the benchmark
Midwest crude oil price to fall substantially below the “world” oil price on the Gulf Coast, de-
spite the fact that these two prices have historically been very close to one another. We show in
this paper that this relative price change has not passed through to markets for refined products:
Midwest wholesale prices for gasoline and diesel have not fallen relative to those along the Gulf
Coast. This result is explained by the fact that the marginal gallon of gasoline (and diesel) in the
Midwest is being imported from the Gulf Coast, where it is refined using relatively expensive
crude oil. In other words, while trade in crude oil between the Midwest and Gulf Coast is capaci-
ty constrained, trade in refined products is not, and in fact the Midwest is actually importing
rather than exporting gasoline and diesel.
         Our results imply that the primary beneficiaries of depressed Midwest crude oil prices
have been Midwest refiners rather than Midwest consumers (Midwest and Canadian crude oil
producers are, of course, bearing the costs). We emphasize that this outcome does not imply that
Midwest refiners are exerting market power. Instead, they are operating at or near their produc-
tion capacity while benefitting from the fact that the marginal refined product suppliers in PADD
2—refineries on the Gulf Coast—are producing from more-expensive crude oil.
         The substantial rents accruing to Midwest refiners and to holders of the limited Midwest
crude oil export capacity strongly suggest that the present situation is not a long-run equilibrium.
In fact, several investment projects have already been announced or are underway that would
increase Midwest crude oil export capacity,11 including construction of the southern segment of
the controversial Keystone XL pipeline (the northern segment would expand capacity from the
Canadian tar sands to the Midwest). These projects will relieve the Midwest crude oil export bot-
tleneck as they come on-line, bringing the Midwest oil price closer to, if not ultimately back into
equality with, the Gulf Coast price. This re-equilibration will primarily increase the Midwest
crude oil price rather than decrease the Gulf Coast price because the Gulf Coast is tied to the
very large world oil market, of which the Midwest is only a small part.
         The merits of these capacity expansions—particularly the Keystone XL project—have
been a matter of public debate on both environmental grounds and the extent to which it will im-

11
   Another type of investment that would dissipate these rents would be additions to Midwest refinery capacity. The
fact that investors are sponsoring crude oil pipeline projects rather than refinery projects suggests that the latter op-
tion is relatively expensive and/or time consuming.


                                                          17
pact U.S. gasoline prices. While this paper is silent on environmental impacts, it does imply that
the impacts on gasoline prices will be extremely limited. Because expanding Midwest crude oil
export capacity will have only a minimal impact on Gulf Coast and world oil prices, U.S. con-
sumers outside the Midwest will not experience a decline in gasoline prices. As for Midwest con-
consumers, our results imply that capacity expansions that increase the Midwest crude oil price
will not increase the Midwest gasoline price. This price is already being set by gasoline refined
using Gulf Coast rather than Midwest oil, despite the depressed Midwest oil price. Resolving the
Midwest crude oil transportation bottleneck will not affect this situation, thereby leaving Mid-
west gasoline prices unaffected as well.



References

Albert, Bill, “Going with the Flow,” Barron’s, 31 March, 2012.

Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson, “Forecasting the Price of Oil,” in Graham
       Elliot and Allen Timmerman, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2, Amsterdam:
       North-Holland, forthcoming.

Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee, “What do Consumers Believe about
       Future Gasoline Prices?” NBER working paper #16974 (2011).

Borenstein, Severin, A. Colin Cameron, and Richard Gilbert, “Do Gasoline Prices Respond
       Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112
       (1997), 305-339.

Chen, Li-Hsueh, Miles Finney, and Kon S. Lai, “A Threshold Cointegration Analysis of Asym-
       metric Price Transmission from Crude Oil to Gasoline Prices,” Economics Letters 89
       (2005), 233-239.

Peters, Mark and Ben Lefebvre, “Riding the Dakota Oil Boom,” Wall Street Journal, 2 Novem-
       ber, 2011.

Swift, Anthony, “Keystone XL: A Tar Sands Pipeline to Increase Oil Prices,” Natural Resources
       Defense Council report (2012).

Verleger, Philip, “If gas prices go up further, blame Canada,” Star Tribune, 13 March, 2011.


                                               18
Appendix to “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who Benefits from Cheap Crude
                           Oil in the Midwest?
            Figure A1: Wyoming (PADD 4) and Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS)
                             Spot Prices for Crude Oil




    Notes: Data plotted are monthly averages of daily spot prices. Delivery points are
          Guernsey, WY for Wyoming and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Source:
          Bloomberg.

Figure A2: PADD 4 (Rocky Mountains) and PADD 3 (Gulf Coast) wholesale gasoline prices




    Notes: Data sourced from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) and are
          PADD-month level prices for “gasoline for resale”. PADD denotes Petroleum
          Administration for Defense District.


                                            A1
      Table A1: OLS regressions of PADD 4 to PADD 3 refined product price differentials on
                        PADD 4 to PADD 3 crude oil price differentials

                                           I                   II                           III                  IV
                                         Gasoline price differences                         Diesel price differences
                                    PADD 4 minus            Wyoming minus            PADD 4 minus                Wyoming minus
Coefficient on covariate:             PADD 3                  Louisiana                PADD 3                      Louisiana
Wyoming crude price                       0.057                   0.056                   -0.040                    -0.114
minus LLS crude price                    (0.112)                 (0.136)                  (0.092)                   (0.138)
                                          0.089                   0.090                    0.147                     0.147
Constant
                                         (0.043)                 (0.055)                  (0.043)                   (0.069)
  2
R                                         0.006                   0.004                    0.004                     0.018
N                                           72                      72                       72                        72
Notes : Crude prices are monthly averages of daily spot prices, all in $/gallon. Delivery points are Guernsey, WY for Wyoming
and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Gasoline and diesel prices are month-level prices for "sales for resale" obtained from the EIA.
Data span 2006-2011. Standard errors are Newey-West with 12 lags.




                            Table A2: First-differenced OLS regressions of PADD 4
                           refined product prices on crude oil prices and differentials

                                                                    III                      IV
                     Coefficient on covariate:                Δ(Gasoline price)         Δ(Diesel price)

                                                                     1.044                    1.071
                     Δ(LLS crude price)
                                                                    (0.124)                  (0.086)
                     Δ(Wyoming crude price                           0.096                   -0.136
                     minus LLS crude price)                         (0.187)                  (0.201)
                       2
                     R                                               0.629                    0.671
                     N                                                353                      353
                     Notes : Crude prices are monthly averages of daily spot prices, all in $/gallon. Delivery
                     points are Guernsey, WY for Wyoming and St. James, Louisiana for LLS. Gasoline
                     and diesel prices are state-month level prices in PADD 4 for "sales for resale"
                     obtained from the EIA. Data span 2006-2011. Standard errors are clustered on month-
                     of-sample.




                                                               A2
