                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DISTANCE AND POLITICAL BOUNDARIES:
        ESTIMATING BORDER EFFECTS UNDER INEQUALITY CONSTRAINTS.

                                          Fernando Borraz
                                          Alberto Cavallo
                                          Roberto Rigobon
                                          Leandro Zipitría

                                        Working Paper 18122
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18122


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We are grateful to Fernando Antía and Bruno Delgado at the General Directorate of Commerce of
Uruguay for providing us with the data. We thank seminar participants at the University of Wisconsin
-Madison, MIT, the Central Bank of Peru, the Central Bank of Uruguay, Universidad de San Andres,
dECON, and Universita di Venezia for all their comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18122.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Fernando Borraz, Alberto Cavallo, Roberto Rigobon, and Leandro Zipitría. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Distance and Political Boundaries: Estimating Border Effects under Inequality Constraints.
Fernando Borraz, Alberto Cavallo, Roberto Rigobon, and Leandro Zipitría
NBER Working Paper No. 18122
June 2012, Revised August 2014
JEL No. F40,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

The “border effect” literature finds that political borders have a very large impact on relative prices,
implicitly adding several thousands of miles to trade. In this paper we show that the standard empirical
specification suffers from selection bias, and propose a new methodology based on quantile regressions.
Using a novel data set from Uruguay, we apply our procedure to measure the segmentation introduced
by city borders. City borders should matter little for trade. We find that when the standard methodology
is used, two supermarkets separated by 10 kilometers across two different cities have the same price
dispersion as two supermarkets separated by 30 kilometers within the same city; so the city border
triples the distance. When our methodology is used, the city border effect becomes insignificant. We
further test our methodology using online prices for the largest supermarket chain in the country, and
show that the “online border” is equivalent to the average distance from the online warehouse to each
of the offline stores.


Fernando Borraz                                    Roberto Rigobon
Banco Central del Uruguay                          MIT Sloan School of Management
Diagonal Fabini 777                                100 Main Street, E62-516
CP: 11100 - Montevideo                             Cambridge, MA 02142
Uruguay                                            and NBER
and dECON-FCS-UdelaR                               rigobon@mit.edu
fborraz@bcu.gub.uy
                                                   Leandro Zipitría
Alberto Cavallo                                    Universidad de Montevideo
MIT Sloan School of Management                     Prudencio de Pena 2440
100 Main Street, E62-512                           CP 11600 Montevideo
Cambridge, MA 02142                                Uruguay
and NBER                                           and Universidad de San Andrés
acavallo@mit.edu                                   leandro.zipitria@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18122
1 Introduction

Political borders can have a signicant impact on relative prices. The degree of price segmen-


tation caused by such boundaries was empirically documented in a seminal paper by Engel


and Rogers (1996), who showed with CPI data that the USCanadian border had an eect


on price dispersion equivalent to adding a distance of at least 1,780 miles between locations


(approximately the distance between Miami and Quebec). Their work spurred a large lit-

                                                                                                    1
erature that found similarly large border eects across countries, states, and even cities.


These results have been heavily debated over the years. Some papers have argued that (i)


the distances have been mis-measured (see Head and Mayer (2002)), (ii) the regressions


suer from aggregation bias (see Evans (2003) and Broda and Weinstein (2008)), (iii) the


gravity equation implied in the standard specication has been misspecied (see Anderson


and van Wincoop (2003) and Hillberry and Hummels (2003)), and that (iv) the regressions


do not have a proper benchmark due to the fact that country distributions of prices are very


dierent across countries (see Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009)). Despite all this work, the


magnitude and reasons behind the segmentation introduced by political borders is still an


open question in the literature.



    In this paper we propose a simple method to estimate the size of the border eect based


on Samuelson's iceberg cost model. This methodology imply that largest price dierences


observed between locations are relevant for transport cost estimation. We rst argue that the


standard regression is based on an arbitrage inequality constraint, and that using all price


observations creates a selection bias that aects both the distance and border coecients (and


therefore the estimates of the border eect). We propose an alternative approach based on


quantile regressions that corrects for the selection bias while simultaneously controlling for

   1 For example, see Parsley and Wei (2001) for results between the US and Japan and Ceglowski (2003)
for the eects of provincial borders in Canada.




                                                  2
potential measurement errors.



     Our method can be explained using a very simple framework along the lines of Engel and


Rogers (1996). Consider the problem of a rm that sets a price bounded by the existence of


an arbitrage constraint. If the arbitrage cost between two establishments (i and                                j)   is   τ,   and


p   denotes the log price in each location, then the arbitrage constraint can be expressed as a


simple inequality:


                                                       |pi − pj | ≤ τ                                                          (1)



where     τ    is a function of distance, political boundaries, and other regional and product


characteristics. The literature typically estimates                 τ   and the border eects by running the

                                                       2
following regression on price dispersion:




                                    |pi,t − pj,t | = α + βDi,j + γBi,j + δXi,j,t + i,j,t                                      (2)




where     pi,t − pj,t    is the log price dierence between locations            i   and   j   at time   t.   The locations


can be countries, provinces, cities or establishments.                    Di,j   is the distance between the two


locations,      Bi,j   is a dummy that takes value 1 if a border exists between locations                      i and j , and
Xi,j,t   is a series of additional controls. In this context, the border eect is the equivalent


number of miles that would produce the same dispersion as the estimated border dummy


coecient        γ.    In its simplest form, it is the ratio      γ/β ,   which means that a bias in either (or


both) of these coecients will have an impact on the estimate of the border eect.



     We argue that           τ    and its determinants cannot be estimated through a simple OLS re-


gression because prices in the two locations are an optimal choice subject to an inequality

    2 A common alternative specication used by papers such as Engel and Rogers (1996) has the standard
deviation     σ (pi,t − pj,t )   instead. In both cases, the objective is to measure the eect of the righ-hand side
variables on price dispersion, which can be done either through the mean of the absolute value or the standard
deviation of the price dierences. Our results do not change if we use the standard deviation. See Broda
and Weinstein (2008) for an overview of the papers that use these two regressions in the literature.




                                                              3
constraint that is not necessarily binding. If the optimal prices of the two stores lie within


the constraint, then their dierence is smaller than          τ   and these observations are not rele-


vant to estimate the arbitrage costs. To illustrate this, consider two markets that are highly


segmented but have identical supply and demand characteristics. Goods will have the same


price across the two locations, but this price gap tells us nothing about the arbitrage costs


or the degree of segmentation between the markets. In fact, all observations within the no-


arbitrage range suer from selection bias, and estimates that use the mean or the standard


deviation of     |p1 − p2 |   will be biased downward as well.



    The arbitrage cost         τ   is better estimated when we use only the largest observed price


dierences between locations.           Those are the observations that provide information about

                                                                                    3
the limit that arbitrage imposes of the magnitude of price dispersion.                  Ideally we would


like to use the maximum observed price gap between locations, but it is potentially sensitive

                               4
to measurement errors.             Instead, we estimate a series of binned-quantile regressions that


allow us to measure the sensitivity of our estimates to the errors-in-variables.                 We start


with the mean price gap between locations (equivalent to the method typically used in the


literature), and then use only the observations in the 80th, 90th, 95th, 99th percentiles, and


the maximum observed price dierence.



    We apply this method to study the impact of city borders on price dispersion in Uruguay.


We use a novel good-level dataset composed by daily prices from 202 UPC-level products


sold in 333 supermarkets across 47 cities collected between 2007 and 2010. When we rst


estimate the border eect using standard methods, we nd that the city border between two

   3 The estimation problem is analogous to estimating using inequality moments as opposed to equality mo-
ments. This area has received signicant attention recently. See for example Andrews, Berry, and Jia (2004),
Andrews and Guggenberger (2009), Andrews and Soares (2010), Andrews and Shi (2014), Ponomareva and
Tamer (2011), and Rosen (2008).
   4 A related idea in the context of trade can be found in Eaton and Kortum (2002) who propose estimating
trade friction using the maximum price dierence. Simonovska and Waugh (2014) criticizes the use of the
maximum price dierence in the estimating strategies, based on the possibility of bias of the estimator on
nite samples.



                                                      4
stores separated by 10 kilometers is larger than 20 kilometers wide, and statistically dierent


from zero. This implies that the border triples the distance of stores across the city borders.


However when we re-estimate using distance-binned quantile regressions, the border declines


until it is not signicantly dierent from zero.            As expected from our discussion both the


distance and border dummy coecients are downward biased in the standard regression, but

                                                    5
the bias is largest on the distance parameter.          As a result, the net impact is that the implied


border eect (in kilometers) falls.



    We perform robustness tests to correct for outliers, product mix, and we change the spec-


ication to include non-linearity and interaction terms. In all of them, the city-border eect


measured in kilometers tends to disappear when higher percentiles are used. Furthermore,


the results are similar at the 99th, 99.5th, 99.9th percentile, and the maximum, suggesting


that the estimates are not signicantly aected by potential errors in the data.



    We further illustrate our methodology to study the dispersion between online and oine


prices.   We use daily prices collected from the website of the largest grocery retailer in


Montevideo, and compare them to the prices in all oine locations of the same retailer. The


oine store's data provide an estimate of the impact of distance on price dispersion across


locations. The online border is simply the distance that would generate the same eect on


online-oine price dispersion observed in the data. When the standard procedure is used,


online and oine markets appear to be very closely integrated, with a border eect of just


1.6 kilometers. However, when we use the 95th percentile of the price gap distribution, the


online border eect becomes 8.8 kilometers, a number close to the actual average physical


distance between the online warehouse (where the online goods are delivered from) and each

                                    6
of the oine stores in the city.

   5 The reason is that price gaps within the arbitrage constraint are less common for observations across
cities, and therefore the border coecient is less aected by the selection bias. Within cities, by contrast,
small price gaps are very frequent and can greatly bias the distance coecient.
   6 The retailer's website indicates that the online prices match those of the store where the orders are



                                                        5
    Our approach and the nature of the data address four additional sources of concerns that


have been raised since the original Engel-Rogers regressions. First, we use product-level data


with identical goods across all locations.         As suggested by Goldberg and Knetter (1997),


product-level data is crucial to understand deviations from the Law of One Price (LOP).


Indeed, Evans (2003) and Broda and Weinstein (2008) argue that a signicant problem in


the border eect literature is the aggregation bias induced by price indexes. Second, we use


retail prices. Hillberry and Hummels (2003) have argued that business-to-business data tends


to overestimate trade ows and to underestimate price dierences within countries. Third,


we know the exact location of each store. As pointed out by Head and Mayer (2002), using


approximate distances (such as from one country capital to another) can greatly overestimate


the border eect. Finally, all the stores in our sample sell the same set of products. As Evans


(2003) points out, the mix of products sold across borders can lead to a bias in the standard


regressions.



    Compared to recent papers in the literature, our results are consistent with Gorod-


nichenko and Tesar (2009), who argue that with cross-country heterogeneity in the dis-


tribution of within-country price dierentials there is no clear benchmark from which to


gauge the eect of the border. We agree with this statement, but we show that even in the


absence of a structural model it is still possible to obtain a simple and reliable estimate for


the magnitude of the border eect using quantile regressions. Our paper is also complemen-


tary to the work of Gopinath, Gourinchas, Hsieh, and Li (2011) who estimate the border


eect by studying the response of average prices in one market to cost shocks in another


market. An advantage of our approach is that it does not require any cost data.

sent from, but it does not provide details on what specic store it is. In order to identify the most likely
candidate, we compared daily online prices for all products with each oine store in the city and found a
location where prices were identical 97.3 percent of the time. That location has an average distance of 7.2
kilometers to all the other stores.




                                                     6
2 Methodology

In this section we present a simple model of price-setting across locations that provides the


inequality we use to estimate arbitrage costs and the border eect. In particular, we propose


a model where the rms' pricing decision is constrained by the ability of the consumer


to arbitrage the price gap between two locations.             Standard OLS regressions used in the


literature consider all pairs of prices, including those that lie within the arbitrage constraint,


which introduces a bias in the estimates of factors that aect the cost to arbitrage, such as


distance and political borders. We propose an alternative methodology that focuses on the


largest observed price dierences between locations using binned-quantile regressions.




2.1 A simple model of price-setting with arbitrage

2.1.1       Consumers




Consider an economy with a mass of consumers uniformly distributed along a line.                         This


line encompasses two cities       (A, B)   of equal distance. There are    J    stores in the economy,    JA
stores in city A and      JB   stores in city B. There is also a border between A and B, in the


sense that consumers pay a cost whenever they cross to another city. This border cost may


arise due to dierences in taxes, convenience in shopping hours, and other characteristics


associated with the city but not driven by distance.               A consumer located on point       `   and


buying in store    i   has an indirect utility function represented by




                                u` (i) = v − θpi − β̃ | ` − `i | −γ̃bi − δ̃Ii                             (3)




where   v   is the reservation price of the consumer, and      θ   captures how sensitive the consumer


is to prices. The rest of the parameters measure transaction costs:               β̃   measures unit trans-



                                                     7
portation costs, multiplied by the distance between the consumer location (`) and the store


position    (`i )   (including information costs about the store, such as knowing the distance to


the store or its prices);          bi   is a dummy that takes value 1 if the consumer and the store are


in dierent cities; and          Ii     measures additional store-specic costs not related with distance,


such as learning the layout and sale events of a given store.



   Since the consumer buys the one item that maximizes his utility, we can compare the

                                                                                   7
price each consumer pays across all possible pairs of stores.                          The consumer     `   weakly prefers


store    i to store j   if   u` (i) ≥ u` (j), for each i, j ∈ J = (JA + JB ), i 6= j .           For simplicity assume


the price elasticity and the transportation cost are symmetric in all locations. This implies


that:


                    v − θpi − β̃ | ` − `i | −γ̃bi − δ̃Ii ≥ v − θpj − β̃ | ` − `j | −γ̃bj − δ̃Ij                        (4)




   Rearranging terms we obtain:



                                           β̃                            γ̃       δ̃
                             pi − p j ≤       (| ` − `j | − | ` − `i |) + M bi,j + M Ii,j                              (5)
                                           θ                             θ        θ


   where      M bij   is equal to 1 if both stores are located in dierent cities and 0 otherwise, and


M Ii,j   measures the incremental information cost incurred by changing the store. Thus for


each pair of stores the consumption decision can be expressed as the result of inequality (6).


The value of the distance terms depends on which store is further away from the consumer.


If the dierence between                | ` − `j | − | ` − `i |    is negative, the price dierence could simply


be dened as         (pj − pi ).   Therefore, the expression is simplied to the absolute dierence of


the location between stores:



                                                     β̃             γ̃       δ̃
                                      | pi − pj |≤      |`i − `j | + M bi,j + M Ii,j                                   (6)
                                                     θ              θ        θ
   7 We require that     v   is large enough so that is   u` (i)   is positive in at least one store.



                                                               8
   Comparing across dierent pairs, if the distance increases, a border exists between the


stores, or there is a positive cost of switching stores, the level of price dispersion rises. The


opposite occurs if consumers are more sensitive to prices. It can be shown that the price space

                                                                                                            8
is not empty and that the inequality constraint is only binding for the marginal consumer.


Where the marginal consumer is traditionally dened as indierent between buying in two


dierent stores. This implies that the rest of the consumers are not indierent between two


stores and always prefer to buy on a particular one. In the end, the marginal consumer is


the one for which the inequality is binding, and denes the demand for each store.




2.1.2   Producers




Assume there are    JA   and   JB   identical producers (or stores) in each city that sell an identical


good at price   pj , where j ∈ J = (JA + JB ).         Each producer maximizes prots, given the prices


of the other stores and subject to the participation constraint of the consumers. Suppose


all producers, except for      j,   are in equilibrium.         Then rm    j   sets its price subject to the


participation constraint of consumer        `:

                                                       Y
                                             max            (pj /p−j )
                                                 pj
                                                        j


                                                  st pj ∈ <+

and to the other    J −1   consumer constraints



                                    β̃             γ̃      δ̃
                    | pi − pj |≤       |`i − `j | + M bij + M Ii,j , ∀i ∈ J, i 6= j
                                    θ              θ       θ

where this condition applies to all the       J       rms in the sample.

  8 See the proof in Appendix A.1




                                                            9
   Firms maximize prots when setting the maximum price for the marginal consumer, as


shown in Appendix A.1. This in turn implies that the inequality will not be binding for the


rest of the consumers. Therefore comparing pairs of prices for all stores to estimate equation


6 will not result in the correct measure of the consumers' parameters, as only those where


the restriction is binding are valid.




2.2 Binned-Quantile Regressions

This model of inequality constraints provides an equation that can be estimated as any other

                                                           9
regression in the literature of border eects.                  In this case, the specication can be dened


as follows


                                 | pi,t − pj,t |≤ βDi,j + γBi,j + δXi,j,t + εi,j,t                                  (7)


                  β̃
where   βDi,j ≡   θ
                       |`i − `j |, γBi,j ≡ γ̃θ Mbi,j ,   and   δXi,j,t ≡ θδ̃ MIi,j .

   Notice that this inequality implies that all the residuals                      (i,j,t )   in equation 7 are either


zero or negative, in which case            E [i,j,t ] ≤ 0.      When this happens the estimation by OLS


is expected to produce biased estimates due to the failure of the orthogonality conditions,


where the bias is downward. There is only one case in which the estimates remain unbiased,


and is if the price deviations are exactly equal to the arbitrage cost i.e. the constraint is


always binding. The residuals are identical to zero and OLS produces unbiased estimates.


Intuitively prices are assumed free of errors-in-variables, so that the extreme in the distri-


bution of price dierences is the closest estimator to the arbitrage costs.                            It is important


to mention that if all prices are optimally chosen to lie within the no-arbitrage region then


even the estimation using the extreme of the price distribution will produce downward bi-


ased estimates. However by construction the biases will be smaller. Formally, the expected

  9 The results from our model are also related to Samuelson (1954). See Appendix A.2.




                                                           10
value of the errors at the medium are more negative than the errors at the 95th quantile:


E [i,j,t |50th] ≤ E [i,j,t |95th] ≤ 0.   Nevertheless, as pointed out by Simonovska and Waugh


(2014) the maximum price dierence could introduce additional biases, so we use instead the

                                           10
upper quintiles for our estimation.



      Figure 1 illustrates how the observed price dispersion may not be informative of the


arbitrage cost. Panel (a) in Figure 1 shows hypothetical prices over time of one product in


two locations. If the no-arbitrage condition is binding, then as the arbitrage cost        τ   decreases,


so does the price dispersion. However if the condition is not binding, as shown in Panel (b),


distributional statistics such as the mean or the standard deviation will not be associated


with the estimate of     τ.   In both cases, however, we would be able to obtain good estimates


of   τ   by using only the maximum observed price dierence.




                                                [Figure 1 here]




      Figure 2 makes a similar point with real data. We plot the distribution of price dierences


for all goods between two locations of a given retailer, and compare the results for stores


located at 1 km, 10 km (same city), 10 km (dierent cities), and 20 km (dierent cities) of


each other. As expected, as the distance increases the share of price gaps at 0% falls (see


table), and the mass between 1% and 20% increases. Interestingly, when we compare the


two pairs of stores located at 10 km from each other (one of which is for stores in dierent


cities), we nd that crossing the city border has an eect on the mean and 90th percentile.


The two pairs, however, have exactly the same gaps at the 99th and 99.9th percentiles of the


distribution. This last result is consistent with the idea that city borders should not aect


the cost to arbitrage across locations. Using the mean and lower percentiles of the price gaps

     10 Note that Simonovska and Waugh (2014) argues that the estimation of the transport costs can be
downward biased if the maximum price dierence is used, but we nd a monotonic increase in this parameter
as we use move from lower quintiles to the maximum price dierence.




                                                      11
that lie within the arbitrage constraint can therefore lead to biased results.




                                            [Figure 2 here]




   In order to address this selection bias, we propose a new method to estimate border eects


using distance-binned quantile regressions. The methodology can be described as follows:



   First, compute the absolute price dierence for all possible location (stores) pairs. Repeat


this exercise across time and all goods, and pool all observations.



   Second, dene distance-border-bins according to a discrete spacing criteria that depends


on the unit of observation (city vs countries) and the availability of enough observations


within each bin.   In the case of the city eect, stores are assigned to bins of a few miles


apart. If the unit of analysis is countries, bins should be larger to contain stores that are


separated by larger distances.     The distance in each bin does not have to be set in linear


increments. For simplicity denote each bin as           n, where n = {1, . . . , N }, and N       is the number


of bins. Each bin is dened by a distance       Dn ,    a dummy          Bn = 1   if there is a border between


the two stores, and additional controls      Xn .   In our case,     Xn    includes a chain dummy and an


interaction term between distance and city dummy.



   Third, compute the relevant quantile statistic of the absolute price dierences for each


bin. Denote the statistic as   Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q)   for the   q th   percentile of bin   n.

   Finally, estimate the following equation:




                      Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q) = α + βDn + γBn + δXn + n                                     (8)




In Figure 3 we depict the impact of the bias and the intuition behind our methodology.


The horizontal axis shows the bins for a range of distances, and the vertical axis is the




                                                    12
absolute price dierence. The dots mark the absolute dierences in the data for each of the


selected bins. The thick black line reects the price dierence implied by the no-arbitrage


constraint. Because all the observed price dierences are less than or equal to the thick line,


the estimation in the standard regression which implicitly uses the mean within each bin


is downward biased as denoted by the red line. In small samples, the true maximum per


bin might not be observed, and therefore estimating via the sample maximum will also be


downward biased. Still, in this case the bias is smaller than using the mean. In other words,


it is possible that there is no realization on the black line, but using the maximum within


each bin gets closer to the true line. This explains why we interpret our results as a lower


bound estimate of the degree of segmentation.




                                        [Figure 3 here]




2.3 Dealing with errors-in-variables

One of the reasons we use quantile regressions to estimate arbitrage costs, instead of only


the maximum, is to relax the assumption of no errors-in-variables (EIV). In particular, the


maximum of the price dierence distribution within each bin can be signicantly aected if


prices are mis-measured. These errors can arise either because prices are observed and/or


reported with errors, or because stores make mistakes and post prices outside the no-arbitrage


range.   When we describe our data in Section 3 it will become clear that the errors from


misreporting are very small, because of the way the data is collected. However, there is still


the possibility that the prices are incorrectly reported, and thus concentrating the estimates


on the maximum within each bin would exacerbate the impact of any errors-in-variables.



   This case is depicted in Figure 4.   The black thick line is still the true upper bound


of the no-arbitrage band, that is the true degree of segmentation.      However due to EIV,


                                              13
some price dierences might even be above the no-arbitrage range. In this case, using the


maximum within each bin also produces a bias in the estimation.




                                            [Figure 4 here]




   We address errors-in-variables in two ways. One is to eliminate outliers from the distri-


bution. As we discuss below, the type of errors that are likely to be present in our data are


misplacement of the decimal point or ipping digits, both of which are likely to produce large


price changes at the item level that we can identify. This approach, however, does not pro-


vide a denite answer. For example, if the estimates change little then it is not clear whether


the EIV had a small impact, or not enough observations were eliminated to remove the bias.


The alternative we propose it to estimate the regression using dierent quantiles. Within

                                                                                                    11
each bin we compute several quantiles the median, 80th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles.


The 50th and 80th percentiles are clearly less aected by the EIV than the maximum, but


those estimates will be aected by the sample selection of prices within the no-arbitrage


range. As we move towards higher percentiles, the estimates are less aected by the sample


selection, and more aected by the EIV. If the EIV is small, it should be the case that the


estimates are monotonically increasing. We evaluate the robustness and sensitivity of our


estimates in Section 4.1.




3 Data

We use a good-level dataset of daily prices compiled by The General Directorate of Commerce

                                                                        12
(DGC) which comprises grocery stores all over the country.                   The DGC is the authority

 11 We also evaluate the robustness of our estimates to the elimination of price change outliers.
 12 The same dataset is used in Borraz and Zipitria (2012).




                                                    14
responsible for the enforcement of the Consumer Protection Law at the Ministry of Economy


and Finance.



    In 2006 a new tax law was passed by the Uruguayan legislature which changed the tax


base and rates of the value added tax (VAT). The Ministry of Economy and Finance was


concerned about incomplete pass-through from tax reductions to consumer prices, and hence


decided to collect and publish a dataset of prices in dierent grocery stores and supermarkets


across the country. The DGC issued Resolution Number 061/006 which mandates grocery


stores and supermarkets to report its daily prices for a list of products if they meet the


following two conditions: i) they sell more than 70% of the products listed, and ii) either


have more than four grocery stores under the same name, or have more than three cashiers


in a store. The information sent by each retailer is a sworn statement, and they are subject


to penalties in case of misreporting.       The objective of the DGC is to ensure that prices


posted reect real posted prices by stores. In this regard, stores are free to set the prices


they optimally choose, but they face a penalty only if they try to misreport them



    The data includes daily prices from April 1st of 2007 to December 31th of 2010 for 202


items corresponding to 61 product categories, where each item is dened by its universal

                        13
product code (UPC).          The three highest-selling brands are reported for each product cate-


gory. Most items had to be homogenized in order to be comparable, and each supermarket


must always report the same item.         For example, sparkling water of the Salus" brand is


reported in its 2.25 liter variety by all stores.       If this specic variety is not available at a


store, then no price is reported. Whenever prices are 50% greater (or less) than the average


price, the retailer is contacted to conrm whether the submitted price is correct. The data


are then used in a public web site that allows consumers to check prices in dierent stores

  13 The only exceptions are meat, eggs, ham, some types of cheese, and bread. However, as we later show,
the exclusion of these goods which could potentially be aected by an imperfect matching, does not modify
the results.




                                                   15
                                                                                            14
or cities and to compute the cost of dierent baskets of goods across locations.



    After the exclusion of observations labeled as preliminary as well as wrongly categorized


or unidentied data (e.g. products that share the same UPC), our nal dataset is composed


by 202 products at the UPC level in 333 grocery stores from 47 cities. Table 1 describes the


summary statistics of the coverage in the data, and Appendix A.4 provides a detailed list


of the products. In addition, see Figure 5 for a map with the cities covered in the dataset.


These cities represent more than 80% of the total population of Uruguay. Montevideo, with


45% of the population, accounts for 58% of the supermarkets in the sample. The maximum

                                                              15
distance between two supermarkets is 526 kilometers.



    We consider two datasets separately to account for outliers that may have a greater


impact on the largest price dierences between one good. A baseline case with the complete


sample, and a second case in which we exclude those prices higher than 3 times (or less than


a third) of the median daily price. However, deleted prices only account for a small 0.034%


of the whole database.



    In order to compute the linear distance between each pair of stores in our sample, we use


information on the exact geographical location of each supermarket as provided by Ciudata,


an industry organization. We then construct distance bins using a geometric sequence start-


ing from 0.1 kilometers, and incrementing by        ((526/0.1)1/N )%.    Our baseline estimation uses


N =500    bins, but we re-estimated our results using 50, 100, and 1,000 bins as well. We then


calculate the distance between all supermarkets in the sample (333) and assign each pair of


supermarkets (55,278) to its proper bin according to their distance range.

  14 See http://www.precios.uy/servicios/ciudadanos.html.
  15 See Borraz and Zipitria (2012) for a detailed description of the database and an analysis on its price
stickiness.




                                                    16
   Finally, we dene the following specication:




               Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q) = α + βDn + γBn + δ1 Bn × Dn + δ2 F irmn + n                     (9)




where     Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q) is the q th quantile of the absolute price dierences for all store pairs i
and   j   whose distance belongs to bin     n; Dn   measures the distance between stores that belong


to bin    n; Bn   is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the supermarkets are in dierent cities;


F irmn     is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the price dierence in bin         n comes from
the same supermarket chain. We also add an interaction dummy between distance and the


city border dummy, and xed eects for each good.



   Notice that this regression requires that we have both observations within and across


cities that overlap in distance bins. Figure 6 shows the distribution of observations for each


of the 500 bins for the same city pairs and the dierent city pairs. The horizontal axis is the


log distance starting at 100 meters to a maximum of 526 km. The black line is the number


of observations per bin for the stores within the same city boundaries, while the gray line


are the observations for the stores in dierent cities. There is a non-trivial range in which


stores are separated exactly by the same distance within cities and across cities although


almost all of them between 5 to 15 kilometers. This is the source of the variation where the


city-border eect is actually estimated.




                                              [Figure 6 here]




4 Results

As described in Section 2.2, we pool all the prices into each corresponding bin and estimate


the distribution of price dierences. We select the mean, median, 80, 85, 90, 95, 97.5, 99, 99.5


                                                     17
and 99.9th percentiles. For each of these we estimate equation (9) by weighted least squares


to account for dierences in the number of observations inside each bin. Price dierences


are expressed in percentage terms, while distance is measured in hundreds of kilometers.




                                    [Table 2 about here]




   The results are presented in Table 2. The rst coecient is the segmentation generated


by distance. The second and third estimate the eect of the city boundaries (border dummy)


and the interaction term (how the eect of distance changes once the stores are in dierent


cities), respectively. The fourth coecient is the impact of both stores belonging to the same


retailer, and the last one is the constant term. Each column reects a dierent regression.


The rst one uses the mean within each bin, which replicates the standard regressions in


the literature. After that we present the results for the quantiles moving from the 50th until


99.9th percentiles and nally the maximum.



   Notice that as we increase the percentile, all individual coecients increase in line with


the intuition we discussed before. This pattern can be easily appreciated in Figures 7 and


8, which show the coecient on distance and city dummy, respectively, as a function of the


percentile.




                                [Figure 7 and Figure 8 here]




   There are two alternatives to compute the border eect. One way is to base the eect


upon a specic distance.   First, we calculate the degree of price dispersion when the two


stores are located in dierent cities. Then we solve for the distance that would be needed for


two stores within the same city to have the same degree of price dispersion. The following




                                             18
                                   16
example claries the analysis.          Using the results in the rst column (average) in Table 2,


we compute the price dispersion of two cities across the border that are 10 km apart. The


price dispersion is   5.081 + 4.188 ∗ 0.1 + 1.260 − 4.049 ∗ 0.1 = 6.355.          Two stores in the same


city exhibit a segmentation equal to        5.081 + 4.188 ∗ X .     Solving for   X   to make the within


city segmentation equal to       6.355   yields 30.5 km. Therefore the border adds 20 kilometers


to two stores 10 kilometers apart that is, the city border triples the distance.                Although


the literature simply uses the ratio of the two coecients to compute the border eect, our


specication also allows for non-linearities. Therefore the implied border eect needs to be


estimated conditional to a given distance.



    In Panel (a) of Figure 9 we compute this implied additional distance for two stores 10


km apart for each of the quantiles. The border eect, as measured in kilometers, collapses


towards zero around the 99.5th percentile. Interestingly, the eect is even found negative


at the highest percentiles. In addition, notice the (almost) monotonic decrease in the esti-


mates.   This is encouraging from an errors-in-variables point of view.               If the maximum of


the distribution were the result of large errors-in-variables, there is no reason to expect the


estimates and the impact of the border eect to remain similar to the upper percentiles.




                                             [Figure 9 here]




    The second way to compute the border eect is to focus on the relative price dispersion for


a given distance. In other words, we compute how large is the implied degree of segmentation


for a pair of stores 10 km apart across two cities, relative to another pair of stores 10 km


apart within the same city. In both cases we consider all stores that do not belong to the


same retailer. For instance, in the average case (column 1 in Table 2) the price dispersion

  16 We show the results for 10 kilometers but results remain qualitatively the same for stores 15 and 20
kilometers apart. Given the characteristics of our data, it makes no sense to go beyond that distance because
in the city of Montevideo there are very few observations with stores more than 20 kilometers apart.



                                                     19
for   Dn = 0.1   and   Bn = 1   is, as before,   5.081 + 4.188 ∗ 0.1 + 1.260 − 4.049 ∗ 0.1 = 6.355.
The price dispersion when       Bn = 0   is   5.081 + 4.188 ∗ 0.1 = 5.499.   Thus the border implies


a 15.57 percent higher degree of segmentation. However, this relative eect becomes small


and insignicant using higher quantiles. In Panel (b) in Figure 9 we present the decreasing


pattern in the relative degree of segmentation, together with its 95th condence band.



      Panels (a) and (b) show that the degree of segmentation is overestimated and the impact


of distance is underestimated when the average price deviations are used. By contrast, the


eect of the border becomes not signicantly dierent from zero when the upper quantiles


of the distribution within each bin are used. Notice that the reduction in the border eect


is not a mechanical consequence of the methodology. The estimation using upper quantiles


should in fact increase the absolute value of all coecients simply because there is less


sample selection. The decrease in the nal border eect, however, comes from the fact that


the bias in the distance coecient is larger than in the border coecient.




4.1 Robustness

In this section we test the sensibility of the baseline estimates to changing the specication


of the regression, to dierent subsamples of product mix, elimination of outliers, and to


dierent number of bins. In all cases we nd that the results are qualitatively similar. That


is, the traditional regression (average price dispersion) estimates a large and signicant city


border eect, whereas quantile regressions show that the city border becomes insignicant


using upper quantiles of the distribution. Furthermore, the results are similar at the highest


percentiles and the maximum, suggesting that the estimates are not signicantly aected by


measurement errors.




                                                    20
   First, we modify the equation to the following non-linear specication:




              Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q) = α + βDn + γBn + δ1 Bn × Dn + δ2 Dn2 + δ3 Dn3

                                     +δ4 Bn × Dn2 + δ5 Bn × Dn3 + δ6 F irmn + n           (10)




where the variables are dened as in equation 9.



   The results, presented in Table 3, yield the same patterns we described above for the base-


line estimation. In absolute value, all point estimates increase as the estimation is performed


over the higher quantiles. Furthermore, if one computes the implied additional distance, the


results remain qualitatively the same as those in Panel (a) in Figure 9. The border eect, as


measured in kilometers, is close to 25 km using the traditional regression (average). However


it decreases with higher percentiles, until it becomes small and insignicant at the 97.5th


percentile.



   In addition, we perform three robustness tests using dierent subsamples. Results are


presented in Appendix A.3, for both the linear and non-linear specications.          First, we


eliminate products in which the matching across stores is not perfect.       In particular, we


exclude meat, bread, among other categories. Quantile regressions yield identical patterns


as when using the complete dataset. Second, we use all products but eliminate the outliers,


dened here as those whose price is above three times (or a third below) the median price.


This approach is more conservative that the one typically used in the literature. For example,


Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) eliminate prices that are


more than 10 times higher or less that a tenth of the median price.        Still, our rule only


excludes 11.2 thousand in 32.8 million, or just 0.034% of the observations. Once again, the


patterns are almost identical to the ones obtained using the complete number of observations.


The only minor dierence is that, for a given percentile, the border eects are smaller in




                                               21
absolute terms. In other words, the estimated implied distances are smaller than those in


Panel (a) in Figure 9. Third, we further combine the two cases above and estimate quantile


regressions excluding goods with imperfect matching as well as those dened as outliers. The


results do not yield signicant dierences with respect to our baseline estimation.



    Lastly, we tested the linear and non-linear specications to the sensibility of the number


of distance bins. Instead of 500 bins, we re-estimated using 50, 100, and 1,000 bins. Notice


the trade-o in the selection of bins. The advantage of a larger number of bins is that each


pair of stores is allocated to a very specic distance bin and the distance representing the


bin is closer to the real distance across the stores. The disadvantage is that the number of


observations within each bin decreases. In the limit, if the bins are so narrow that each store


pair belongs to a single bin, then the problem is that the estimation at the 99.9 percentile

                       17
becomes very noisy.         The results are qualitatively the same to the baseline estimation. The


city-border eect measured in kilometers falls and becomes insignicant when the upper


quantiles are used in the estimation.




5 The Online Border Eect

We now use online and oine prices from a retailer in Uruguay to estimate an online border


eect. The degree of segmentation between online and oine markets is an interesting topic


by itself, but has received little attention because of the data limitations.                Selling online


allows a retailer to price discriminate among consumers who have time to travel to a store


and those who prefer the convenience of online shopping.                By deciding to buy online, the

  17 Future research should formally address the optimal bandwidth selection. For the moment we compare
the results across dierent specications, and do not explore the issue further because the results remain
essentially identical. It is possible that if the estimation is done using less frequent data such as month by
month, or using a much smaller dataset, then the issue of bandwidth selection becomes more important.
This was not the case in our application.




                                                     22
consumer may therefore be paying a cost in terms of price dispersion (in addition to any


delivery charges).



   We use data collected by the Billion Prices Project at MIT (BPP) using a method that


scans the HyperText Markup Language (HTML) code of public retailers' website, identifying

                                                                                 18
and storing all relevant price and product information on a daily basis.              The largest grocery


retailer in Uruguay sells products in dozens of oine locations, as well as online, in the city


of Montevideo.    We compared the daily prices of all goods in the DGC oine data with


their corresponding online price on the same date. Both datasets contain daily prices for the


period between October 1st 2007 and December 31th 2010.



   Figure 10 provides an example of the prices posted in the dierent stores (including the


online store) for a given product over time. On most dates, the online price is within the


range of prices observed in oine stores.          This feature is observed in most goods in the


sample.




                                          [ Figure 10 here ]




   Suppose a consumer decides to buy a good from the retailer's website instead of walking


to an oine location.      What is the eect of crossing this online border on prices?              We


can calculate an online border eect by simply estimating the implied distance that would


produce the same degree of online-oine price dispersion observed in the data. We calculate


this eect in two steps. First, we estimate the following regression for each quantile           q   using


only data from the oine stores:




                                 Qn (|pi,t − pj,t |, q) = λ + βDn + n                                (11)

 18 See Cavallo (2010) for additional details on the online data scraping methodology.




                                                   23
      Notice this is equal to equation 9 with   Bn = 0   (same city),    F irmn = 1   (same retailer),


and    λ = α + γ.   The coecient   β   therefore provides an estimate of the eect of distance


on the dispersion of prices across locations. Finally, to calculate the implied online border


eect we simply compute the average online-oine price dispersion (between all pairs of


online-oine stores), subtract the constant     λ   and divide by   β.


                                           [Table 4 here]




      We estimated regression 11 using both the traditional and the binned-quantile methods,


and computed the online border in both cases. Table 4 shows that using the traditional OLS


regression provides an implied distance of 1.6 kilometers. By contrast, if we use the 95th


percentile we obtain an implied distance of 8.78 kilometers.



      How do we know which estimate is better? We can compare the results in both methods


to the actual distance of the online store. Although the warehouse of the online store is


not known, the website of this retailer states that the online prices are identical to those


available in an oine store that lls the orders. It fails to name it explicitly, but we can


compute a simple matching probability between the online prices and each of the oine


stores to identify it. This matching probability is just the average probability that the online


price is identical to the price in an oine store on any given day. We calculate it at the store


level in two steps.   First, for each product, we compute the share of days that the online


price is identical to the oine price. And second, we get the mean (or median) across all


products in that store.




                                           [Table 5 here]




      Table 5 shows that online prices most closely resemble those of oine store number


22.    The last column in the table shows the physical distance between store 22 and each


                                                 24
of the other oine stores.    The average distance is 7.22 kilometers (and a median of 8.04


km). This number is very close to the estimate we obtained by using the 95th percentile in


the regression. In this case, the traditional regression greatly   underestimates   the degree of


online-oine market segmentation.



   This example illustrates why our method will not mechanically cause a reduction in


border eects every time.     By using the largest observed price dierences, we know that


all coecients and constant in 9 will increase, because the standard OLS method creates a


downward bias in all of them. But whether the border       eect   rises or falls depends on the


magnitude of those changes. In the case of the online border in equation 11, the distance


coecient   β   rises less than the constant, as shown in Table 4. This is because we are only


looking at stores within the city of Montevideo, where the share of identical prices is very


large. When the traditional OLS regression is used, the average price dispersion captured by


λ is extremely small.   When those identical prices are ignored, as we do with our methodology,


λ rises signicantly more than the β   coecient on distance, and the border eect" increases.




6 Conclusions

The extensive literature on the degree of segmentation resulting from political borders has


reported extremely large transaction costs introduced by country, province, and even city


borders. In this paper we argue that some of those estimates have been overstated because


the empirical strategy has not taken into account the selection problem in posted prices:


when a rm faces the possibility of arbitrage due to the existence of a transaction cost,


the rm sets prices subject to a no-arbitrage constraint. However, if the optimal price falls


within the no-arbitrage range, the dispersion in prices is not informative of the tightness of


the constraint. A rm may set the same price in two locations, but it does not mean that



                                               25
the arbitrage cost for the consumer is zero. This implies that the estimation using average


absolute price dierences or standard deviations of price dierences will not capture the size


of the trade or arbitrage cost.



   This paper builds on the existing literature with two main contributions. In the rst place,


it oers an alternative methodology to estimate transactions costs which not only can be


applied in international trade, but also in other areas as in empirical nance, measurement


of liquidity, or the cost of regulatory restrictions.   In the second place, we show that city


borders matter little for price dispersion within a country. Although the border eect of a


city should be small from an intuitive point of view, the traditional methods still estimated


a very wide border eect (20 additional kilometers to two stores separated 10 km apart,


that is, the border triples the distance). This is particularly large in a country where the


largest city is less than 40 kilometers wide and there are no signicant dierences between


cities in terms of taxes, language and the like. By contrast, the border becomes insignicant


once we estimate using our method of distance-binned quantile regressions. We illustrate our


method to measure border eects for the online-oine border in Montevideo, and showed


that we can correctly approximate the true average distance between the oine stores and


the location where online purchases are sourced by simply using price gap data.



   Finally, we believe further research should advance in at least two dimensions. From a


methodological point of view, it is important to further examine the denition of optimal


bandwidths. Although in our paper we used dierent bin sizes and results remained consis-


tent across all specications, this may not be the case in other applications in economics.


And second, similar micro-level data needs to be collected across several countries to shed


light on the actual width of international borders.




                                               26
References
Anderson, J.,        and   E. van Wincoop (2003): Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the


  Border Puzzle,     American Economic Review,         93(1), 170192.



Andrews, D. W. K., S. Berry,             and   P. Jia (2004): Condence Regions for Parameters


  in Discrete Games with Multiple Equilibria, with an Application to Discount Chain Store


  Location,   Working Paper, Yale University.

Andrews, D. W. K.,            and   P. Guggenberger (2009):          Validity of Subsampling and


  Plug-in Asymptotic Inference for Parameters dened by Moment Inequalities,           Economic

  Theory,   25(03), 141.



Andrews, D. W. K.,          and    X. Shi (2014): Nonparametric Inference based on Conditional


  Moment Inequalities,       Journal of Econometrics,    179(1), 3145.



Andrews, D. W. K.,           and   G. Soares (2010): Inference for Parameters Dened by Mo-


  ment Inequalities Using Generalized Moment Selection,           Econometrica,   78(1), 119157.



Borraz, F.,     and   L. Zipitria (2012): Retail Price Setting in Uruguay,       Economia,   12(2),


  77109.



Broda, C.,     and   D. E. Weinstein (2008): Understanding International Price Dierences


  Using Barcode Data,        NBER Working Paper 14017.

Cavallo, A. (2010): Scraped Data and Sticky Prices,           MIT Sloan Working Paper 4976-12.

Ceglowski, J. (2003): The Law of One Price: Intranational Evidence for Canada,                 The

  Canadian Journal of Economics,         36(2), 373.



Eaton, J.,     and   S. Kortum (2002): Technology, Geography, and Trade,           Econometrica,

  70(5), 17411779.


                                                   27
Engel, C.,    and   J. H. Rogers (1996): How Wide is the Border?,         American Economic

  Review,   86(5), 11121125.



Evans, C. L. (2003): The Economic Signicance of National Border Eects,               American

  Economic Review,     93(4), 12911312.



Goldberg, P. K.,       and   M. M. Knetter (1997):        Goods Prices and Exchange Rates:


  What Have We Learned?,        Journal of Economic Literature,   35(3), 12431272.



Gopinath, G., P.-O. Gourinchas, C.-T. Hsieh,            and N. Li (2011):   International Prices,


  Costs, and Markup Dierences,      American Economic Review,       101(6), 245086.



Gopinath, G.,       and   R. Rigobon (2008):      Sticky Borders,   The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics,   123(2), 531575.



Gorodnichenko, Y.,         and   L. Tesar (2009): Border Eect or Country Eect? Seattle


  may not be so far from Vancouver after all,       American Economic Journal  Macroeco-

  nomics,   1(1), 219241.



Head, K.,    and    T. Mayer (2002):       Illusory Border Eects:   Distance Mismeasurement


  Inates Estimates of Home Bias in Trade,      CEPII Research Center, Working Paper 2002-

  01.

Hillberry, R.,      and D. Hummels (2003):      Intranational Home Bias: Some Explanations,


  The Review of Economics and Statistics,      85(4), 10891092.



Klenow, P. J.,      and O. Kryvtsov (2008):      State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:


  Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Ination?,      The Quarterly Journal of Economics,      123(3),


  863904.




                                                28
Parsley, D. C.,      and   S.-J. Wei (2001):   Explaining The Border Eect:       The Role of


  Exchange Ratee Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography,        Journal of International

  Economics,    55(1), 87105.



Ponomareva, M.,       and E. Tamer (2011):     Misspecication in Moment Inequality Models:


  Back to Moment Equalities?,      The Econometrics Journal,   14(2), 186203.



Rosen, A. M. (2008): Condence Sets for Partially Identied Parameters that Satisfy a


  Finite Number of Moment Inequalities,     Journal of Econometrics,   146(1), 107117.



Samuelson, P. A. (1954):         The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs, II: Analysis of


  Eects of Trade Impediments,      The Economic Journal,   64(254), 264289.



Simonovska, I.,      and   M. E. Waugh (2014):       The elasticity of trade:    Estimates and


  evidence,   Journal of International Economics,   92(1), 3450.




                                               29
7 Figures and Tables
                         Figure 1: Price dispersion and the arbitrage cost



                                   (a)   Binding no-arbitrage condition




                                (b)   Non binding no-arbitrage condition




Note: Panel (a) shows cases where the no-arbitrage condition constrains the price dispersion. Panel (b) cases

where the price dispersion is not correlated with the arbitrage cost.




                                                     30
                     Figure 2: Example of Price Gaps in Dierent Store Pairs




                Distance     Same City       Share at 0%               Price Gaps (in %)

                  (Km)                           (in %)        Mean      90th     99th    99.9th

                    1            yes              96.5           0.3       0      11.1     20.5

                    10           yes              76.6           1.9      8.64    16.9     25.1

                    10            no              73.6           2.0      9.46    16.9     25.1

                    20            no              69.3           2.6      10.6    26.9     39.3



Note: We calculate the price gaps (in absolute value) for all goods sold in a single retailer across two locations.

We picked a random store from the largest retailer in the country and compared its prices to those of other

stores from the same retailer located at 1 km, 10 km (same city), 10 km (dierent city), and 20 km (dierent

city).   Where DC denotes pairs in dierent cities.     The graph excludes the mass at 0% to facilitate the

comparison of positive gaps. The table shows the distributional statistics for all price gaps, including those

at 0% (identical prices).




                                                         31
                                Figure 3: Bias in Standard Regressions




Note: This gure illustrates the source of the selection bias. The horizontal axis shows the bins for a range

of distances. The vertical axis is the absolute price dierence across locations. For each bin, all the absolute

dierences from the data are shown as the black dots.       The thick black line reects the price dierence

implied by the no-arbitrage constraint. Because all the observed price dierences are less or equal to the

thick line, the estimation in the standard regression which implicitly uses the mean within each bin (red

line) is downward biased.




                                                      32
                  Figure 4: Bias in Standard Regression in the presence of EIV




Note: The black thick line is still the true upper bound of the no-arbitrage band, i.e. the true degree of

segmentation. However due to EIV, some price dierences might even be above the no-arbitrage range. In

this case, using the maximum within each bin also produces a bias in the estimation. For this reason we use

a series of quantile regressions instead.




                                                    33
                                  Figure 5: Cities covered in the sample




             Note: Each dot represents a store location across the 19 Uruguayan departments.




   Figure 6: Distribution of observations for 500 bins in the same city and between cities


                            80,000,000




                            60,000,000




                            40,000,000
                        N




                            20,000,000




                                    0
                                         .1     1                 10                      100
                                                        Distance (in logs)

                                                    Same City                Different City




Note: The black line shows the distribution of bilateral observations for each of the 500 bins within cities,

while the grey line (extending to the right, with multiple peaks) shows the distribution across cities. Lines

are smoothed for better visualization.




                                                     34
               Figure 7: Estimation of the distance coecient by quantile




                     100
                     80  60
                Dispersion
               40    20
                     0




                              Mean   80   85   90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                    Percentile



 Note: Estimated distance coecient when dierent quantiles are used for the baseline regression.




                       Figure 8: Estimation of the city coecient by quantile
                     5
                     4
               Dispersion
                   3 2
                     1




                              Mean   80   85   90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                    Percentile



Note: Estimated city dummy coecient when dierent quantiles are used for the baseline regression.




                                                    35
                   Figure 9: Estimation of the city border eect using all data



                                                 (a)   Implied Kilometers


               Additional Km implied by City Border Eect for Stores 10 Km Apart




                          30
                          20
                        Km
                        100
                          −10




                                Mean     80     85     90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                            Percentile




                                       (b)   Relative Increase in Price Dispersion


                                       of City Borders for Stores 10 Km Apart.




Note: Panel (a) shows the implied additional km for the linear specication using all data and 500 bins.

Panel (b) shows the relative increase in the degree of segmentation for the baseline linear specication, with

its 95th percent condence band.


                                                            36
                Figure 10: Example of Online and Oine Prices: Cocoa - 0.5Kg




                             80    70
                       Price (Pesos)
                     60      50




                                    10/2008   01/2009 04/2009   07/2009   10/2009   01/2010 04/2010   07/2010   10/2010   01/2011
                                                                               Date

                                                  Online Price               Offline Price (each line is a different store)




Note: This is an example of the typical time series pattern of online prices compared to oine prices in the

same city of Montevideo. Each line is a dierent store. The online price is marked with a dotted line, and

tends to lie in-between the prices of the oine stores.




                                                                             37
Table 1: Product, time, and regional coverage in the data




                                          All Stores

     (i)       Retailers                     136

     (ii)      Stores                        333

     (iii)     Products                      202

     (iv)      Categories                     61

     (v)       Country                    Uruguay

     (vi)      Cities                         47

     (vii)     Departments                    19

     (viii)    Time Period            April 1st 2007 to
                                     December 31st 2010

     (ix)      Days                         1,154

     (x)       Observations                179,215
               (bins)

     (xi)      Observations              32,159,865
               (pairs)

    Note:     Summary statistics of the data compiled by The
    General Directorate of Commerce (DGC).




                                38
            Table 2: Weighted Least Square Estimation of Price Dierential using the complete database and for 500 bins


                                                                      Linear Specication


                  Average          50          80           85           90           95          97.5          99          99.5         99.9        Max


     Distance     4.188***   3.528***    5.073***     5.504***     6.428***     8.153***    12.822***    14.618***    26.287***    41.329***     95.596***


                   (0.186)     (0.202)     (0.297)      (0.323)      (0.368)      (0.510)      (0.733)      (0.967)      (1.414)      (2.601)      (4.677)


     City         1.260***   1.243***    1.691***     1.738***     1.880***     1.926***     1.890***     2.478***     2.794***     2.889***      5.105***


                   (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.026)      (0.029)      (0.033)      (0.045)      (0.065)      (0.086)      (0.126)      (0.232)      (0.417)


     City*Dist   -4.049***   -3.350***   -4.930***    -5.364***    -6.323***    -8.083***   -12.880***   -14.670***   -26.460***   -41.833***   -92.579***




39
                   (0.186)     (0.202)     (0.297)      (0.323)      (0.368)      (0.510)      (0.733)      (0.967)      (1.414)      (2.602)      (4.678)


     Chain       -6.012***   -5.196***   -9.652***   -10.738***   -12.101***   -14.642***   -18.086***   -22.188***   -25.305***   -38.565***   -68.955***


                   (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.032)      (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.056)      (0.080)      (0.106)      (0.155)      (0.285)      (0.508)


     Const        5.081***   3.782***    8.541***     9.956***    11.745***    14.832***    18.150***    22.106***    25.807***    41.789***    130.155***


                   (0.038)     (0.041)     (0.061)      (0.066)      (0.075)      (0.104)      (0.150)      (0.198)      (0.289)      (0.532)      (0.975)


     N             179,215    179,215     179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215       184,328


     R2              0.752       0.645       0.749        0.761        0.762        0.725        0.744        0.766         0.68         0.58        0.492



     Note: * signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%. Standard errors in parenthesis.
            Table 3: Weighted Least Square Estimation of Price Dierential using the complete database and for 500 bins


                                                                           Non Linear Specication


                       Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


     Distance          -1.396**    -4.359***     1.854**     3.213***     3.132***     4.005***    24.295***     43.301***     94.219***     221.741***     946.493***


                        (0.542)      (0.589)      (0.870)      (0.947)      (1.081)      (1.498)      (2.153)       (2.840)       (4.152)        (7.636)       (13.542)


     City             0.610***     0.486***     1.042***     1.091***     1.132***     0.982***      1.355***     2.276***      3.575***       7.527***      18.414***


                        (0.025)      (0.028)      (0.041)      (0.044)      (0.051)      (0.070)      (0.101)       (0.133)       (0.195)        (0.358)        (0.640)


     City*Dist        2.467***     5.559***        -0.669     -1.974**      -1.780*       -2.262   -22.579***    -41.457***    -92.334***    -221.689***    -919.021***


                        (0.543)      (0.590)      (0.872)      (0.948)      (1.082)      (1.500)      (2.156)       (2.844)       (4.158)        (7.647)       (13.564)


     Chain            -6.001***    -5.186***    -9.637***   -10.721***   -12.083***   -14.618***   -18.044***    -22.122***    -25.194***     -38.355***     -67.614***


                        (0.020)      (0.022)      (0.032)      (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.056)      (0.080)       (0.106)       (0.155)        (0.284)        (0.500)




40
     Dist2           34.149***    48.223***    19.697***    14.030***    20.175***    25.390***    -70.068***   -175.224***   -415.058***   -1102.431***   -5203.545***


                        (3.117)      (3.387)      (5.002)      (5.440)      (6.210)      (8.607)     (12.373)      (16.321)      (23.862)       (43.883)       (77.900)


     Dist3            0.026***     0.031***     0.025***     0.028***     0.034***     0.061***      0.062***     0.032***          0.008      -0.112***      0.870***


                        (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.027)        (0.060)


     City*Dist
                 2   -34.466***   -48.581***   -20.037***   -14.394***   -20.597***   -26.020***   69.408***    174.667***    414.569***    1102.788***    5194.370***


                        (3.117)      (3.387)      (5.002)      (5.440)      (6.210)      (8.607)     (12.373)      (16.321)      (23.862)       (43.883)       (77.901)


     Const            5.241***     4.010***     8.630***    10.017***    11.835***    14.946***    17.800***     21.239***     23.768***      36.406***     104.760***


                        (0.041)      (0.044)      (0.065)      (0.071)      (0.081)      (0.112)      (0.161)       (0.213)       (0.311)        (0.572)        (1.031)


     N                 179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215      179,215       179,215      179,215       179,215        179,215        184,328


     R2                   0.755        0.649        0.751        0.763        0.763        0.726        0.745         0.767         0.681          0.581          0.509



     Note: * signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%. Standard errors in parenthesis.
                 Table 4: The Online-Oine Border




                                                  Price Dierence

                                                   (1)                  (2)

 Variables                                      Mean     95th Percentile

 Log Distance                               0.100***             0.156***

                                             (-0.005)             (-0.010)

 Constant                                   0.439***             3.177***

                                             (-0.174)             (-0.362)

 Observations                                    2300                 2300

 Dierence Online-Oine (%)                      0.60                 4.55

 Implied Distance (Km)                           1.60                 8.78

Note: *** signicant at 1%.    Robust standard errors in parenthesis.    We
measure the online border eect, dened as the implied distance between
the oine stores and the online stores.     If the usual procedure is used,
online and oine markets appear to be very closely integrated, with an
equivalent border of 1.6 kilometers. When the 95th percentile of the price
gap distribution is used, the online border eect becomes 8.8 kilometers.
This is very close to the actual physical average distance between the online
warehouse (store 22, where the online goods appear to be delivered from)
and each of the oine stores in the city.




                                     41
                       Table 5: Online vs Oine stores


 Store    City            Online Match Probability         Distance to Store 22

 22       Montevideo                  97.34                          0.00

 31       Montevideo                  96.59                          1.28

 39       Montevideo                  96.59                          1.88

 41       Montevideo                  96.83                          2.32

 21       Montevideo                  96.83                          2.72

 38       Montevideo                  96.58                          3.32

 33       Montevideo                  81.85                          5.66

 34       Montevideo                  96.96                          6.50

 35       Montevideo                  96.70                          8.04

 32       Montevideo                  81.702                         8.84

 43       Montevideo                  81.18                          8.96

 28       Montevideo                  81.68                          9.23

 30       Montevideo                  96.54                          10.58

 27       Montevideo                  81.73                          11.81

 23       Montevideo                  81.57                          12.87

 36       Montevideo                  81.56                          13.29

 42       Montevideo                  81.37                          15.42

                 Mean                 89.62                          7.22

               Median                 96.54                          8.04

Note: The Online Match Probability shows the percentage of days in which the
online price is identical to the price observed oine in a particular store. Distance
from store 22 to the other oine stores is measured in kilometers.




                                         42
A Appendix

A.1 Proofs to the model of price-setting with arbitrage

A.1.1        Consumers




Lemma 1.            The price space is non empty.


Proof.     Given prices        pi    and      pj    the right hand side of the inequality is non negative for the

                                                                                                    β̃
consumer located on store                    `i .   In this case, equation 6 is      | pi − pj |≤   θ
                                                                                                         |` − `j | + γ̃θ bj + θδ̃ Ij ,
as    ` = `i .   This implies that there must exist at least one price in order for the consumer to


compare its bundles. Thus both the right and left hand side of the inequality are positive.


Lemma 2.            The inequality constraint is binding only for the marginal consumer.


Proof.     The marginal consumer can be dened as the one obtaining the same utility from


buying in both stores, that is                      u` (i) = u` (j).   This in turn implies that     v − θpi − β̃ |` − `i | −
γ̃bi − δ̃Ii = v − θpj − β̃ | ` − `j | −γ̃bj − δ̃Ij .                   Rearranging terms we obtain that              | pi − pj |=
β̃                  γ̃              δ̃
θ
     |`j − `i | +   θ
                         M bi,j +   θ
                                         M Ii,j .


A.1.2        Producers




Lemma 3.            Firms maximize prots by setting the price that binds the participation constraint

for consumer i.


Proof.     Given the prices of all stores except for                        j,   and given the right hand side of the


equation in terms of            pj ,     Kuhn Tucker conditions determine that the price dierence should


be maximal. That is, when the consumer restriction is binding. At the same time, notice


that the marginal consumer for rm                         j   determines the demand for its products.


                                                                       43
Proposition 4.    The consumer that maximizes prots is the marginal consumer.


Proof.   From Lemma 2 and Lemma 3, the rm sets the maximum price for the marginal


consumer.



Proposition 5.    For any given two stores (locations), the parameters can only be estimated

for the marginal consumer, i.e. where the inequality is binding.


Proof.   From Lemma 2 and Proposition 4, the rm sets its price for the marginal consumer


such that equation 6 is binding. Therefore the price dierences will be maximum given the


store location and other exogenous variables for the consumer.



Lemma 6.     If transportation costs increase (beta) or a border exists between two stores, or if

the sensitivity of the consumer to price changes decrease, then the price dispersion increase.


Proof.   Take partial derivatives of each coecient on the last equation of Lemma 2.




A.1.3     Consumer heterogeneity: Discussion




So far we have assumed that consumers only dier in their location on the line. However


consumers can also dier in their valuation of the good. This feature can be introduced to the


original model in either two ways. First, consumers can dier in their maximum valuation


of the good, in which case   v ∈ [v, v].   In this case, previous results are easily maintained


as well, although now satisfying two conditions for the marginal consumer: indierence in


distance and in valuation. Recall that previous results are for the medium consumer. Second,
                                                                                
consumers can dier in their disposition to pay for the good, i.e.       θ ∈ θ, θ .    Similarly


as before, there are two constraints to estimate the demand for each store: the distance


constraint and the valuation constraint.




                                               44
    Therefore adding heterogeneity to consumers' taste does not change the estimation pro-


cedure. In order to estimate the demand for each store, we must still solve the model for


the marginal consumer. As previously shown, the price inequality should only be binding


for this consumer, and slack for non-marginal consumers.




A.2 Samuelson's Iceberg Costs

The results from our model of product arbitrage is also related to the no-arbitrage pricing

                                                           19
region generated in Samuelson's Iceberg costs.                  Assume that there is an arbitrage cost


between two locations that can be described as follows:




                                   τi,j,t = α + βDi,j + γBi,j + δXi,j,t                                              (12)




where the variables are dened as before. This arbitrage cost                 τ    represents the proportion of


the item that is lost when a customer transports one unit from                     i   to   j .20   Under this form of


arbitrage costs, prices need to lie within the range            |pi − pj | ≤ τi,j,t         to avoid the possibility


that a customer arbitrates across locations. In particular, assume that                        pi   is set. The second


store, when deciding its price, maximizes prots subject to the no-arbitrage constraint. If


the optimal price is such that the dierence between               pi   and   pj    is smaller than          τ   then the


constraint is not binding and the price dierence is a biased estimate of                               τ.   But if the


dierence is larger, then the store sets the price at the corner solution and the constraint


is binding. This simple behavior implies that the absolute dierence of log prices satises


inequality 1, which can be rewritten as         |pi − pj | ≤ τi,j,t = α + βDi,j + γB + δXi,j,t .
  19 See Samuelson (1954).
  20 For simplicity in the exposition it is assumed that the arbitrageur is the customer itself.                 Thus the
arbitrage cost can be interpreted not only as the loss of physical items, but also the loss in terms of utility
that the customer would experience if were forced to travel from one location to another.




                                                      45
46
A.3 Alternative Specications
           Figure 11: Estimation of the city border eect excluding meat and bread



                                                 (a)   Implied Kilometers


                Additional Km implied by City Border Eect for Stores 10 Km Apart

                          30
                          20
                        Km
                        100
                          −10




                                Mean     80     85     90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                            Percentile




                                       (b)   Relative Increase in Price Dispersion


                                       of City Borders for Stores 10 Km Apart




Note: Panel (a) shows the additional km implied by the city border eect for the linear specication, excluding

meat and bread, and using 500 bins. Panel (b) shows the relative increase in the degree of segmentation,
                                                            47
with its 95th percent condence band, for the same specication.
                 Table 6: Weighted Least Square Estimation of Price Dierential excluding Meat and Bread, and for 500 bins


                                                                               Linear Specication


                         Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance          3.892***     3.118***     4.602***     5.029***     6.207***     7.902***    13.154***     15.652***     28.285***      45.346***     104.739***

                          (0.182)      (0.199)      (0.291)      (0.317)      (0.365)      (0.513)      (0.684)       (0.968)       (1.466)        (2.724)        (4.906)

      City              1.156***     1.136***     1.523***     1.554***     1.695***     1.718***      1.999***     2.472***      2.650***       2.513***       5.423***

                          (0.016)      (0.018)      (0.026)      (0.028)      (0.033)      (0.046)      (0.061)       (0.086)       (0.131)        (0.242)        (0.437)

      City*Dist         -3.773***    -2.966***    -4.484***    -4.913***    -6.119***    -7.846***   -13.222***    -15.725***    -28.474***     -45.858***    -101.768***

                          (0.182)      (0.199)      (0.291)      (0.317)      (0.366)      (0.513)      (0.684)       (0.968)       (1.466)        (2.724)        (4.907)

      Chain             -5.831***    -5.020***    -9.383***   -10.459***   -11.807***   -14.329***   -17.488***    -21.293***    -24.357***     -37.604***     -68.527***

                          (0.020)      (0.022)      (0.032)      (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.056)      (0.075)       (0.106)       (0.161)        (0.298)        (0.534)

      Const             5.170***     3.884***     8.680***    10.100***    11.878***    14.975***    18.057***     22.072***     25.835***      41.914***     129.772***

                          (0.036)      (0.039)      (0.058)      (0.063)      (0.073)      (0.102)      (0.136)       (0.192)       (0.291)        (0.541)        (0.995)

      N                   159566       159566       159566       159566       159566       159566       159566        159566        159566         159566         165297

      R2                    0.705        0.593        0.712        0.726        0.724        0.684         0.71         0.679         0.576          0.523          0.479




                                                                             Non Linear Specication


                         Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance          -1.721***    -4.583***        0.963     2.260**       1.818*         1.948   19.575***     38.915***     91.935***     220.458***     960.037***




48
                          (0.534)      (0.582)      (0.853)      (0.931)      (1.073)      (1.508)      (2.011)       (2.845)       (4.309)        (8.002)       (14.213)

      City              0.521***     0.389***     0.878***     0.912***     0.949***     0.775***      1.299***     2.045***      3.363***       7.466***      19.508***

                          (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.040)      (0.044)      (0.050)      (0.071)      (0.094)       (0.133)       (0.202)        (0.375)        (0.672)

      City*Dist         2.776***     5.783***         0.214       -1.029       -0.501        -0.27   -17.751***    -36.835***    -90.069***    -221.470***    -934.595***

                          (0.534)      (0.583)      (0.855)      (0.932)      (1.075)      (1.510)      (2.013)       (2.849)       (4.315)        (8.013)       (14.236)

      Chain             -5.821***    -5.010***    -9.369***   -10.443***   -11.791***   -14.309***   -17.450***    -21.232***    -24.252***     -37.419***     -67.215***

                          (0.020)      (0.022)      (0.032)      (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.056)      (0.075)       (0.106)       (0.160)        (0.298)        (0.525)

             2
      Dist             34.381***    47.169***    22.303***    16.981***    26.898***    36.483***    -39.254***   -142.333***   -389.547***   -1071.870***   -5238.861***

                          (3.072)      (3.351)      (4.913)      (5.358)      (6.178)      (8.679)     (11.575)      (16.379)      (24.805)       (46.066)       (81.902)

             3
      Dist              0.031***     0.037***     0.034***     0.037***     0.041***     0.068***      0.080***     0.061***         0.027*      -0.159***      0.725***

                          (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.029)        (0.063)

                   2
      City*Dist        -34.723***   -47.560***   -22.682***   -17.386***   -27.347***   -37.132***   38.493***    141.596***    388.977***    1072.661***    5230.745***

                          (3.072)      (3.351)      (4.913)      (5.358)      (6.178)      (8.679)     (11.575)      (16.379)      (24.805)       (46.066)       (81.903)

      Const             5.332***     4.107***     8.782***    10.177***    12.001***    15.144***    17.858***     21.370***     23.931***      36.707***     104.313***

                          (0.039)      (0.042)      (0.062)      (0.068)      (0.078)      (0.110)      (0.147)       (0.208)       (0.314)        (0.584)        (1.055)

      N                   159566       159566       159566       159566       159566       159566       159566        159566        159566         159566         165297

      R2                    0.708        0.599        0.714        0.728        0.726        0.685        0.711          0.68         0.577          0.525          0.497




     Note: * signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%. Standard errors in parenthesis.
    Figure 12: Estimation of the city border eect using all data and excluding outliers



                                                  (a)   Implied Kilometers


               Additional Km implied by City Border Eect for Stores 10 Km Apart




                            25
                            20
                            15
                       Km
                            10
                            5
                            0




                                 Mean     80     85     90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                             Percentile




                                        (b)   Relative Increase in Price Dispersion


                                        of City Borders for Stores 10 Km Apart




Note:   Panel (a) shows the additional km implied by the city border eect for the linear specication,

excluding outliers, and using 500 bins. Panel (b) shows the relative increase in the degree of segmentation,

with its 95th percent condence band, for the same specication.


                                                             49
                      Table 7: Weighted Least Square Estimation of Price Dierential excluding Outliers and for 500 bins


                                                                              Linear Specication


                        Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance          4.188***    3.684***     5.205***     5.564***     6.442***     8.025***    13.066***     15.412***     16.448***      21.987***      43.223***

                          -0.173       -0.189       -0.285        -0.31        -0.35       -0.469       -0.617        -0.775        -0.925         -1.313        (1.719)

      City              1.252***    1.242***     1.674***     1.715***     1.851***     1.933***      2.178***     2.554***      2.814***       2.036***       3.885***

                          -0.015       -0.017       -0.025       -0.028       -0.031       -0.042       -0.055        -0.069        -0.083         -0.117        (0.153)

      City*Dist        -4.031***    -3.489***    -5.040***    -5.404***    -6.316***    -7.945***   -13.075***    -15.427***    -16.567***     -22.461***     -42.125***

                          -0.173       -0.189       -0.285        -0.31        -0.35       -0.469       -0.617        -0.775        -0.925         -1.313        (1.720)

      Chain            -6.114***    -5.327***    -9.843***   -10.971***   -12.380***   -14.943***   -18.049***    -21.893***    -24.775***     -34.202***     -48.398***

                           -0.02       -0.021       -0.032       -0.035       -0.039       -0.053       -0.069        -0.087        -0.104         -0.148        (0.187)

      Const             5.046***    3.773***     8.537***     9.959***    11.755***    14.834***    17.891***     21.944***     25.812***      38.182***      67.798***

                          -0.036       -0.039       -0.059       -0.064       -0.073       -0.097       -0.128        -0.161        -0.192         -0.273        (0.358)

      N                  183341       183341       183341       183341       183341       183341       183341        183341        183341         183341         184277

      R2                   0.752        0.657        0.749        0.761        0.764        0.733        0.736         0.749         0.735          0.687          0.645




                                                                            Non Linear Specication


                        Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance          -1.220**    -3.840***    2.562***     3.890***     3.888***     5.123***    23.404***     44.674***     67.140***     190.276***     496.586***




50
                          -0.506       -0.553       -0.835       -0.909       -1.027       -1.376       -1.812        -2.276        -2.716         -3.838        (4.885)

      City              0.544***    0.439***     0.973***     1.014***     1.045***     0.886***      1.347***     2.148***      2.999***       5.676***      10.710***

                          -0.024       -0.026       -0.039       -0.043       -0.049       -0.065       -0.086        -0.108        -0.128         -0.181        (0.231)

      City*Dist         2.632***    5.349***        -0.989     -2.257**     -2.080**     -2.727**   -20.608***    -41.664***    -64.293***    -187.771***    -481.214***

                          -0.507       -0.554       -0.836        -0.91       -1.029       -1.378       -1.815         -2.28         -2.72         -3.845        (4.893)

      Chain            -6.099***    -5.312***    -9.823***   -10.949***   -12.355***   -14.911***   -18.000***    -21.820***    -24.680***     -33.997***     -47.680***

                          -0.019       -0.021       -0.032       -0.035       -0.039       -0.053       -0.069        -0.087        -0.104         -0.147        (0.180)

             2
      Dist             33.048***   45.971***    16.168***     10.248**    15.630***     17.760**    -63.107***   -178.667***   -309.537***   -1027.722***   -2772.443***

                          -2.908       -3.175       -4.797       -5.221         -5.9       -7.905      -10.406       -13.076       -15.599        -22.048       (28.102)

             3
      Dist              0.067***    0.068***     0.072***     0.075***     0.090***     0.139***      0.176***     0.174***      0.147***       0.134***       0.619***

                          -0.002       -0.002       -0.004       -0.004       -0.005       -0.006       -0.008         -0.01        -0.012         -0.017        (0.022)

                  2
      City*Dist       -33.610***   -46.552***   -16.786***    -10.896**   -16.387***    -18.860**   61.740***    177.259***    308.252***    1026.488***    2766.629***

                          -2.908       -3.175       -4.797       -5.221         -5.9       -7.905      -10.406       -13.076       -15.599        -22.048       (28.102)

      Const             5.202***    3.992***     8.610***    10.003***    11.825***    14.912***    17.574***     21.062***     24.291***      33.159***      54.267***

                          -0.038       -0.042       -0.063       -0.069       -0.078       -0.104       -0.138        -0.173        -0.206         -0.291        (0.372)

      N                  183341       183341       183341       183341       183341       183341       183341        183341        183341         183341         184277

      R2                   0.755        0.661        0.751        0.762        0.766        0.734        0.737          0.75         0.736          0.691          0.669




     Note: * signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.
     Figure 13: Estimation of the city border eect excluding meat, bread, and outliers



                                                    (a)   Implied Kilometers


                Additional Km implied by City Border Eect for Stores 10 Km Apart




                             20
                             10
                        Km
                             0
                             −10




                                   Mean     80     85     90   95    97.5   99   99.5   99.9   Max
                                                               Percentile




                                          (b)   Relative Increase in Price Dispersion


                                          of City Borders for Stores 10 Km Apart




Note:   Panel (a) shows the additional km implied by the city border eect for the linear specication,

excluding meat, bread, as well as outliers, using 500 bins. Panel (b) shows the relative increase in the degree

of segmentation, with its 95th percent condence band, for the same specication.


                                                               51
     Table 8: Weighted Least Square Estimation of Price Dierential excluding Meat, Bread and Outliers, and for 500 bins


                                                                              Linear Specication


                        Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance         3.892***     3.291***     4.753***     5.128***     6.249***     7.930***    13.006***     15.211***     17.272***      24.002***      45.887***

                          -0.169       -0.185       -0.279       -0.305       -0.348       -0.478       -0.637        -0.789        -0.939         -1.374        (1.820)

      City             1.149***     1.143***     1.520***     1.545***     1.674***     1.721***      1.923***     2.382***      2.772***       1.754***       3.603***

                          -0.015       -0.016       -0.025       -0.027       -0.031       -0.043       -0.057         -0.07        -0.084         -0.123        (0.162)

      City*Dist        -3.760***    -3.128***    -4.621***    -5.000***    -6.149***    -7.872***   -13.035***    -15.237***    -17.375***     -24.488***     -44.766***

                          -0.169       -0.185       -0.279       -0.305       -0.348       -0.478       -0.638         -0.79        -0.939         -1.374        (1.821)

      Chain            -5.954***    -5.151***    -9.579***   -10.700***   -12.104***   -14.697***   -17.884***    -21.690***    -24.328***     -33.595***     -48.239***

                          -0.019       -0.021       -0.031       -0.034       -0.039       -0.054       -0.072        -0.089        -0.106         -0.155        (0.198)

      Const            5.140***     3.873***     8.674***    10.103***    11.893***    14.988***    18.073***     22.063***     25.784***      38.307***      67.890***

                          -0.034       -0.037       -0.056       -0.061        -0.07       -0.097       -0.129        -0.159         -0.19         -0.277        (0.369)

      N                  163729       163729       163729       163729       163729       163729       163729        163729        163729         163729         165257

      R2                   0.718        0.611        0.715        0.728        0.731        0.698        0.718          0.74         0.714           0.65           0.62




                                                                            Non Linear Specication


                        Average           50           80           85           90           95          97.5           99           99.5           99.9          Max


      Distance         -1.484***    -4.044***     1.702**     2.972***      2.602**      3.160**    21.621***     41.226***     61.861***     189.136***     503.975***




52
                          -0.496       -0.541       -0.818       -0.895       -1.021       -1.406       -1.874         -2.32        -2.759          -4.02        (5.173)

      City             0.458***     0.352***     0.824***     0.852***     0.872***     0.677***      1.103***     1.907***      2.762***       5.301***      10.530***

                          -0.023       -0.026       -0.039       -0.042       -0.048       -0.066       -0.089         -0.11         -0.13          -0.19        (0.244)

      City*Dist        2.850***     5.523***         -0.18       -1.398       -0.876       -0.885   -18.941***    -38.225***    -58.906***    -186.650***    -488.696***

                          -0.496       -0.542       -0.819       -0.896       -1.023       -1.408       -1.877        -2.324        -2.763         -4.026        (5.181)

      Chain            -5.940***    -5.137***    -9.560***   -10.679***   -12.083***   -14.670***   -17.840***    -21.623***    -24.239***     -33.397***     -47.521***

                          -0.019       -0.021       -0.031       -0.034       -0.039       -0.054       -0.072        -0.089        -0.106         -0.154        (0.191)

             2
      Dist            32.907***    44.890***    18.684***     13.212**    22.336***    29.204***    -52.666***   -159.090***   -272.702***   -1010.075***   -2805.846***

                          -2.851       -3.113       -4.705       -5.148       -5.876       -8.088      -10.782        -13.35       -15.875         -23.13       (29.808)

             3
      Dist             0.068***     0.071***     0.074***     0.078***     0.092***     0.139***      0.178***     0.184***      0.163***       0.137***       0.600***

                          -0.002       -0.002       -0.004       -0.004       -0.005       -0.006       -0.008         -0.01        -0.012         -0.018        (0.023)

                  2
      City*Dist       -33.471***   -45.482***   -19.309***   -13.863***   -23.085***   -30.284***   51.313***    157.639***    271.333***    1008.830***    2800.138***

                          -2.852       -3.113       -4.705       -5.148       -5.876       -8.088      -10.782        -13.35       -15.875         -23.13       (29.808)

      Const            5.296***     4.086***     8.760***    10.162***    11.996***    15.122***    17.809***     21.281***     24.448***      33.390***      54.252***

                          -0.037        -0.04       -0.061       -0.066       -0.076       -0.104       -0.139        -0.172        -0.204         -0.298        (0.384)

      N                  163729       163729       163729       163729       163729       163729       163729        163729        163729         163729         165257

      R2                   0.721        0.616        0.716         0.73        0.733        0.699        0.719         0.741         0.715          0.655          0.646




     Note: * signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.
A.4 Data Details

              Table 9: Description of products in the database and share in CPI.

Product                  Brand                        Specication             Share in CPI (%)
Beer                     Pilsen                       0.96 L                   0.38
Beer                     Patricia                     0.96 L                   0.38
Beer                     Zillertal                    1L                       0.38
Bleach                   Agua Jane                    1L                       n/i
Bleach                   Solucion Cristal             1L                       n/i
Bleach                   Sello Rojo                   1L                       n/i
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      No Brand - Cow               1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      No Brand                     1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      With Bone - No Brand         1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      Boneless - No Brand          1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      With Bone - No Brand - Cow   1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Aguja"      Boneless - No Brand          1 Kg                     0.23
Bovine Beef "Nalga"      No Brand - Novillo           1 Kg                     0.32
Bovine Beef "Nalga"      With Bone - No Brand         1 Kg                     0.32
Bovine Beef "Nalga"      Boneless - No Brand          1 Kg                     0.32
Bovine Beef "Nalga"      Boneless - No Brand - Cow    1 Kg                     0.32
Bovine Beef "Nalga"      With Bone - No Brand - Cow   1 Kg                     0.32
Bovine Beef "Paleta"     With Bone - No Brand - Cow   1 Kg                     0.20
Bovine Beef "Paleta"     Boneless - No Brand          1 Kg                     0.20
Bovine Beef "Paleta"     With Bone - No Brand         1 Kg                     0.20
Bovine Beef "Peceto"     No Brand                     1 Kg                     0.16
Bovine Beef "Peceto"     No Brand - Cow               1 Kg                     0.16
Bovine Beef "Rueda"      With Bone - No Brand         1 Kg                     0.17
Bovine Beef "Rueda"      With Bone - No Brand - Cow   1 Kg                     0.17
Bread                    Bimbo                        0.33 Kg                  0.06
Bread                    Los Sorchantes               0.33 Kg                  0.06
Bread                    Pan Catalan                  0.33 Kg                  0.06
Bread                    No Brand                     1 Unit Aprox. 0.215 Kg   1.14
Brown Eggs               El Ecologito                 1/2 Dozen                0.46
Brown Eggs               El Jefe                      1/2 Dozen                0.46
Brown Eggs               Prodhin                      1/2 Dozen                0.46
Brown Eggs               Super huevo                  1/2 Dozen                0.46
Brown Eggs               El Ecologito                 1 Dozen                  0.46
Brown Eggs               El Jefe                      1 Dozen                  0.46
Brown Eggs               Prodhin                      1 Dozen                  0.46
Burgers                  Burgy                        3 Units                  0.17
Burgers                  Schneck                      2 Units                  0.17
Burgers                  Paty                         2 Units                  0.17
Butter                   LacterÃa                     0.2 Kg                   0.23
Butter                   Conaprole sin sal            0.2 Kg                   0.23
Butter                   Calcar                       0.2 Kg                   0.23
Butter                   Kasdorf                      0.2 Kg                   0.23
Cacao                    Copacabana                   0.5 Kg                   0.08
Cacao                    Aguila                       0.5 Kg                   0.08
Cacao                    Vascolet                     0.5 Kg                   0.08
Cacao                    Saint                        0.5 Kg                   0.08
Cheese                   Cerros del Este              1 Kg                     0.21
Cheese                   Dispnat                      1 Kg                     0.21
Chicken                  Avesur                       1 Kg                     0.83
Chicken                  Tenent                       1 Kg                     0.83
Chicken                  Avicola del Oeste            1 Kg                     0.83
Chicken                  Melilla                      1 Kg                     0.83
Chicken                  Tres Arroyos                 1 Kg                     0.83
Coee                    Aguila                       0.25 Kg                  0.09
Coee                    Chana                        0.25 Kg                  0.09
Coee                    Saint                        0.25 Kg                  0.09
Coee                    Tropical                     0.2 Kg                   0.09
Cola                     Coca Cola                    1.5 L                    1.23
Cola                     Pepsi                        1.5 L                    1.23
Cola                     Nix                          1.5 L                    1.23
Cola                     Coca Cola                    2.25 L                   1.23
Cola                     Pepsi                        2L                       1.23
Corn oil                 Delicia                      0.9 L                    n/i
Continue in next page.


                                                        53
Table 9  continued from previous page
Product                 Brand                   Specication                  Share in CPI (%)
Corn oil                Rio de la Plata         0.9 L                         n/i
Corn oil                Salad                   1 Kg                          n/i
Cornmeal                Gourmet                 0.45 Kg                       n/i
Cornmeal                Presto Pronta Arcor     0.5 Kg                        n/i
Cornmeal                Puritas                 0.45 Kg                       n/i
Crakers                 Famosa                  0.14 Kg                       0.28
Crakers                 Maestro Cubano          0.12 Kg                       0.28
Crakers                 El Trigal               0.15 Kg                       0.28
Deodorant               Axe Musk                0.113 Kg                      0.34
Deodorant               Dove Original           0.1 Kg                        0.34
Deodorant               Rexona Active Emotion   0.105 Kg                      0.34
Diswashing detergent    Hurra Nevex Limon       1.25 L                        0.13
Diswashing detergent    Deterjane               1.25 L                        0.13
Diswashing detergent    Protergente limon       1L                            0.13
Dulce de leche          Conaprole               1 Kg                          0.14
Dulce de leche          Manjar                  1 Kg                          0.14
Dulce de leche          Los Nietitos            1 Kg                          0.14
Fish                    No Brand                1 Kg                          0.43
Flour                   Cololo                  1 Kg                          0.21
Flour                   Canuelas                1 Kg                          0.21
Flour                   Cololo                  1 Kg                          0.21
Flour                   Puritas                 1 Kg                          0.21
Frankfurters            Cattivelli              8 Units - Aprox.   0.340 Kg   0.23
Frankfurters            Ottonello               8 Units - Aprox.   0.330 Kg   0.23
Frankfurters            Schneck                 8 Units - Aprox.   0.330 Kg   0.23
Frankfurters            Centenario              8 Units - Aprox.   0.33 Kg    0.23
Frankfurters            Sarubbi                 8 Units                       0.23
Frozen sh              No Brand                1 Kg                          n/i
Grated Cheese           Conaprole               0.08 Kg                       0.16
Grated Cheese           El Trebol               0.08 Kg                       0.16
Grated Cheese           Milky                   0.08 Kg                       0.16
Grated Cheese           Artesano                0.08 Kg                       0.16
Grit Noodles            Adria                   0.5 Kg                        0.43
Grit Noodles            Las Acacias             0.5 Kg                        0.43
Grit Noodles            Puritas                 0.5 Kg                        0.43
Ground Beef             No Brand - Cow          1 Kg                          0.98
Ground Beef             No Brand                1 Kg                          0.98
Ground Beef             Up to 20% Fat           1 Kg                          0.98
Ground Beef             Up to 5% Fat            1 Kg                          0.14
Ham                     La Constancia           1 Kg                          0.16
Ham                     Schneck                 1 Kg                          0.16
Ham                     Centenario              1 Kg                          0.16
Ice cream               Cru                    1L                            0.22
Ice cream               Conaprole               1L                            0.22
Ice cream               Gebetto                 1L                            0.22
Laundry Soap            Nevex                   0.8 Kg                        0.45
Laundry Soap            Drive                   0.8 Kg                        0.45
Laundry Soap            Skip - Paquete azul     0.8 Kg                        0.45
Laundry Soap in Bar     Bull Dog                0.3 Kg - 1 Unit               n/i
Laundry Soap in Bar     Nevex                   0.2 Kg - 1 Unit               n/i
Margarine               Doriana nueva           0.25 Kg                       n/i
Margarine               Primor                  0.25 Kg                       n/i
Margarine               Danica dorada           0.2 Kg                        n/i
Margarine               Flor                    0.25 Kg                       n/i
Mayonnaise              Hellmans                0.5 Kg                        0.21
Mayonnaise              Natura                  0.5 Kg                        0.21
Mayonnaise              Fanacoa                 0.5 Kg                        0.21
Mayonnaise              Uruguay                 0.5 Kg                        0.21
Noodles                 Cololo                  0.5 Kg                        0.43
Peach Jam               Los Nietitos            0.5 Kg                        n/i
Peach Jam               Dulciora                0.5 Kg                        n/i
Peach Jam               Limay                   0.5 Kg                        n/i
Peach jam               El Hogar                0.5 Kg                        n/i
Peas                    Arcor                   0.35 Kg                       0.09
Peas                    El Hogar                0.35 Kg                       0.09
Peas                    Trofeo                  0.35 K                        0.09
Peas                    Campero                 0.3 Kg                        0.09
Peas                    Cololo                  0.38 Kg                       0.09
Peas                    Nidemar                 0.3 Kg                        0.09
Continue in next page.


                                                  54
Table 9  continued from previous page
Product                 Brand                          Specication          Share in CPI (%)
Quince jam              Los Nietitos                   0.4 Kg                0.13
Quince jam              Limay                          0.4 Kg                0.13
Rice                    Green Chef                     1 Kg                  0.38
Rice                    Blue Patna                     1 Kg                  0.38
Rice                    Aruba tipo Patna               1 Kg                  0.38
Rice                    Pony                           1 Kg                  0.38
Rice                    Vidarroz                       1 Kg                  0.38
Rice                    Saman Blanco                   1 Kg                  0.38
Salt                    Sek                            0.5 Kg                0.09
Salt                    Urusal                         0.5 Kg                0.09
Salt                    Torrevieja                     0.5 Kg                0.09
Sausage                 Cattivelli - Extra             1 Kg                  0.37
Sausage                 La Familia - Hilo amarillo     1 Kg                  0.37
Sausage                 Centenario - Extra             1 Kg                  0.37
Semolina Noodles        Adria                          0.5 Kg                0.43
Semolina Noodles        Las Acacias - franja celeste   0.5 Kg                0.43
Shampoo                 Sedal                          0.35 L                0.36
Shampoo                 Suave                          0.93 L                0.36
Shampoo                 Fructis                        0.35 L                0.36
Soap                    Astral                         0.125 Kg              0.16
Soap                    Palmolive                      0.125 Kg              0.16
Soap                    Suave                          0.125 Kg              0.16
Soap                    Astral plata                   0.125 Kg              0.16
Soap                    Rexona                         0.125 Kg              0.16
Soap                    Primor                         0.3 Kg                n/i
Soybean Oil             Condesa                        0.9 L                 0.11
Soybean oil             Rio de la Plata                0.9 L                 0.11
Soybean oil             Salad                          0.9 L                 0.11
Sparkling Water         Salus                          2.25 L                0.82
Sparkling Water         Matutina                       2L                    0.82
Sparkling Water         Nativa                         2L                    0.82
Sugar                   Azucarlito                     1 Kg                  0.35
Sugar                   Bella Union                    1 Kg                  0.35
Sunower oil            Optimo                         0.9 L                 0.37
Sunower oil            Uruguay                        0.9 L                 0.37
Sunower oil            Rio de la Plata                0.9 L                 0.37
Tea                     Hornimans                      Box 10 Units          0.07
Tea                     La Virginia                    Box 10 Units          0.07
Tea                     Lipton                         Box 10 Units          0.07
Tea                     President                      10 Units              0.07
Toilet paper            Higienol Export                4 Unit - 25 M each    0.24
Toilet paper            Sin Fin                        4 Unit - 25 M each    0.24
Toilet paper            Personal                       4 Unit - 25 M each    0.24
Toilet paper            Elite                          4 Units - 30 M each   0.24
Tomate pulp             Gourmet                        1 Kg                  0.16
Tomato Paste            Qualitas                       1L                    0.16
Tomato Paste            Conaprole                      1L                    0.16
Tomato Paste            De Ley                         1L                    0.16
Toothpaste              Colgate Total                  0.09 Kg               0.19
Toothpaste              Kolynos                        0.09 Kg               0.19
Toothpaste              Colgate Herbal Blanqueador     0.09 Kg               0.19
Toothpaste              Closeup Triple                 0.09 Kg               0.19
Toothpaste              Kolynos Triple accion          0.09 Kg               0.19
Toothpaste              Pico Jenner Plus               0.09 Kg               0.19
Wheat Flour             Canuelas                       1 Kg                  0.21
Wheat Flour             Primor                         1 Kg                  0.21
Wine                    Santa Teresa Clasico           1L                    0.79
Wine                    Tango                          1L                    0.79
Wine                    Roses                          1L                    0.79
Wine                    Faisan                         1L                    0.79
Yerba                   Canarias                       1 Kg                  0.64
Yerba                   Sara                           1 Kg                  0.64
Yerba                   Envase Del Cebador             1 Kg                  0.64
Yerba                   Del Cebador                    1 Kg                  0.64
Yerba                   Baldo                          1 Kg                  0.64
Yogurt                  Conaprole                      0.5 Kg                0.13
Yogurt                  Parmalat (Skim)                0.5 Kg                0.14
Yogurt                  Calcar                         1L                    0.14
Yogurt                  Conaprole BIO TOP              1.2 L                 0.14
Continue in next page.


                                                         55
Table 9  continued from previous page
Product                 Brand                        Specication                Share in CPI (%)
Yogurt                  Parmalat BIO YOGUR           1L                          0.14

Note: n/i means not included in the CPI, Kg. kilograms, L. liters and M. meters.
Source: Own elaboration from data of the Uruguayan Ministry of Economy and Finance.




                                                       56
