                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HOUSING MARKET SPILLOVERS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE END OF RENT CONTROL IN CAMBRIDGE MASSACHUSETTS

                                           David H. Autor
                                         Christopher J. Palmer
                                           Parag A. Pathak

                                         Working Paper 18125
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18125


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012




We thank seminar participants at Berkeley, the Boston Fed, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, NYU, Stanford,
Virginia, and the NBER Summer Institute on Local Public Finance and Real Estate and our discussants,
Erzo Luttmer and Jaren Pope, for comments and suggestions. We are grateful to David Sims for assistance
with Cambridge Rent Control Board data and to Norma Coe, Cliff Cook, Bill Cunningham, Lisa Sweeney,
and the staff at the Cambridge Assessor's Office for invaluable access to expertise and data. We acknowledge
generous support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Lincoln Institute for Land Policy, the National
Science Foundation (grant SES--962572), and the Rappaport Institute for Greater Boston. Palmer thanks
the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (grant 0645960). We received excellent
research assistance from Andrew Garin, Annalisa Scognamiglio, Karen Scott, Barrett Strickland, Daniel
Sullivan, Thiago Vieira, and Melanie Wasserman, as well as a hardworking team of MIT undergraduate
data sleuths. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from the End of Rent Control in Cambridge Massachusetts
David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 18125
June 2012
JEL No. D61,H23,R23,R31,R32,R38

                                                 ABSTRACT

Understanding potential spillovers from the attributes and actions of neighborhood residents onto the
value of surrounding properties and neighborhoods is central to both the theory of urban economics
and the development of efficient housing policy. This paper measures the capitalization of housing
market spillovers by studying the sudden and largely unanticipated 1995 elimination of stringent rent
controls in Cambridge, Massachusetts that had previously muted landlords' investment incentives and
altered the assignment of residents to locations. Pooling administrative data on the assessed values
of each residential property and the prices and characteristics of all residential transactions between
1988 and 2005, we find that rent control's removal produced large, positive, and robust spillovers onto
the price of never-controlled housing from nearby decontrolled units. Elimination of rent control added
about $1.8 billion to the value of Cambridge's housing stock between 1994 and 2004, equal to nearly
a quarter of total Cambridge residential price appreciation in this period. Positive spillovers to never-controlled
properties account for more half of the induced price appreciation. Residential investments can explain
only a small fraction of the total.


David H. Autor                                           Parag A. Pathak
MIT, Department of Economics                             MIT, Department of Economics
E52-371                                                  E52-391C
50 Memorial Drive                                        50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                 Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER                                                 and NBER
dautor@mit.edu                                           ppathak@mit.edu

Christopher J. Palmer
MIT, Department of Economics
E52-391
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
cjpalmer@mit.edu
1        Introduction
Understanding potential spillovers from the attributes and actions of neighborhood residents onto the
value of surrounding properties and neighborhoods is central to both the theory of urban economics
and the development of efficient housing policy (Fujita, 1991; Glaeser and Gyourko, 2009). Credibly
identifying and quantifying these spillovers, however, poses a significant empirical challenge because
key features of the housing market equilibrium—in particular, who lives where, the quality and
quantity of housing, the levels of local public goods and amenities, and what prices prevail—are
simultaneously determined.
        This paper exploits an unusual, large scale policy change in Cambridge, Massachusetts to quantify
the capitalization of residential housing market spillovers onto the value of real estate, specifically,
from the elimination of rent control in 1995. From December 1970 through 1994, all rental property
in Cambridge built prior to 1969 was regulated by a far-reaching rent control ordinance that placed
strict caps on rent increases and tightly restricted the removal of units from the rental stock. The
legislative intent of the rent control ordinance was to provide affordable rental housing, and at the
eve of rent control’s elimination in 1994, controlled units typically rented at 25 to 40 percent below
the price of nearby non-controlled properties—though maintenance and amenities in controlled units
were typically sub-par (Sims, 2007).
        The policy change that provides the identifying variation for our study is the swift elimination of
Cambridge’s rent control law via a statewide ballot initiative. In November 1994, the Massachusetts
electorate passed a referendum to eliminate rent control by a narrow 51% to 49% margin, with
nearly 60% of Cambridge residents voting to retain the rent control ordinance. The removal of rent
controls took effect in January of 1995, only two months after the referendum.1
        The decontrol of Cambridge’s rental market offers a unique opportunity to measure spillovers in
residential housing markets. In addition to its swift and largely unanticipated elimination, two fea-
tures of Cambridge’s rent control system make it well-suited for identifying housing market spillovers.
First, Cambridge’s rent control ordinance only applied to a fixed, non-expanding set of residential
units—specifically, non-owner occupied rental houses, condominiums, or apartments built prior to
1969. By contrast, units built after 1968, older non-residential units converted to residential sta-
tus, and owner-occupied units faced no threat of rent control.2 The fact that controlled and non-
controlled units stood side by side in Cambridge neighborhoods at the time that rent control was
removed offers a tight temporal and geographic framework for assessing the impact of the law on
residential property prices.
        A second empirical virtue of Cambridge’s rent control system is that there was substantial
variation across neighborhoods in the share of units subject to rent controls. Although roughly a
third of residential units were controlled prior to elimination (see Figure 1), this fraction frequently
    1
     A last-minute legislative compromise, discussed below, allowed disabled, elderly, and low-income renters to retain
their current units at controlled rents for up to two years.
   2
     If an owner-occupied residential unit built before 1969 were put up for rent, it could be subject to rent control.
Our informal understanding based on discussions with Cambridge homeowners of that era was that such rentals were
rare and often arranged discreetly to avoid the notice of the Rent Control Board.


                                                          1
exceeded sixty percent in neighborhoods with older housing stocks and a substantial share of renters
at the time of rent control’s enactment in 1970. This cross-neighborhood variation in the fraction
of units that were decontrolled allows us to assess localized price spillovers by comparing pre-post
removal price appreciation among never-controlled properties in neighborhoods that differed in their
‘Rent Control Intensity’—that is, the share of residential units that were controlled.
       The hypothesized price spillovers studied here could arise through two main channels, investment
and resident allocation (or sorting). On the first channel, it is likely that Cambridge’s rent control
law muted owners’ incentives to maintain and improve controlled properties since the Rent Control
Board was unlikely to grant rent increases following property improvements.3 This may have reduced
the desirability of the local neighborhoods in which these properties were located. Decontrol would
have spurred long-deferred investments in formerly controlled units, with the potential for positive
spillovers to nearby never-controlled units. Consistent with this mechanism, Sims (2007) presents
evidence that chronic maintenance problems (such as holes in walls or floors, chipped or peeling
paint, loose railings, etc.) were more prevalent in controlled than non-controlled units during the
rent-control era and that this differential fell substantially with rent control’s elimination.
       Spillovers might also accrue through the sorting of individuals to housing units. Cambridge’s
rent control law was intended to enable relatively less affluent individuals to reside in units that
would command high rents under a market allocation—most notably, the dense neighborhoods
proximate to Cambridge’s major universities, commercial centers, and transportation hubs. While
there was no formal mechanism to allocate controlled units to low-income households, limited quan-
titative evidence indicates that less affluent residents and students were overrepresented in controlled
units—though a significant number of units were also occupied by wealthy professionals.4 If affluent
residents prefer to locate near one another, a high concentration of rent controlled units in a neigh-
borhood might dampen demand for nearby non-controlled units. More affluent tenants moving into
newly decontrolled units could potentially raise demand among other affluent households to reside in
nearby never-controlled units. If either the investment or allocation channel was operative, the end
of rent control in Cambridge had the potential to spur differential appreciation of never-controlled
units as induced improvement in local amenities capitalized into prices.
       Regulations are widespread in housing markets and rent control is arguably among the most
important regulations historically (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2009). The modern era of U.S. rent controls
began as a part of World War II-era price controls and as a reaction to housing shortages following
demographic changes immediately after the war (Fetter, 2011). Even though the prevalence of rent
control as a housing market policy has decreased since this period, rent control and rent stabilization
   3
      Leonard (1981) notes that the Board limited the allowable rate of return on investments at a “relatively low”
level deemed “fair,” which made improvements both comparatively unprofitable and difficult to finance. Rent Control
Board records indicate that applications for rent adjustments were infrequent—once per decade for a typical unit.
    4
      A 1998 study commission by the City of Cambridge found that sitting residents of formerly controlled units had
mean annual earnings in 1997 of $35,650 versus $43,630 among tenants of market rate units and $41,340 among tenants
of formerly controlled units who had taken residence after rent control removal (Atlantic Marketing Research, 1998).
Sims (2007) calculates that 67 percent of residents of rent controlled units in Boston, Brookline, and Cambridge were
in the bottom two quartiles of the income distribution. At the same time, blacks were substantially underrepresented
in controlled units.


                                                         2
plans are still in place in many U.S. and European cities (Arnott, 1995). New York City’s system
of rent regulation affects at least one million apartments, while cities such as San Francisco, Los
Angeles, Washington DC, and many towns in California and New Jersey have various forms of rent
regulation. Rent control remains a topic of active debate among affordable housing advocates.
    The early empirical literature on rent control focuses on its effects on the supply of rental proper-
ties (Olsen, 1972) and the incentives of landlords to invest in building quality (Frankena, 1975; Gy-
ourko and Linneman, 1989). A second strand of this literature examines how below-market rents
may encourage individuals to spend effort to obtain cheap housing and how this may lead to a
misallocation of housing (Suen, 1989; Glaeser and Luttmer, 2003; Sims, 2011). Fallis and Smith
(1984) examine how the impact of rent control on the uncontrolled sector depends on the allocation
mechanism in the controlled sector. Wang (2011) investigates the impact of privatization of housing
that was owned and allocated by the state in urban China. Her analysis, like ours, shows that the
degree of misallocation of assets prior to privatization impacts the expected change in prices.
    Sims (2007) undertakes the first empirical analysis of the end of rent control in Massachusetts,
focusing on its impacts on the supply of rental properties and their rental prices. Sims produces
compelling evidence that the elimination of rent control caused substantial increases in rents in
Massachusetts towns (Boston, Brookline and Cambridge) that had binding rent control laws in
1994, and led to significant increases in the quality and quantity of rental housing available. Distinct
from Sims’ work, we analyze rent control’s effect on the market value (rather than rental prices)
of the entire residential housing stock (not simply rental units) in Cambridge and distinguish its
direct effects on the value of decontrolled properties from the spillover effects onto never-controlled
properties.5
    This paper is also related to studies of neighborhood revitalization and gentrification, both of
which may generate spillover benefits to surrounding areas (Hurst, Guerrieri and Hartley, 2011;
Ioannides, 2003; Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Owens, 2010; Schwartz, Ellen, Voicu and Schill, 2005).
Studies by Linden and Rockoff (2008) and Pope (2008) of the housing market impacts of the arrival
of registered sex offenders into a neighborhood consider allocative externalities in residential housing.
Recent interest in measuring external effects in housing has been spurred in part by historically high
levels of foreclosures and the concern for their impact on immediate neighbors and neighborhoods
(Campbell, Giglio and Pathak, 2011; Hartley, 2010; Mian, Sufi and Trebbi, 2011).6
    Price controls are not unique to housing markets. A large literature examines the effects of
price controls in labor markets (Holzer, Katz and Krueger, 1991; Card and Krueger, 1995) and
energy markets (Frech and Lee, 1987; Davis and Killian, 2011). Relative to this literature, our main
interest is on a relatively under-explored consequence of price controls: the external effects on the
non-controlled sector, which seem likely to play an especially important role in the housing market.
    Our analysis draws on a uniquely detailed geographic and economic database sourced from
   5
     Sims (2007) further explores spillovers from decontrol onto the rental price of never-controlled units, but his data
do not allow sufficient precision to draw firm conclusions.
   6
     In addition, a number of papers present evidence that subprime mortgage lending leads to price appreciation in
neighborhoods where housing credit was historically in short supply (Mian and Sufi, 2009; Landvoigt, Piazzesi and
Schneider, 2011).


                                                           3
Cambridge administrative records that enumerate the exact location of all rent controlled units, the
assessed value of each house and condominium in 1994 and 2004, the transacted price of each resi-
dential property sold between 1988 and 2005, the movement of properties across various residential
and non-residential uses (e.g., houses that were converted to condominiums), and the permitted in-
vestment expenditures at each residential location. We also use 10 years of Cambridge City Census
data to document the rapid turnover of residents of formerly controlled units following the end of
rent control. These sources permit direct estimation of the change in residential real estate prices in-
duced by rent decontrol, distinguishing between direct effects on the value of decontrolled properties
and the indirect (spillover) effects onto never-controlled properties nearby.
   We find compelling evidence that the elimination of rent control generated positive spillovers
onto the assessed values of never-controlled properties. Using the fraction of all residential units
within a 0.20 mile radius that were subject to rent control as of 1994 as a measure of of rent
control exposure, we estimate that houses at the mean level of rent control exposure of 34 percent
appreciated by roughly 12 percent more than houses with no nearby controlled neighbors; houses
at one standard deviation above the mean level of exposure appreciated in value by an additional 6
percent. While estimated spillovers are large, precise, and robust for houses, the spillover results are
not as consistent for condominiums. One reason for this difference may be that the decade following
the end of rent control saw a 32 percent increase in the number of condominiums in the Cambridge
housing stock—driven in large part by the conversion of apartments and houses to condominiums—a
potentially mitigating supply shock.
   Our statistical analysis also indicates that rent controlled properties were valued at a discount
of about 50 percent relative to never-controlled properties with comparable characteristics in the
same neighborhoods during the rent control era, and that the assessed values of these properties in-
creased by approximately 18 to 25 percent after rent control ended. The appreciation of decontrolled
properties likely reflects a mixture of increased rental revenue (which would capitalize into valua-
tions), additional maintenance and improvements made at these locations, and potentially positive
spillovers from improved maintenance and changes in resident composition at nearby units.
   Our key findings are robust to numerous alternative measures of rent control intensity, to rich
controls for property-level characteristics (such as age, lot size, and number of bedrooms and bath-
rooms), and to the inclusion of detailed geographic fixed effects and neighborhood trends that allow
price levels to vary across Cambridge neighborhoods and to trend over time within them. Data
on transactions prices for all properties sold in Cambridge between 1988-2005 provide an alterna-
tive data source for measuring changes in market values. These data yield comparable estimates
of spillover effects to those found using the assessor’s data. We further explore the possibility that
the rising market value of never-controlled properties in Cambridge after 1994 reflects a general
increase in demand for urban residential locations rather than a Cambridge-specific phenomenon
per se. Using data on residential transaction prices from 1988 through 2005 for the nearby cities
of Somerville, Malden, and Medford, we find no consistent evidence of similar differential rises in
property prices in comparison neighborhoods. It bears emphasis that the elimination of Cambridge



                                                   4
rent control occurred well before the changes in the availability of home financing associated with
sub-prime lending commencing in 2001 and the subsequent growth of mortgage credit in 2002-2005
documented by Mian and Sufi (2009). As an additional check on this concern, we verify that our
results are unaffected by eliminating the subset of residential transactions in which the mortgage
holder is known to have issued subprime loans.
   To unpack the channels through which the removal of rent controls capitalized into Cambridge
housing values, we analyze administrative data on residential expenditures permitted by the Cam-
bridge Inspectional Services for significant investments or modifications made to housing. Aggregate
annual real permitted building expenditures increased dramatically for both houses and condomini-
ums after 1994, rising from $21 million per year between 1991-1994 to $45 million per year between
1995 and 2004. We find some evidence that the incidence of permitting—though not investment
expenditures per unit—rose differentially at formerly controlled properties in the years immediately
following rent control removal. But the total value of Cambridge residential investments in these
10 years was less than one quarter as large as the estimated increment of $1.8 billion to Cambridge
residential housing values induced by rent control removal, suggesting that the allocative rather than
the investment channel is the more important explanation for the post-1994 rise in the market value
of never-controlled properties.
   The economic magnitude of the effect of rent control removal on the value of Cambridge’s housing
stock is $1.8 billion. We calculate that positive spillovers from decontrol added $1.0 billion to the
value of the never-controlled housing stock in Cambridge, equal to 10 percent of its total value
and one-sixth of its appreciation between 1994 and 2004. Notably, direct effects on decontrolled
properties are smaller than the spillovers. We estimate that rent control removal raised the value of
decontrolled properties by $770 million, which is 25 percent less than the spillover effect. Since price
gains at decontrolled properties are largely a transfer from renters to owners while price changes at
never-controlled properties should reflect efficiency gains–that is, increased consumers valuation of
these locations–our findings imply that the efficiency costs of Cambridge’s rent control policy were
large relative to the size of the transfers made to residents of controlled units. Noting, however,
that the majority of Cambridge resident voted to retain rent control in 1994, a revealed preference
argument implies that the median Cambridge voter perceived the benefits of rent control to exceed
the costs.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides additional detail on the enactment, enforce-
ment, and removal of rent control in Cambridge. Section 3 describes a simple model of housing
markets in the presence of rent control to guide our empirical analysis (the Theory Appendix con-
tains the model). Section 4 describes data sources and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our
main results using property assessments, while Section 6 presents results using transaction prices.
Section 7 reports on our investigation of permitting and investment activity and Section 8 describes
economic magnitudes. We conclude with a discussion of areas for further investigation.




                                                   5
2        Cambridge Rent Control: Enactment, Enforcement and Removal
The city of Cambridge, which sits on the north side of the Charles River opposite the City of Boston,
has a population of just over 100,000, 70 percent of whom are ages 20-plus and 9 percent of whom
are age 65-plus according to the 2000 US Census. In that year, Whites accounted for 68 percent of
the population and Blacks and Asians comprised the two next largest racial groups at 12 percent
each. The city’s two major research universities, Harvard and MIT, are its largest employers. The
city also has a high concentration of biotechnology companies and healthcare providers. The median
family income was $47,900 in 2000 and 13 percent of residents were below the poverty line.

2.1       Rent control adoption and elimination
In 1970, the Massachusetts state legislature enacted a statue allowing cities and towns with popu-
lations over 50,000 to implement rent control to “alleviate the severe shortage of rental housing [...]
which shortage has caused a serious emergency detrimental to the public peace, health, safety and
convenience” (An Act Enabling Certain Cities and Towns to Control Rents and Evictions, 1970).
Boston, Brookline, Cambridge, Lynn, and Somerville each adopted a rent control plan, with Cam-
bridge moving first in 1970 and keeping the ordinance longer than any other city.7 Lynn repealed
its plan in 1974 and Somerville in 1979. Boston allowed for decontrol of vacant units in 1976 and
Brookline began to phase out its system prior to the statewide repeal, though both cities still had a
significant number of controlled units in 1994 (Cantor, 1995). In Cambridge, rent control was seen
as an integral part of the city’s affordable housing program.
        Cambridge’s initial rent control policy adopted in 1970 applied to all non-owner-occupied rental
housing built before 1969. It did not apply to structures built after January 1, 1969, to owner-
occupied condominiums, or to non-residential structures converted to rental properties after this
time. Oversight of the rent control law rested with the Cambridge Rent Control Board, whose
charter, nominally, was to ensure that landlords obtained a fair net operating income. The Board
established maximum allowable rents for each controlled property with the aim of fixing landlord
net operating income at inflation-adjusted 1967 levels. In the 1970s and 80s, the Board authorized a
series of across-the-board rent increases ranging from 1.15 to 3.1 percent, intended to cover increases
in heating costs, operating costs, and property taxes (Rent Control Board, 1982). Landlords could
also apply to raise prices beyond the levels granted by these scheduler increases—to recoup the cost
of documented capital improvements, for example. Variances from scheduler increases were rare,
however, in part because these applications required supporting petitions, extensive legal documen-
tation, and substantial time investments.8
        Distinct from other cities, Cambridge’s rent control policy did not allow for so-called “vacancy
decontrol,” whereby controlled rental units were returned to market-rate rents after protected tenants
    7
    See Epple (1988) for a game-theoretic model of communities’ decisions to adopt rent control.
    8
    A legendary incident involves Harvard Philosophy Professor Robert Nozick extracting a settlement of over $30,000
in the 1980s from his landlord, famed classicist and novelist Eric Segal, for overcharging rent, described in Tucker
(1986).



                                                         6
moved out. This feature of Cambridge’s rent control law created an incentive for landlords to remove
units from the rental stock, and landlords responded by converting substantial numbers of units in
older buildings into condominiums and selling them to owner-occupants. To prevent the controlled
rental stock from being depleted, the city council passed in 1979 the “Removal Permit Ordinance”
despite the strenuous objections of landlords. This ordinance substantially restricted the removal
of controlled units from the rental stock and complicated the conversion of controlled units into
owner-occupied condominiums.9
       Throughout this period, rent control was a contentious issue in the political debate in Cambridge.
Repeated efforts by the Small Property Owners Association (SPOA) to roll back rent controls were
rebuffed by civic organizations, the Cambridge City Council, and the state courts. The initiative
that lead to rent control’s defeat was SPOA’s successful effort to place rent control on the state-wide
ballot in 1994, thus diluting the strong support that rent control enjoyed in Cambridge. Rent control
was eliminated by an extremely slim 51 to 49 percent margin in the 1994 state-wide election, despite
nearly 60 percent of Boston, Brookline, and Cambridge voters voting to retain the current regime.
       Following rent control’s defeat, a majority of properties were decontrolled a mere two months
later, in January of 1995. A last-minute legislative compromise, however, allowed disabled, elderly,
and low-income renters to retain their current units at their controlled rents for up to two years.
Though only a small share of residents received rent control extensions, this compromise likely
created some uncertainty about whether decontrol was final—at least until the grandfathering period
expired in 1997 with no further controls in place.10

2.2      The post decontrol regime
The elimination of rent control catalyzed a series of rapid changes in the Cambridge rental market.
Prior to decontrol, it was widely perceived that rents at controlled units were significantly below
market rate, and the data support this view. Using microdata from a 1987 Abt Associates study
(Finkel and Wallace, 1987) commissioned by the City of Cambridge, we estimate that quality-
adjusted rents were approximately 44 percent lower at controlled units than at observably similar
non-controlled units.11
   9
      This ordinance required proof that removal would not aggravate the housing shortage and would “benefit the
persons sought to be protected” by the rent control statute (Cantor, 1995). The ordinance was subsequently amended
following difficulties with enforcement, as in the case of the so-called “condo martyrs” who were prosecuted for
occupying their own controlled properties before the completion of a conversion.
   10
      Shortly after the referendum, the state legislature adopted a bill extending rent control for five years. The
Governor vetoed this bill and later signed an alternative on January 3, 1995 that granted rent control extensions
of one year (two years if the rental building had more than 12 units) to renters whose incomes were below 60% of
the median for the Boston MSA (or 80% of the MSA median for disabled and elderly renters). Sims (2007) reports
that about 3,000 of approximately 21,000 tenants applied for exemptions while Haveman (1998) reports that 9.4% of
tenants were eligible to apply.
   11
      We regressed the log of contract rent on rent-control status, tenant awareness of rent-control status, unit character-
istics (bedrooms, bathrooms, total rooms, an indicator for elevator in building, and indicators for whether furnishings,
heat, electricity, or water are included in the rent), zip-code main effects, and dummy variables indicating units that
were reported to be in either poor or excellent condition. Notably, the fraction of controlled and non-controlled units
reported in poor (excellent) condition was 9.5 (12.5) percent and 4.2 (24.4) percent, respectively. When models were
fit separately for each of the four Cambridge zip codes (the finest level of geographic identification provided in the



                                                             7
    Rents rose dramatically following decontrol. Using data from the American Housing Survey,
Sims (2007) estimates an average rent increase of $84 between 1993 and 1998 (in 1998 dollars) in
Massachusetts towns where rent controls were eliminated by the 1994 ballot initiative—an increase
of 21 percent over the average (real) monthly rent of $398 in these towns prevailing during 1985
through 1998.12 A 1998 Atlantic Marketing Survey commissioned by the City of Cambridge, which
provides data specific to Cambridge residents, found that nominal Cambridge median rents rose by
40 percent between 1994 and 1997 for tenants of formerly controlled units who either remained at
these units or moved to other non-controlled units. Median rents rose by only 13 percent for sitting
tenants of never-controlled units in the same time period.
    Consistent with the rapid increase in rents at decontrolled units, we document a sharp differential
rise in resident turnover at formerly controlled units after 1994. We measure resident turnover by
constructing an annual panel of all Cambridge adults ages 17-plus by street and address using city
voter registration records for the years 1991 through 2000.13 In this 10 year interval, 26.9 percent of
Cambridge residents turned over–that is, changed locations–with the highest turnover rates found
among apartment residents (33.5 percent), followed by residents of condominiums (29.7 percent)
and houses (23.2 percent). To explore whether turnover rates at rent control units differentially
increased after 1994, we estimate linear probability models of the following form:

                              newijt = γg + δt + λ1 RCj + λ2 RCj · Postt + ijt ,                                     (1)

where newijt is an indicator equal to one if resident i in unit j in year t was not present in that
unit in the prior year. In this model, RCj is an indicator equal to one if unit j was rent controlled
in 1994, γg is a vector of 1990 Census block group dummies, δt is a vector of year dummies, and
Postt is an indicator for years 1995 onwards.
    Estimates of this model in Table 1 show that prior to the elimination of rent control, residents
of controlled units were not significantly more likely to turnover from year to year than residents of
non-controlled units.14 Following rent control removal, the probability of resident turnover rose by
5.4 percentage points at formerly controlled units relative to never-controlled units, with an even
survey), we estimate a rent control discount of 51, 42, 41, and 35 percent respectively in zip codes 02138, 02139,
02140, and 02141. Further details are presented in the Data Appendix, and tables of estimates are available from the
authors.
   12
      This number likely underestimates the increase in rents at controlled units in Cambridge due to the fact that
the American Housing Survey data do not allow Sims to distinguish never-controlled from decontrolled units in the
post-control era. Hence, his estimates contrast changes in rents at all units in Massachusetts, comparing towns with
and without rent controls. Since only a subset of Cambridge rental units was controlled, the average rent increase in
Cambridge will understate the average rent increase at decontrolled units.
   13
      State law (M.G. L. ch. 51.4) requires an annual listing of all adult residents for voter registration, regardless of
voter status, including name, street address, gender, date of birth, occupation, and nationality. City Census books
from 1991-2000 were double-entry hand keyed and assembled into a panel using name and address matching, as
described in the Data Appendix.
   14
      Subsequent columns reveal that this result is driven by composition. Focusing only on apartments and con-
dominiums, residents of controlled units were significantly less likely to turn over than residents of non-controlled
units—consistent with the idea that controlled units had scarcity value. Residents of controlled houses, by contrast,
were significantly more likely to turnover than residents of non-controlled houses, but this likely reflects the fact that
most non-controlled houses were owner-occupied whereas controlled houses were renter-occupied.



                                                            8
larger increase when looking only at condominiums. Figure 2 depicts the evolution of this turnover
differential using a variant of equation (1) in which the rent-control indicator is interacted with a
set of eight year dummies (1994 is the omitted category). The relative turnover rate at decontrolled
units spiked by 4 percentage points in the year of rent control removal and continued to climb to 10
percentage points over the next three years, where it remained through the year 2000. The fact that
turnover at formerly controlled units continued rising for four years after decontrol suggests that the
process of resident reallocation and neighborhood change spurred by decontrol took multiple years
to unfold.
    Accompanying the increase in rents and the spike in resident turnover at decontrolled units,
Cambridge experienced a sharp increase in residential property investments, as we show below.
The number of building permits issued per residential unit for improvements and new construction
increased by approximately 20 percent after 1994, while annual permitted expenditures roughly
doubled in real terms. Additionally, elimination of the “Removal Permit Ordinance” allowed a
substantial number of decontrolled houses, apartments, and non-residential units to be converted
to condominiums in the ensuing years, thus boosting the supply of condominiums in the residential
housing stock. Finally, as demonstrated by Sims (2007), the fraction of units that were made
available as rental properties increased by nearly six percentage points after rent control removal,
reflecting the discouragement effect of the rent control law on the incentive to supply rental housing.
    This combination of sharp rent increases, rapid turnover of incumbent renters, rising residential
investment, and outward shifts in the supply of both condominiums and rental properties were
likely in net to have changed the quality of the Cambridge residential housing stock, the allocation
of residents to neighborhoods, and the availability of residential units for both rent and sale. Our
subsequent empirical analysis quantifies the capitalized value of these decontrol-induced changes in
the Cambridge housing market, focusing in particular on the spillover impacts onto never-controlled
housing.


3    The Direct and Indirect Price Effects of Rent Control
The Theory Appendix presents a stylized spatial equilibrium model of the housing market that
considers the relationship between rent control and prices of both controlled and non-controlled
properties. In the model, summarized here, a city consists of N neighborhoods with a continuum
of locations in each neighborhood. A continuum of potential residents chooses locations to maxi-
mize utility defined over consumption of housing services, a non-housing composite good, and local
amenities. Residents differ only in their taste for consumption of housing services relative to the
non-housing composite good. Profit-maximizing landlords choose the level of maintenance at each
location, and this level is increasing in residents’ tastes for housing services.
    We assume that amenities in a neighborhood depend on the level of maintenance of neighborhood
housing and the types of residents in the neighborhood, where types with higher taste for housing are
also more desirable neighbors and hence contribute more to neighborhood amenities. This formula-



                                                    9
tion creates a positive feedback from residents’ taste for housing, the extent of house maintenance,
and the production of amenities in a neighborhood. In the free market equilibrium (absent rent
controls), rents are higher in neighborhoods with greater amenities due to higher maintenance and
neighbors who spend more of their income on housing (that is, they are higher types).15
    We consider the imposition of rent controls at the initial free market equilibrium by assuming
that a rent control authority caps the rent of some fraction of units in a neighborhood at below
their free market level. Maintenance levels and hence housing services fall at controlled units since
landlords choose maintenance levels facing a regulated price. The combination of reduced rents and
lower maintenance will have one of two effects on incumbent residents: either they will be sufficiently
compensated by reduced rents so that they remain at their current locations, although the bundle
of maintenance and amenities is not optimized for their tastes; or alternatively, they will choose to
relocate to areas with higher amenities and higher rents. In the latter case, they will be replaced
by residents who prefer lower housing services, i.e., lower types.16 The average taste for housing
services at controlled locations will therefore weakly decline following the imposition of rent control.
    Since neighborhood amenities are a function of the maintenance of all units in a neighborhood
and the preferences of their residents for housing services, the supply of amenities at non-controlled
locations in these neighborhoods–as well as maintenance and rents–are also impaired by rent control.
This in turn causes lower types to move into non-controlled locations. Hence, imposition of rent
control causes inefficiently low maintenance and misallocation of residents at both controlled and
non-controlled locations within a neighborhood.
    Decontrol unwinds these effects. Prices rise due directly to the lifting of the cap, and indirectly
due to improved maintenance and increased production of local amenities throughout the neigh-
borhood. At non-controlled locations, the price increase will be greater in neighborhoods where a
larger fraction of locations were controlled, where the capped price ceiling was set further below the
market price level, and where controls induced a larger misallocation of resident types relative to
the free market setting. The lifting of controls allows an additional, direct price increase at formerly
controlled locations.
    The model also offers a simple welfare interpretation of any direct and indirect price effects of
rent decontrol. Price increases at decontrolled locations reflect three forces: a mechanical ‘uncap-
ping’ effect, which reflects a transfer from renters to owners; a price increase reflecting improved
maintenance, which generates increased landlord surplus net of the resource cost of maintenance;
and a price increase reflecting greater neighborhood amenities due to improvements in maintenance
and changes in resident types nearby. While the latter two effects reflect economic gains, the first
does not. The price increase at decontrolled locations is therefore likely to substantially exceed the
economic gains from decontrol at these locations.
    Induced price increases at non-controlled locations following decontrol reflect only two of these
  15
     The equilibrating force in the model is the convex cost function for production of housing services, which ensures
that maintenance, production of local amenities and rents do not rise without bound.
  16
     If the incumbent renter is dissatisfied with the new price-services pair, this pair can only be preferred by a lower
type.



                                                           10
three forces: real resource costs for improved maintenance (or, more generally, housing investments)
and gains in social surplus from improved neighborhood amenities (both maintenance and sorting).
The increase in prices at non-controlled locations net of the additional resource cost therefore reflects
the gain in social surplus stemming from positive external effects of decontrol–that is, spillovers. We
attempt to quantify these spillovers below. Though we cannot directly measure the gains in social
surplus from spillovers, we can infer them by estimating the induced rise in prices at non-controlled
locations and netting out the value of investments at these locations (measured using Cambridge
building permits data).


4     Data Sources
4.1    The geographical database
There are approximately 15,000 taxable parcels of land in the city of Cambridge organized into
unique geographic units known as “map-lots.” The foundation for our dataset is a snapshot of the
entire universe of residential real estate from the 1995 Cambridge Assessor’s File, from which we
construct the residential housing structures file.17 Each record includes the map-lot identifier, ad-
dress, owner’s name and address, usage, and property tax assessment as of January 1994. Usage
categories are designated as commercial or residential, and residential categories are further subdi-
vided into condominiums, single-family, two-family, and three-family houses, multi-unit apartment
complexes, and mixed residential-commercial structures. In calculating rent control intensity below,
we treat any usage code where individuals are likely to live as a residential structure. Our analysis of
assessed values and transactions is limited to houses and condominiums, which comprise the market
for residential real estate.
    We identify rent controlled properties from historical records of the Cambridge Rent Control
Board obtained via a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request.18 We merge rent control struc-
tures to the Assessor’s file using the map-lot identifier and address information coded in the Rent
Control Board file. Rent controlled records that could not be matched via map-lot identifiers were
hand-matched to the corresponding street address. Due to limitations of the Rent Control Board
data, it was often not possible to determine which specific units in a multi-unit building were con-
trolled. This creates a potential econometric pitfall: if we were to inadvertently code some controlled
units as never-controlled, we could erroneously detect spillovers in our data analysis that reflect noth-
ing more than appreciation of formerly controlled units after decontrol. To obviate this source of
error, we code all units on a map-lot as rent controlled if any unit at that map-lot was controlled in
1994. This ensures that all coding errors are uni-directional: it is very unlikely that there are any
controlled units that we fail to capture. Conversely, when measuring the rent control intensity of a
given geographic area, we calculate the fraction of residential units—rather than structures—that
  17
     This database was constructed by double-entry hand-keying the four bound volumes of the 1995 Cambridge
Assessor’s Commitment Books, which were provided to us by the Cambridge Historical Commission.
  18
     While we filed our own FOIA request, we utilize the file obtained by David Sims since its coverage appears more
complete.


                                                        11
are rent controlled.19 This is also conservative in that it prevents us from overestimating units’
exposure to other controlled properties.
       Figure 1 illustrates the prevalence of rent control in Cambridge, with dark circles indicating
controlled properties. In 1994, 22 percent of all residential structures and 38 percent of residential
units were subject to rent control. The dense neighborhoods close to the two major universities and
proximate to the subway that bisects Cambridge from east to northwest contain high concentrations
of renters and numerous multi-unit structures and thus had relatively high rent control intensity.
The largely owner-occupied area of Southwestern Cambridge features a higher fraction of single unit
houses and hence had relatively low rent control intensity. It bears emphasis that our statistical
analysis abstracts from these gross geographic differences in rent control intensity by comparing
changes in residential prices among properties that differ in their proximity to controlled units but
lie within relatively small neighborhoods.
       To analyze the impact of rent decontrol on market capitalization, we append two additional
databases that contain information on property values. The first is the 2005 Cambridge Assessor’s
File, available in electronic form, which contains property valuations from 2004. In combination
with the 1995 Assessor’s File (with 1994 values), this database allows us to observe the assessed
appreciation of each extant property from the year prior to rent decontrol to nine years thereafter.
The second dataset is based on residential sales, which come from a commercial database provided by
the Warren Group enumerating all changes in ownership of residential properties for the years 1988
through 2005. Sourced from records of deeds, these data record for each real estate transaction the
sale price, address, map-lot, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, lot size, year built, and property
type. As described in the Data Appendix, we cleaned these data to eliminate transactions that
appear to reflect either intra-family transfers of ownership rather than arms-length transactions or
duplicate transactions due to intermediation or corrections of public records. We exclude commercial
properties such as apartment buildings from the analysis because such sales are rare and transact
at heterogeneous prices that are in some cases extremely high.
       These two data sources—assessments and transactions—provide complementary means to mea-
sure the capitalization of rent control’s end. While the assessor’s panel offers information on the
estimated value of residential properties, the valuations may offer a lagging indication of residents’
changing willingness to pay for locations and might differ from market valuations due to discretionary
aspects of the assessment process. In addition, our ability to control for underlying housing market
trends is limited with these data because we only have access to valuations for one year prior to and
nine years after the end of rent control. In contrast, the sales data include both market prices and
a rich set of property characteristics for locations where transactions take place (we subsequently
analyze whether rent control impacted the composition of transacted properties). Because we have
access to the sales dataset from 1988-2005 and from neighboring cities, we can more finely control for
neighborhood-level house price trends within Cambridge and also compare house price appreciation
in Cambridge to other nearby cities.
  19
    Our data always allow us to calculate the share of units in a building that are controlled, though we often cannot
determine which specific units these are.


                                                         12
       Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the assessed Cambridge residential houses and condo-
miniums used in our analysis, comprising 15,475 properties in 1994 and 17,505 in 2004.20 Slightly
more than half of these properties are houses. Rent decontrolled properties account for 30 percent
of all residential properties, with condominiums comprising the substantial majority. Because the
vast majority of Cambridge houses were and are owner-occupied, only 10 percent of houses are
rent controlled.21 Consistent with overall house price appreciation, assessed values in constant 2008
dollars are lower in the pre-decontrol year of 1994 than in the post-decontrol year of 2004.22 For
example, the average 1994 assessed value of a decontrolled condominium is $116,000, while it is
$351,000 in 2004—an increase of 111 log points. Houses typically have higher assessed value than
condominiums, and in both periods, decontrolled houses and condominiums have lower values on
average than never-controlled houses.

4.2      Measuring rent control intensity (RCI)
Measuring a residential property’s rent control exposure requires two determinations: 1) which
nearby units should be counted in the unit’s reference set—that is, to which units it is ‘exposed’
and 2) how should the rent control status of these reference units be combined to form an exposure
index.
       Taking these issues in reverse order, we calculate the rent control status of the surrounding
units to which a given property i is exposed by summing the number of controlled units within
a surrounding geography g and dividing it by the sum of all residential units Jg (controlled and
non-controlled) in that geography:23

                                                             Jg
                                                      1    X
                                          RCIi(g) =      ×   RCj(g) .
                                                      Jg
                                                             j6=i


Thus, our RCI measure is simply equal to the fraction of nearby units subject to rent control, and
it is defined on the unit interval.
       The second input into the exposure measure is the choice of a surrounding geography. One
potential set of geographies is supplied by the U.S. Census Bureau, which subdivides the area
of cities into three increasingly fine geographic units: tracts, block groups and blocks, of which
there are 30, 89, and 587, respectively, in Cambridge containing at least one assessed house or
  20
     Note that a property may contain multiple units, e.g., a multi-family house.
  21
     Conversions from houses and apartments to condominiums were commonplace after decontrol, as we discuss in
section 5. The house and condominium designations in Table 2 reflect the property’s residential category at the time
of assessment.
  22
     Prices are deflated by the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Series Id CUUR0000SA0L2. This
index is an average for U.S. cities and excludes the price of shelter (since we do not wish to confound the outcome
measure, house price appreciation, with the numeraire).
  23
     Although our analysis of assessed values and transactions excludes apartment buildings, both controlled and
never-controlled apartments contribute to the numerator and denominator of our exposure measure. In addition, each
rental unit within a multi-family house is counted separately in both the numerator and denominator. Further, the
RCI determination for a condominium structure excludes all other units in that structure.




                                                        13
condominium.24 These pre-defined Census geographies have the virtue of allocating Cambridge
land parcels to exhaustive, mutually exclusive geographic units. They also have two substantial
drawbacks for our analysis. One is that the Census geographies do not necessarily correspond to any
specific notion of neighborhoods or proximity. For example, Census blocks frequently divide streets
down the center, so that units on opposite sides are assigned to different blocks, which is clearly
undesirable for measuring spillovers from nearby properties. The second drawback is intrinsic to any
allocation of geography into non-overlapping parcels: units closer to the perimeter of a geography
are treated differently from units located in its center. For example, for a residential unit located
on the northern edge of a geography, its neighbors 50 feet to its south will contribute to the unit’s
rent control exposure measure whereas its neighbors 50 feet to its north will not do so. For a unit
located in the center of a geography, by contrast, equidistant neighbors contribute equally to its rent
control exposure measure.
         To avoid both drawbacks of using fixed geographies, our preferred measure of a unit’s rent
control exposure is the fraction of residential units within a fixed straight line radius of 0.10, 0.20,
and 0.30 miles of that unit that were controlled as of 1994. This radius exposure measure non-
prejudicially selects the residential units that are physically closest to the reference unit without
excluding nearby units that fall outside an externally stipulated boundary.25 To provide a feel for
the area encompassed by these radii, Figure 1 plots concentric rings of appropriate scale overlaid on
the Cambridge map.
         Our main estimates are based on rent control intensity measured at a radius of 0.20 miles, which
corresponds to about 0.13 square miles—an area larger than a block group but smaller than a tract
in our sample. For the typical residential property, 34 percent of the surrounding units within a
0.20 radius are rent controlled. As shown in Table 2, condominiums are in neighborhoods with more
rent control than houses and both decontrolled houses and condominiums tend to be in more rent
control intensive neighborhoods than their never-controlled counterparts. For instance, in 1994, 32
percent of units surrounding a typical never-controlled condominium are controlled, compared to 45
percent for decontrolled condominiums. There is also considerable cross-sectional variation in rent
control intensity. Across all assessed properties, the standard deviation of RCI measured at 0.20
miles is 17 percentage points, and the range of the RCI measure spans from 0 to 72 percent.


5         Capitalized Effects of Rent Decontrol using Assessments
We next estimate the capitalization of spillovers stemming from the elimination of rent control
in 1995 onto the value of Cambridge residential real estate. Our illustrative model suggests that
    24
     These units have average land areas of 0.22, 0.07, and 0.01 square miles respectively in Cambridge. These
geographies housed an average of 3,145, 986, and 135 residents and contained a mean of 1,292, 428, and 63 residential
units. Additional details on the size, population, and number of structures and units in Census geographies is contained
in Table A1.
  25
     Note the caveat that we calculate RCI using only Cambridge properties; when calculating the radius-based RCI
for units close to the City’s edge, the RCI measure will not include nearby units that lie outside the city. We have
verified that our findings are robust to discarding all properties in block groups that border the city of Somerville. A
table of these results is available from the authors.


                                                          14
spillovers may arise through two channels: improvements in the maintenance of residences and
changes in the sorting of households to neighborhoods. Both effects should be most pronounced in
locations with higher rent control intensities and should capitalize into the value of both decontrolled
and never-controlled properties that are situated in rent control-intensive locations. Decontrolled
properties should also benefit directly (i.e., not via spillovers) from the elimination of price controls
and relaxation of unit conversion restrictions, both of which increase the investment value of these
properties. Moreover, spillovers may accrue to residential properties throughout the city—including
those in neighborhoods with low control intensity—if decontrol changes homeowners’ overall desire
to live in Cambridge.
       Our econometric model recognizes each of these channels. We fit equations of the form:

          log(pigt ) = γg + δt + β 0 Xi + λ1 ·RCi + λ2i · RCIi ·Non-RCi + λ3 · RCIi ·RCi                                 (2)
                    + ρ1 · RCi · Postt + ρ2 ·RCIi · Non-RCi · Postt + ρ3 · RCIi · RCi · Postt + igt ,

where pigt is the real assessed value of property i in neighborhood g in year t, γg are fixed effects
representing different geographies, δt are year effects, and Xi are property characteristics such as
housing type (condominium, single family, two-family or three-family house). The dummy variable
RCi is equal to one for properties that were rent-controlled in 1994 (prior to the law’s repeal), while
the Post indicator is equal to one for 2004. Of central importance to the analysis, the variable RCIi
measures the fraction of units nearby to i that were controlled as of 1994. As noted above, our main
specifications code “nearby” units as those within a 0.20 mile radius of a given property. We explore
alternative definitions of proximity in Table 7.
       Three parameters are of main interest in this equation. The coefficient ρ1 estimates the direct
effect of rent control removal on the assessed value of formerly controlled properties by contrasting
the change in value of controlled versus never-controlled properties following the end of rent control,
holding constant unit characteristics, cross-neighborhood differences in residential real estate prices
and over-time, and city-wide changes in residential real estate prices. The coefficient ρ2 estimates
the spillover effect from rent decontrol onto the value of never-controlled properties by contrasting
changes in the value of never-controlled properties in geographies with high rent control intensity
relative to those with low rent control intensity, again holding constant property characteristics,
neighborhood effects, and time effects. The coefficient ρ3 estimates analogous spillovers onto de-
controlled properties from other nearby decontrolled units after accounting for the direct effect of
decontrol (ρ1 ) and holding constant property characteristics, neighborhood effects, and time effects.
Finally, any effects of decontrol that accrue city-wide—that is, are not limited to decontrolled prop-
erties or nearby never-controlled properties—are absorbed by the time effects δt . Since these time
effects soak up any macroeconomic factor affecting the value of Cambridge’s housing stock in this
time period, we do not interpret the evolution of δt as a causal effect of rent decontrol.26
  26
     Similarly, we do not interpret the coefficients on the RC main effect and RCI ×RC and RCI×Non-RC (coefficients
λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 ) as causal effects of rent control status or rent control intensity since these variables will also pick up
unobserved factors that determined rent control status and rent control intensity at the time that rent control was



                                                             15
    For ρ2 and ρ3 to provide unbiased estimates of the causal external effects of rent decontrol on
the market value of residential properties, we require two conditions. First, the elimination of rent
controls—and resulting neighborhood level changes—must not have been fully anticipated by house-
holds and landlords; to the degree that rent decontrol (and any resulting neighborhood effects) were
foreseen by incumbent and potential owners, buyers and renters, these spillover effects would substan-
tially capitalize into values before rent control was removed, which would work against our finding
either a direct or spillover effect of rent decontrol. As discussed above, the assumption of incomplete
anticipation appears plausible in light of the fact that the rent control law was narrowly eliminated
(51 to 49 percent) by a state-wide referendum in which a large majority of Cambridge residents
voted against rent decontrol. Second, it must be the case that conditional on detailed geographic
and time effects, the variable representing a property’s exposure to rent decontrol (RCIi ×Postt )
is uncorrelated with other unmeasured factors within neighborhoods that affect local house prices,
change contemporaneously with rent control removal, but yet are not caused by the elimination of
rent control. It is difficult to state precisely what these factors would be since the most obvious
candidates (e.g., improvements in neighborhoods) are plausibly caused by rent control removal. We
subsequently present event-study graphs with the transaction price sample that strongly suggest
that the effect of rent control intensity on house prices is not present prior to the elimination of rent
control and evident thereafter.
    One concern for our research design is the potential for confounding price trends. The end of
rent control in 1995 coincided with a period of nationwide house price appreciation. While the
time effects δt in our estimating model will absorb overall changes in the price level of Cambridge
housing, they will not absorb any differential appreciation in rent control-intensive neighborhoods
that might hypothetically occur if the concurrent relaxation of mortgage lending standards led to an
influx of lending into these neighborhoods, causing prices to appreciate (Mian and Sufi, 2009). We
address this concern by estimating specifications containing tract-by-year interactions, in addition
to 89 geographic main effects for Cambridge block groups, thereby allowing assessed values to differ
by year across Census tracts.

5.1    Appreciation of decontrolled properties
Table 3 presents baseline estimates of equation (2) for the causal effect of rent decontrol on assessed
values of decontrolled properties from 1994 to 2004 using the full set of 15,475 residential properties.
Column 1 reports a parsimonious specification containing only an RC main effect, a RC × Post
indicator, and a set of dummies for year-of-sale and structure type (condominium, two family house,
three family house). Prior to rent decontrol, the transacted price of controlled (RC) properties
averaged 50 log points below the price of never-controlled (non-RC) properties transacted in the
same year.27 Following decontrol, this gap closed by 22 log points.
adopted in 1970 (for example, the age of the residential housing stock and the fraction of nearby units that were
owner occupied versus rented).
  27
     The RC main effect estimates do not admit a causal interpretation, as noted above. A property’s rent control
status in 1994 is a function of the property’s year of construction and its residential and occupancy status (rental vs.


                                                          16
    Columns 2 through 4 successively add controls that improve the precision of the comparison by
sweeping out cross-neighborhood differences in valuations and adjusting for differences in property
characteristics that are likely to affect prices. When block group effects are added to the model
(column 2), the rent control main effect is 23 log points. With tract-year interactions included, the
estimate is 25 log points. The last column, which includes a fixed effect for each residential location
or map-lot, is the most demanding. The RC main effect is absorbed by these controls, and the
estimate on RC × Post contrasts the within map-lot change in assessed values of decontrolled versus
never-controlled map-lots. The estimate here is 22 log points.
    Of signal importance for our identification strategy, the estimated RC × Post interaction varies
minimally across these models. In all within-neighborhood comparisons (columns 2 through 4),
our estimates find that the gap in values between RC and non-RC properties closed by 22 to 25 log
points following decontrol. The robustness of this result supports a key identifying assumption of our
analysis: while RC and non-RC properties (as well as surrounding ‘exposed’ properties) may differ
on many dimensions—not all of which are well measured— these characteristics should not change
discontinuously following decontrol. Accordingly, the post-decontrol contrast in values between RC
and non-RC properties should hold constant any cross-sectional differences between RC and non-RC
properties and hence capture the causal effect of decontrol on the market value of RC properties.
    We take these initial estimates as evidence that the voiding of Cambridge’s rent control law by
statewide ballot in 1995 led to a change in the value of decontrolled properties. In combination
with the finding above that rent decontrol catalyzed a rapid change in resident turnover at formerly
controlled units, these findings highlight the possibility that rent decontrol might have increased
the overall desirability of the neighborhoods in which RC units were situated, generating positive
spillovers to nearby never-controlled properties. We evaluate this hypothesis next.

5.2    Spillovers from decontrol
To explore localized spillovers from rent control removal onto nearby properties, we estimate in
Table 4 a set of models analogous to those above, now augmented with a measure of the rent control
exposure (RCI) of each residential property and an interaction between this variable and an indicator
for the post-1994 period. This interaction term allows us to test whether properties with greater
rent control exposure saw differential appreciation following decontrol. Our measure of rent control
exposure is rent control intensity at the 0.20 mile radius surrounding each property (denoted RCI
in the table).
    In a bare specification containing only year of sale and structure type dummies (column 1), we
find that properties with higher rent control exposure had lower value in the decontrol era, and that
this differential was largely erased in period following decontrol. Specifically, the point estimate of
−0.58 on the RCI measure indicates that a property at the mean level of rent control exposure of
owner-occupied) as of 1971, which in turn are likely to be correlated with the fixed characteristics of the property,
its maintenance and appearance, as well as the desirability of its surrounding neighborhood. While the rent control
main effect is robustly large and negative in all cases, this may reflect omitted property attributes and not the causal
impact of rent control.


                                                          17
0.32 was assessed at approximately 19 log points below a property with zero exposure. Conversely,
the coefficient of 0.33 on the RCI×Post indicator implies that 56 percent of this price differential was
erased in the years after decontrol. As above, we do not take the main effect of RCI as causal since it
is likely to be correlated with the many factors that determined which properties were controlled in
1971. Under our identifying assumption that these unobserved factors are quasi-fixed or smoothly
trending, our working hypothesis is that the RCI × Post interaction may be viewed as a causal
estimate of localized housing market spillovers.
       We explore the robustness of these initial relationships by applying the control variables used
above: block group fixed effects, tract-year effects, and map-lot fixed effects. These covariates reduce
the precision of the RCI main effect, though the point estimates remain large. The coefficient of
primary interest (RCI×Post) increases in magnitude with the inclusion of tract-year effects. Column
3 obtains an estimate for the RCI × Post coefficient of approximately 55 log points, while in column
4 the estimate is 48 log points implying that a residential property at the mean level of rent control
exposure gained approximately 15-17 percent more in assessed value following decontrol than a
property at the first exposure quartile.
       These first four estimates derive from models that constrain spillovers from decontrolled units to
neighboring properties to be the same magnitude for never-controlled and decontrolled properties.
In practice, spillovers may differ between structure types. Moreover, it is not clear that rent control
exposure effects on decontrolled properties should be counted as spillovers. The argument in favor of
this classification is that the value of an RC property is determined jointly by its physical attributes
(age, size), its rent control status, and the desirability of its location. If rent control intensity affects
the desirability of a neighborhood, then this effect is likely to affect the market value of both RC and
non-RC properties. The argument against viewing these effects as spillovers is that RC properties in
rent control-intensive locations may differ from other RC properties in some unmeasured dimension
(e.g., perhaps they are more dilapidated). If rent decontrol leads to subsequent rehabilitation of
these properties, we might erroneously classify as a spillover what is in reality a direct effect.28
       We do not need to take a stand on which interpretation is preferable to proceed. In columns
5 and 6, we free up the specification so that the relationship between rent control exposure and
property values may differ between controlled and never-controlled properties. We demean this
measure so that the rent control main effect corresponds to the price differential for the mean RC
property (rather than a property with zero RCI exposure). These estimates produce evidence that
never-controlled properties with higher RC exposure appreciated following decontrol by significantly
more than comparable properties with lower exposure. In particular, the point estimate for the
positive spillover to never-controlled properties is comparable to the prior columns’ pooled estimate
(28 versus 26 log points for the RCI × Post interaction term without tract-year effects), and hence
the effect size is also comparable. We additionally estimate a slightly larger spillover coefficient for
decontrolled properties of 61 to 65 log points in columns 6 and 7. We can reject the hypothesis that
spillovers from decontrol to never-controlled properties are zero. The estimated spillovers accruing
  28
   Note that if RC properties in RC-intensive areas are less well maintained as a consequence of their greater RC-
exposure (as would be implied by our model), then this would be a true spillover rather than an erroneous spillover.


                                                        18
to decontrolled properties are roughly as large as the those for never-controlled properties, but these
estimates are less precise and, as we show subsequently, they are also less robust.

5.3      Distinguishing among property types
We now separately analyze spillovers to houses and condominiums. A key motivation for distinguish-
ing between these property types is that the supply of houses and condominiums moved in opposite
directions during our sample period. Using the Cambridge Assessor’s Databases from 1995 and 2005
(reflecting the status of properties in 1994 and 2004, respectively), we calculate that the stock of
units in houses in Cambridge decreased from 14,722 in 1994 to 13,861 in 2004, a 6 percent change.29
In the same period, the stock of condominiums rose from 7,220 to 9,561 units, an increase of 32
percent, with 45 percent of this increase accounted for by conversion of houses to condominiums
(Table 5).30 Though we are unable to create comparable statistics for the pre-1994 period, it is a
near certainty that rent decontrol released a torrent of condominium conversions (Haveman, 1998).
Prior to 1995, Cambridge’s Rent Control Board and City Council repeatedly took action to prohibit
owners of controlled houses and apartment buildings from converting them to condominiums—since
this would reduce the supply of rent-controlled units. When rent control was vacated in 1995, these
restrictions were lifted and condominium conversions were able to proceed rapidly.
       If real estate buyers view houses and condominiums as imperfect substitutes, differing supply
trends will likely dampen the market prices of condominiums relative to houses. Consider the fact
that for the approximately 85 percent of Cambridge houses that were never-controlled, decontrol
meant an increase in market value, resident turnover, and condominium conversions at nearby con-
trolled properties without a corresponding increase in the supply of residential houses. By contrast,
for the approximately 50 percent of condominiums that were never-controlled, decontrol meant an
increase in market values and resident turnover at nearby controlled properties and an influx of newly
converted units into the residential real estate market. Consequently, we suspect that the never-
controlled condominiums that were most exposed to any localized benefits of rent decontrol were
also likely exposed to the greatest increase in localized condominium supply. These opposing forces
may work against our finding positive price spillovers from decontrolled units to never-controlled
condominiums.
       Table 6 presents estimates for the houses and condominiums separately. Across the two panels,
the direct impact of rent decontrol for controlled houses is substantially smaller than the correspond-
ing estimate for condominiums, a fact potentially due to a greater amount of upgrading at controlled
condominiums.31 Across the columns, the first three specifications in the top panel confirm that
  29
     These figures count each unit in a multi-family house separately to meaningfully compare the supply of housing
across different structure types and in different periods.
  30
     Twenty-five percent is due to conversion of rental apartments and the remainder is due to conversion of other
residential and non-residential units. An additional 54 condominium structures were built between 1994 and 2004.
  31
     As discussed in section 7, Cambridge building permit data indicate that annual city-wide investments in de-
controlled condominiums increased by 206 percent in the post versus pre-decontrol period while the corresponding
increase for decontrolled houses was 120 percent (Table 11).




                                                        19
spillovers from rent decontrol to residential houses are economically large and statistically robust.32
In the first column, the spillover coefficient is 42 log points, implying that houses at the 75th per-
centile of exposure appreciated by 10 log points more than houses at the 25th percentile following
decontrol. When allowed to differ between decontrolled and never-controlled houses (columns 3 and
4), we find evidence for spillovers for both never-controlled and decontrolled houses. In column 3,
for instance, they are of comparable magnitude at 41 and 50 log points, respectively.
       The spillover estimates for condominiums present a contrasting pattern. Pooling RC and non-RC
units, we estimate a spillover coefficient of 23 log points in the first column. However, this estimate
is almost half of the size of the estimate for houses and is no longer significant without tract-year
effects. Allowing spillovers to differ between RC and non-RC units (column 3 and 4), we again find
that the estimates are not significant unless we include tract-year effects. These patterns suggest
that controlling for underlying market trends is an important feature of the condominium market
during our time period, as might be expected if there were a structural shift in this market due to
conversioning and increased supply.
       As noted above, one possible explanation for the contrasting results for houses and condomini-
ums concerns property conversions, which are likely to have two effects on our estimates. First,
as above, conversions differentially increase the supply of condominiums available in formerly rent
control-intensive locations, which may reduce the value of nearby never-controlled units. Second,
because condominium conversions often include substantial, unmeasured upgrades to a unit’s over-
all condition and amenities, it is possible that some of the estimated ‘spillovers’ to decontrolled
condominium units actually reflect the capitalized values of unmeasured improvements.
       We can shed some light on this second hypothesis by re-estimating the Table 6 models while
excluding houses and condominiums that were converted from or to some other usage between 1994
and 2004. These estimates appear in columns 5 and 6 of both the upper and lower panels. Consistent
with the possibility that property improvements may explain some fraction of the appreciation of
condominiums, we find weaker evidence for spillovers to condominiums once converted properties
are excluded. Robust evidence of spillovers to houses remains, however.

5.4      Alternative rent control intensity measures
The estimates we have reported so far measure rent control intensity at a 0.20 mile radius. To explore
the sensitivity of our main estimates to this choice, Table 7 reports estimates from alternatives. Other
than the change in the RCI measure, the models estimated in Panel I without trends are the same
as those in column 5 of Table 4, while those with tract trends are the same as those in column 6 of
that table. The specifications in Panel II are the same as those in column 3 of Table 6.
       The direct impact of decontrol is insensitive to the RCI measure and the controls for neighbor-
hood geographies. Across specifications, the direct effect of decontrol ranges between 18 to 24 log
  32
     To simplify exposition, we display only the interaction terms between post-decontrol and the RC and RCI terms,
suppressing the included main effects of these variables. As with Table 4, the RCI variable is demeaned (in this case
separately for houses and condominiums) so that ρ̂1 corresponds to the estimated post-decontrol price appreciation
for a RC property at the mean of RCI exposure.


                                                         20
points pooling together properties. As in Table 6, the direct impact is smaller for houses than for
condominiums, a fact which remains true for each of the reported variations of RCI and geographic
controls. This pattern is perhaps unsurprising since the direct effect of decontrol should not de-
pend primarily on geographic spillovers across locations but rather on the rent control status of the
particular property.
    Across RCI measures and geographies, the spillover estimates are larger and more precisely es-
timated for the pooled sample in models with tract-year effects than without. Without tract-year
effects, the only significant estimate is the 0.20 mile radial RCI measure reported earlier. However,
spillover estimates using other RCI definitions and geographic fixed effects are of comparable mag-
nitudes. With tract-year effects, the largest estimate comes from the 0.30 mile radial RCI measure,
though this is statistically indistinguishable from the 0.20 mile measure. Another noteworthy pat-
tern is the lower precision of estimates using Census block group RCI measures, which may indicate
that block group boundaries inadequately capture spatial proximity.
    As we have seen in Table 6, by imposing a common effect across structure types, the pooled
estimates may be concealing important heterogeneity in impacts by structure type. A striking finding
of Table 7 is the consistency of the spillover estimates for houses (Panel II). The estimates are similar
as we vary the geographic fixed effects and the measures of rent control intensity. Moreover, the
estimates are large and precise for both never-controlled and de-controlled houses. The estimates
for condominiums are also consistent across the specifications, but like the estimates in Table 6,
they are imprecise. On balance, the alternative specifications reported in Table 7 indicate that the
magnitude of our spillover estimates are not driven by our particular radial measure of RCI and that
the evidence of spillovers to houses is stronger than for condominiums.
    An interesting finding in Table 7 is that the spillover estimates for houses increase with the area
covered by the RCI measure. This fact might suggest that spillovers do not decline with geographic
distance, but since there is overlap in RCI defined, say at 0.20 and 0.30 miles, we cannot directly use
the Table 7 estimates to come to this conclusion. To probe at how spillover estimates change with
distance, we estimated models where we allow for two different measures of rent control intensity
in the same regression: an “inner” measure, corresponding to rent control intensity inside the given
radius (as before), and an “outer” measure corresponding to rent control intensity between the
boundary of the inner measure and the next distance. Using an inner radius of 0.20 miles and an
outer radius corresponding to 0.20-0.30 miles, there is modest evidence that spillovers decline with
distance for houses: the inner spillover estimate is 0.34 (se=0.08), while the outer spillover estimate
is 0.10 (se=0.09).


6    Measuring Capitalization using TransactionsAssessments versus
     transactions
A key drawback of our sample of assessed values in Cambridge is that it covers only two points in
time, the year before the end of rent control (1994) and ten years thereafter (2004). This sample


                                                   21
does not allow us to determine how property values changed during the years immediately following
the end of rent control nor how prices evolved prior to decontrol. To address these limitations, we
turn to data on residential housing transactions for the years 1988 through 2005, which detail the
year-by-year evolution of Cambridge housing prices at controlled and never-controlled locations.
       Our empirical approach parallels our earlier strategy: we estimate equation (2) where, in this case,
the dependent variable is the log real sales price of a transacted property, the Post indicator variable
now corresponds to years after 1994, and the covariate vector X contains richer controls for property
characteristics available in the deeds records including: total number of rooms, bathrooms, and
bedrooms, interior square footage, a quadratic in lot size and a dummy for lot size zero (commonplace
for condominiums), a quadratic in the property’s age, and a dummy for missing year built. All
controls are interacted with dummies for structure type since the value of these attributes may differ
across types.
       Since not all properties transact before or after the end of rent control, a concern in interpreting
estimates of equation (2) is that non-random selection of properties into transaction could lead to
biased estimates of ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 . This would occur if unobservable determinants of properties’
market values were correlated with both their probability of transacting and their rent control
status or rent control intensity. Table A2 in the appendix reports summary statistics on the 14,789
transactions recorded between 1988 and 2005. Of note, the number of transactions in the period
before the end of rent control is 5,463 compared to a total of 15,475 assessed residential locations,
implying that roughly one-third of locations transacted before the end of rent control.33 The fraction
of houses that transact is substantially lower than for condominiums, however; this results in a small
sample size for transacting decontrolled houses (< 350 in both the pre- and post-decontrol period) but
nevertheless yields a sizable sample of transacting never-controlled houses (1, 624 and 2, 599 in the
pre- and post-period, respectively). To examine selection into transaction, we estimate Seemingly
Unrelated Regression (SUR) models in Tables A3 and A4 that explore how the characteristics
of transacted properties vary with rent control status and rent control intensity. The regression
specification for these models is comparable to those above, except in place of house values, we
use as dependent variables a vector of property characteristics and the full set of equations is fit
simultaneously to allow for hypothesis testing across equations.
       For houses, we detect no individually or jointly significant pre-post decontrol changes in the
relationship between rent control status, rent control intensity, and selection into transaction (Table
A3). Hence, we do not reject the null hypothesis that the composition of transacted houses did not
change after 1994 as a function of rent control status or RCI. There are compositional differences
for condominiums, however (Table A4). Condominiums that transact after 1994 at decontrolled
locations have 0.15 fewer total rooms than those that transact prior to 1995 and they are more
likely to be recently built. Moreover, the number of total rooms and bedrooms in transacted de-
controlled condominiums increased after 1994 in rent control-intensive neighborhoods, a pattern
consistent with upgrading of these locations. The chi-squared test for the joint significance of these
  33
    Because some properties transact multiple times, this figure somewhat overstates the fraction of all properties
transacted.


                                                        22
relationships confirms that the end of rent control saw a shift in the composition of transacted con-
dominiums, which suggests some caution in drawing conclusions using the transaction price data for
condominiums.
       The transaction sample also provides an opportunity to explore the concern noted earlier that
assessed real estate values may not accurately reflect market prices. We examine this issue in
Table A5 by constructing a matched assessor’s sample for properties that transacted in 1994 and
2004 and presenting parallel estimates for the relationship between rent control status and rent
control intensity and, separately, assessed and transacted property values. These models yield
a close match between the estimated impact of decontrol and rent control intensity on assessed
values and transaction prices and, moreover, the match is particularly close for houses.34 This
comparison suggests that the transaction and the assessor’s sample provide complementary and
broadly consistent measures of valuations.
       Neither of these comparison exercises is perfect, of course: in the first case, we cannot directly
test for changes in unobservable characteristics of transacted properties; in the second case, our
comparison does not rule out the possibility that assessed values are a lagging indicator of price
changes for non-transacted properties. Nevertheless, these results in combination reduce concerns
about biases stemming from selection intro transaction.

6.1      Effects of decontrol on transaction prices
The year-by-year coverage of the transaction sample allows us to explore one of our identifying
assumptions—specifically, that the end of rent control was not fully anticipated. Following the
referendum ending rent control in November 1994, there was still lingering uncertainty on the phase-
out timeline. This fact together with adjustment costs in new investments and non-immediate re-
allocation of residents could lead the price impacts from the end of rent control to operate with some
delay. Using the transaction sample, we can explore whether the end of rent control had a discrete
impact on transactions prices. We report “event study” plots of the main effect of rent-control status
from the equation:

                                                              2005
                                                              X
                          log(pigt ) = γg + δt + β 0 Xi +            (RCi × δt )ρ1,t + igt ,
                                                             t=1988

where γg , δt , and Xi are as in equation (2), and ρ1,t are by-year estimates of rent-control main effect
measured relative to the year 1994, the omitted reference category.
       Panel I of Figure 3 plots estimates of the evolution of the RC effects. The relative price of RC
properties increased by roughly 10 log points over the first three years following decontrol, declined
modestly between years three and four, and then rose almost continuously thereafter. By the end
  34
     An additional complexity in comparing the assessed versus sale values of condominiums is that we are unable to
determine which specific unit among the assessed condominiums units at a map-lot is transacted. Consequently, we
include matched assessor data for all units at the map-lot where one or more unit transacts. This leads to a sample
of 7,897 condominium assessments matched to the 937 units that were transacted in 1994 or 2004.



                                                        23
of the sample in 1995, RC properties had increased in market value by almost 30 log points relative
to nearby non-RC properties with similar characteristics.
    The subsequent two panels of Figure 3 plot RCI spillovers to never-controlled properties from
the equation:


                                                         2005
                                                         X
                    log(pigt ) = γg + δt + β 0 Xi +              (Non-RCi ×RCIi × δt )ρ2,t + igt ,
                                                       t=1988

estimated separately for never-controlled houses (Panel II) and condominiums (Panel III). Though
precision is limited by the small number of houses transacting annually, there is a clear upward shift
in the sale price of never-controlled houses in rent control-intensive neighborhoods after 1994. The
point estimate for ρ2,t rises by 25 log points between 1994 and 1997, drops temporarily in 1998, and
then becomes large (50 to 75 log points) and statistically significant in years 1999 forward. Panel
III also offers evidence of positive RCI spillovers to never-controlled condominiums, but consistent
with the point estimates in Table 6 without trends, these estimates are less precise than the results
for houses.35
    One noteworthy feature of Figure 3 is that the estimated effects of decontrol on transaction prices
do not reach their maximum until four or more years after rent control removal. This increasing
cumulative effect may be explained by two forces. First, as noted above, it is likely that the last
minute legislative compromise that kept a subset of units under control for an additional two years
generated lingering uncertainty about whether the decontrol regime would hold—uncertainty that
ultimately abated as efforts to reinstate controls failed. Second, and perhaps more importantly,
the changes in the desirability of locations and neighborhoods induced by decontrol—including
residential upgrading and reallocation of residents across areas—likely took years to unfold. As
noted above, the evidence on resident turnover found in Figure 2 reveals that although turnover at
decontrolled units rose immediately after decontrol, its rise continued for several additional years
and did not plateau until 1998.
    We explore the relationship between decontrol and residential transaction prices in detail in
Table 8. Taking advantage of the additional years of data available from the transactions sample,
we consider more flexible controls for housing market trends. Specifically, we include linear and
quadratic time trends by neighborhood, which take the form:

                                            α0,τ (i) + α1,τ (i) t + α2,τ (i) t2 ,                                      (3)

where τ (i) denotes the Census tract in which property i resides.36 These neighborhood-specific
geographic time trends allow prices to evolve differentially across each of the 30 different Cambridge
tracts. The addition of these 60 trend measures (two for each tract) allows for a smooth, flexible
  35
     We do not plot event studies for spillovers to rent-controlled properties, but a full set of plots for RC main effects
and RCI interactions with structure type and RC status is available from the authors.
  36
     In most specifications, the tract main effect is absorbed by the inclusion of block group main effects.



                                                            24
evolution of house prices over time within fine geographies. When controlling for property char-
acteristics, we also interact quadratic time trends with structure type to allow different housing
types—condominiums, single family homes, multi-family homes—to allow for different price paths.
   The first three columns provide estimates of the direct appreciation of decontrolled properties.
The estimates range from 6 to 11 log points as we add block group fixed effects, controls for property
characteristics, and quadratic tract trends. Adding these covariates reduces the magnitude of the
baseline price differential between RC and non-RC properties substantially (from −31 to −19 log
points). This pattern is consistent with the data summarized in Table A2 indicating that RC
properties are situated on smaller lots and in older structures, and in the case of condominiums,
provide less square footage than non-RC properties.
   Columns 4 and 5 of Table 8 introduce RCI effects. The coefficient of interest in column 4
(the RCI ×Post effect) is 20.5 log points, which is on the lower range of our estimates using the
assessor’s sample. Adding flexible geographic trends (column 5) slightly reduces the spillover point
estimate and increases its standard error. Finally, the last two columns report estimates where the
relationship between rent control exposure and prices is permitted to differ between controlled and
never-controlled properties. The estimates are not different between these two groups, though they
are more precisely estimated for never-controlled properties. In the final column, which includes all
prior covariates including tract-specific quadratic trends, the spillover point estimates are no longer
significant at conventional levels, reflecting the larger standard errors from the inclusion of tract
trends.
   Following our analysis of assessed property values, we next fit models separately for the sub-
samples of houses and condominiums in Table 9. Consistent with the earlier findings, spillovers are
large for both houses and condominiums, but are much more precisely estimated for houses than
condominiums. For instance, for houses, the point estimate of 0.34 on the RCI × Post coefficient is
comparable to the estimate of 0.42 in Table 6, while for condominiums the magnitudes are similar,
but there is more precision for the transactions-based estimate, perhaps due to the availability of
richer property-level controls. Consistent with the assessment data, spillover estimates to houses are
generally highly robust while spillover estimates for condominiums are more sensitive to specification.
   One important difference between the two samples involves spillover effects for houses by con-
trolled status.   Using the transactions sample, the majority of the spillovers accrue to never-
controlled houses, while the assessor’s estimates show spillovers accruing for both controlled and
never-controlled houses. We suspect that a primary reason for the difference is that the number
of controlled houses that transact averages only 33 per year, which is a small fraction of the 829
controlled locations.
   Appendix Table A6 considers two further robustness checks using the transaction sample. First,
to address potential compositional changes, we focus only on transactions involving locations that
did not change structure type between 1994 and 2004. This sample restriction leads us to drop con-
siderably more condominium than house transactions (2,100 out of 9,975 versus 287 out of 4,814).
The spillover estimates for uncontrolled houses are similar to those reported in Table 9, but, consis-



                                                  25
tent with Table 6 (columns 5 and 6), the condominium results that exclude converted units are less
precise. These results support the interpretation that the prices of condominiums may have been
affected differently by decontrol because of changes to the housing stock at condominium locations,
and further show that our estimates for never-controlled houses are not sensitive to property con-
versions. Second, to examine the possibility that the price effects are driven by the availability of
subprime lending in Cambridge, we have re-estimated our main specifications discarding any trans-
actions where a mortgage lender is identified as part of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s list of subprime lenders (Table A6).37 Overall, 311 (2%) out of our sample of 14,789
transacted properties in Cambridge were financed by lenders identified as subprime, though it is
likely that not all these properties were financed by subprime loans. Our estimates that exclude
these transactions are nearly identical to those reported in Table 9.

6.2      Price appreciation in adjoining cities
The decade following the elimination of rent control in Cambridge saw substantial housing price ap-
preciation throughout Massachusetts. For example, the Federal Housing Finance Agency’s OFHEO
house price index (HPI) of single-family houses for the Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA),
an area corresponding to 97 towns including Cambridge (which accounts for 3% of the total MSA
population), shows a 270 percent increase from the first quarter of 1995 to the first quarter of 2005.38
This backdrop of rising real estate prices raises a potential concern that the price appreciation in
Cambridge that we attribute to rent decontrol might instead reflect aggregate house price trends.
Since our empirical strategy compares price appreciation across local areas within Cambridge, this
aggregate phenomenon is only a threat to our identification strategy if it leads to differential appre-
ciation at formerly rent control-intensive locations for reasons that are unrelated to rent decontrol.
       One way to explore this concern is to compare price appreciation in rent control-intensive loca-
tions in Cambridge to comparable locations in surrounding Massachusetts towns that did not have
rent control in this time period. We implement this comparison by analyzing housing transaction
data for the three nearby cities: the adjoining city of Somerville, which abuts Cambridge; the city of
Medford, which abuts Somerville; and the city of Malden, which abuts Medford. These transactions
data are also sourced from the Warren Group files, used for the price analysis immediately above,
and contain the identical data elements and years of coverage.39
       To perform the comparison, we create a Predicted RCI (‘P-RCI’) measure for Cambridge and
surrounding towns by, first, regressing the Cambridge block group level RCI measure on 18 distinct
  37
      This follows the approach of Gerardi, Shapiro and Willen (2007), who use U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development data to construct a list of subprime lenders.
   38
      Genesove and Mayer (2001) also document price appreciation in downtown Boston’s condominium market during
the 1990s.
   39
      A caveat to this approach is that the folk wisdom in the Boston area is that the displacement of Cambridge residents
following decontrol—both those leaving decontrolled units and those fleeing rising rents—spurred gentrification of parts
of Medford and Somerville. Lending some credence to this hypothesis, Atlantic Marketing Research (1998) reports
that 58 percent of Cambridge renters who moved out of their decontrolled units between 1994 and 1997 left Cambridge.
In general, we would expect this potential spillover to surrounding cities to bias us towards finding similar differential
rises in property prices in non-Cambridge comparison neighborhoods.


                                                           26
block group attributes available from the 1990 Census Summary Tape Files (STF) to obtain a
forecasting relationship between census block group attributes and RCI in Cambridge.40 We next
use the model to predict the P-RCI value for each block group in Cambridge, Somerville, Malden,
and Medford. Finally, we explore the relationship between P-RCI and residential real estate price
appreciation within all four cities. Table 10 presents estimates.
       As a benchmark, the first pair of models in Panel I presents the relationship between actual RCI
and pre-post decontrol price appreciation at never-controlled house and condominium properties
in Cambridge between 1988 and 2005.41 Unlike Table 9, the RCI measure in this specification is
computed at the 1990 Census block group level. Panel II presents an identical set of estimates where
the observed RCI measure is replaced by P-RCI. For Cambridge houses, the point estimate for the
the Post × P-RCI variable is reassuringly similar to the estimate using the actual RCI measure. This
suggests that we may be able to use the statistical relationship between RCI and block group census
attributes to construct a proxy for RCI in non-Cambridge towns. While the correspondence is not
as close for Cambridge condominiums, this is a secondary concern since we have already established
that the RCI results for Cambridge condominiums are not as robust.
       The next four panels of Table 10 perform the comparison exercise using transaction data from
Somerville, Malden, and Medford. Panel III pools these three cities. Distinct from the pattern for
Cambridge houses, we detect neither a significant negative relationship between P-RCI and house
transaction prices in the pre-decontrol period nor a significant positive relationship between P-RCI
and house transaction prices in the post-decontrol period. Panels IV, V, and VI report estimates
separately for the three non-Cambridge cities. These models find inconsistently signed relationships
between P-RCI and house transaction prices in Somerville, Malden, and Medford. One surprising
result, however, is that the point estimate for P-RCI × Post for Medford houses is similar to the
analogous estimate for Cambridge houses and is significant at the 5 percent level—though unlike in
Cambridge, the relationship between P-RCI and house transaction prices in Medford is small and
statistically insignificant in the pre-decontrol period. While this result is disconcerting inasmuch as
Medford did not have rent control, we are inclined to view this as a chance finding given the evidence
in the prior three panels.
       A second pattern in Table 10 is that for all towns except Cambridge, we find evidence of a
substantial decline in the transaction prices of condominiums in block groups with high P-RCI in the
post-decontrol period. Placing this result in context, it bears note that Massachusetts experienced
a substantial increase in condominium construction and conversions in urban neighborhoods in this
period, and this supply shift may have lowered prices. Comparing the non-Cambridge condominium
  40
     The 18 block group attributes are population density, median family income, the fraction of commuters using
public transportation, average owner tenure (the average tenure in years of owner-occupants at their current residence),
average renter tenure, the fraction of owner-occupied housing units that were built before 1970, the fraction of renter-
occupied units built before 1970, the fraction of units that are condos, the fraction of residents that are renters, the
number of residents within non-family households (e.g. roommates), average age, median contract rent, the average
residential property value, the fraction of residents self-identifying as white, the fraction of residents self-identifying
as Asian, the fraction of housing units that are vacant, the fraction of housing units in structures with at least 20
units, and the fraction of housing units in structures with 5 to 19 units
  41
     We exclude decontrolled properties from this exercise since no such properties exist in the comparison cities.


                                                            27
results to those for Cambridge, one potential inference is that condominium prices in rent control-
intensive neighborhoods in Cambridge would have fallen substantially after 1994 had it not been for
the end of rent control. Given the many complexities surrounding condominium supplies and prices
in this time period, however, we remain agnostic on this point.


7         Measuring Housing Investments
To explore whether the price responses documented above can be attributed in part to increased
residential investment, we obtained a listing of all building permits issued by the Cambridge Inspec-
tional Services Department for years 1991 through 2005, including property address and proposed
expenditure.42 Table 11 presents descriptive statistics for investments by structure type.43 Since
permits can be filed either for a structure (e.g., a multi-unit condominium complex) or for any
unit in a structure, we attribute a permit at a given structure to only one unit in that structure
when computing permitted units in Table 11. For reference, we report the mean number of units in
permitted structures in the third row.
         Cambridge experienced an overall investment boom after the end of rent control. Total permitted
investment at houses and condominiums rose from $83 million in the period 1991-1994 to $455 million
in the period 1995-2004. Annual investment expenditures roughly doubled at three of four property
types: decontrolled houses, never-controlled houses, and never-controlled condominiums. Annual
investments roughly tripled at decontrolled condominiums. While fewer than one in twenty-five
residential units receives a building permit annually, this fraction increased substantially following
decontrol. For houses, annual permitting rates rose by 17 and 7 percent at never-controlled and
decontrolled houses, respectively. For condominiums, the percentage increase in permitting was
considerably larger: 36 percent for never-controlled and 45 percent for decontrolled structures.44
         Figure 4 reports estimates of an event study of the impact of decontrol on permitting activity
(following Panel I of Figure 3). There is a sustained rise in permitting activity at decontrolled relative
to never-controlled properties between 1995 and 2000. This differential returns to its pre-decontrol
level thereafter. In contrast to the patterns for permitting activity, we find no differential increase
in investment at decontrolled locations, nor do we find spillover effects on investment expenditure.45
    42
      Section 110.0 of the Massachusetts State Building Code stipulates that anyone “seeking to construct, alter, repair
or demolish a structure” must obtain a building permit before the start of work, post this permit at the job site,
and commence within 6 months of obtaining the permit. Ordinary repairs such as painting, wallpapering, or adding
shingles to roofs, defined in the Building Code as “any Maintenance which does not affect the structure, egress, fire
protection systems, fire ratings, energy conservation provisions, plumbing, sanitary, gas, electrical or other utilities,”
do not require a permit.
   43
      Table 11 tabulates data only through 2004 to allow for a direct comparison to our assessor’s database. In 2005, the
fraction of units permitted are roughly comparable to the period 1995-2004 and expenditures were $45,864, $7,586,
$6,492, and $2,151 thousands for never-controlled houses, decontrolled houses, never-controlled condominiums, and
decontrolled condominiums, respectively.
   44
      We cannot exclude the possibility that the incentives to file for investment permits, or to accurately report
investment costs on building permits, were affected by the rent control regime; for example, a landlord of a controlled
unit might have been more likely to declare investment activity to justify a price increase to the Rent Control Board.
   45
      By matching the permit data to the structures file, we observe permitting activity at every structure and hence our
investment analysis sample is a balanced panel of structures by year, though the majority of permitting observations



                                                           28
Given the aggregate investment boom in Cambridge after decontrol, it is surprising that we do
not find stronger evidence for increased building expenditure at decontrolled properties. It appears
that although decontrol raised the share of formerly controlled properties receiving investments,
actual investment expenditures rose relatively uniformly across decontrolled and never-controlled
properties. One factor that may obscure any direct expenditure effect in our analysis is low statistical
power: the vast majority of investment expenditures are zero, while the mean and variance of
expenditures at permitted units are high and rising (Table 11, Panel III). However, unless increased
investment occurred along dimensions that do not require permits and hence are not observed in our
data—e.g., repairs and maintenance that are not structural and do not alter major systems—the
pattern of results appears to rule out very large differential expenditure effects at formerly controlled
units.


8     The Capitalized Value of Rent Decontrol in Cambridge
How economically large are the spillovers from the end of rent control estimated above? We answer
this question by benchmarking our estimates against the overall level of house price appreciation
in Cambridge using the Cambridge Assessor’s Database as our measure of the value of the housing
stock.
    The top panel of Table 12 presents information about the valuation of the never-controlled
housing stock from 1994 to 2004. The total assessed value of the 7,426 never-controlled houses and
3,602 never-controlled condominiums in Cambridge was $10.0 billion in 2004, with houses accounting
for 73 percent of the total. We compute the contribution of rent decontrol to these valuations by
subtracting the implied post-decontrol price change at each never-controlled location as a function
of its rent control exposure (RCI).46 The aggregate value of the stock of never-controlled houses
was $7.3 billion in 2004. Had rent control continued, our estimates imply that the aggregate value
would have been $6.5 billion. For condominiums, the aggregate value of the never-controlled stock
was $2.7 billion and, had rent control continued, we estimate that this value would have been $2.5
billion. Summing up, we estimate that rent decontrol yielded a $1.0 billion rise in the value of the
never-controlled housing stock between 1994 and 2004, accounting for 17 percent ($1.0 billion of
$6.0 billion) of the price appreciation of these properties in this period.
    The bottom panel reports an analogous calculation for decontrolled properties. The value of the
formerly controlled stock appreciated $1.7 billion, from $0.8 billion in 1994 to $2.5 billion in 2004.
Had rent control continued, our estimates imply that the 2004 value would have been $770 million
lower (including the spillover effects), implying that 45 percent ($770 million of $1.7 billion) of the
rise in the value of formerly controlled properties during this period was due to decontrol.47
are zeros. We regress investment expenditure on a rent control indicator and the rent control indicator interacted with
various post measures, controlling for year of sale dummies, and the number of units and its square (for multi-unit
structures), structure type and structure times post interactions.
  46
     Estimates are from the regression model with Census block group fixed effects by structure (following column 5
of Table 4). Additional details are provided in the notes to Table 12.
  47
     Of this total, 74 percent ($567 million) is a direct decontrol effect, and the other 26 percent ($203 million) is due



                                                           29
    Notably, the change in the never-controlled stock’s value was much greater than the change
in the value of the decontrolled stock from 1994 to 2004: $6.0 billion versus $1.7 billion. Rent
decontrol contributed substantially more to the change in the value of never-controlled properties
than to previously-controlled properties: $1.0 billion versus $770 million. That the magnitude of
the spillover effect is greater than the direct effect of decontrol remains true regardless of whether
we count spillover effects on previously-controlled properties as true spillovers. Thus, while the
proportional effect of rent decontrol on prices was larger for decontrolled than never-controlled
properties (45 versus 17 percent), the never-controlled segment of the market received the largest
increase in capitalization from rent control’s removal—and by implication, bore the majority of the
incidence of rent control regulation prior to its removal.
    Can the increase in residential investments documented in section 7 account for these price im-
pacts? Total permitted residential investments in Cambridge was $455 million between 1995 and
2004, with $375 million invested in the never-controlled stock. If all of the never-controlled invest-
ment activity is to account for the $6.0 billion appreciation of never-controlled housing, this would
imply a roughly 1,600 percent return per dollar of investment. It therefore seems unlikely that these
investments are sufficient to explain a substantial fraction of the observed property appreciation.
Focusing specifically on never-controlled properties, consider an extreme case in which the entire
$19.8 million increase in annual permitted investments at never-controlled structures between 1995
and 2004 ($198 million total) could be causally attributed to rent decontrol, where each dollar of
expenditure led to a dollar of price appreciation, and where there was no subsequent depreciation
of these investments during this ten year interval.48 In this case, we would conclude that only 20
percent of the induced appreciation of never-controlled structures was due to induced investment,
with the remaining 80 percent due to capitalized spillovers from rent decontrol.


9    Conclusion
The largely unanticipated elimination of rent control in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1995 affords
a unique opportunity to identify spillovers in residential housing markets. This paper exploits the
sharp cross-neighborhood contrasts in the fraction of units that were decontrolled to credibly assess
the localized price spillovers to never-controlled properties as well as to quantify direct effects on
decontrolled properties. Our main finding is a large and significant positive spillover impact from
decontrol onto the valuation of never-controlled properties, leading on average to a 12 percent in-
crease in the market valuations of never-controlled houses between 1994 and 2004. The evidence for
spillovers is somewhat less clear-cut for condominiums—likely in part due to a substantial increase
in the supply of condominiums enabled by decontrol. We document that, consistent with expecta-
tions, rent-controlled properties were valued at a substantial discount relative to never-controlled
to spillovers from exposure to rent control.
  48
     Annual investments in never-controlled structures were $30.0 and $7.6 million for houses and condominiums,
respectively, in the post-decontrol period and $14.0 and $3.7 million in the pre-decontrol period. The increase in
annual expenditures was $19.8 million.



                                                       30
properties. Rent decontrol largely eliminated this differential, increasing the assessed values of these
properties by approximately 18 to 25 percent.
   The contribution of decontrol to the capitalized value of the Cambridge residential housing stock
in this period corresponds to a total of $1.8 billion. Of the $6.0 billion increase in the assessed value
of the never-controlled housing stock in Cambridge between 1994 and 2004, we estimate that $1.0
billion (17 percent) was due to elimination of rent controls. While the direct effects on decontrolled
properties were larger in percentage terms than the effects on never-controlled properties, the stock of
controlled properties was smaller and less valuable than the never-controlled stock. As a consequence,
positive spillovers to never-controlled properties account for more than half (57 percent) of the
decontrol-induced increase in the value of the housing stock.
   Under any reasonable set of assumptions, increases in residential investment stimulated by rent
decontrol can explain only a small fraction of these spillover effects. Thus, we conclude that decon-
trol led to changes in the attributes of Cambridge residents and the production of other localized
amenities that made Cambridge a more desirable place to live. This possibility is also highlighted
by our theoretical model, though we are not able to thoroughly examine it with our data. Influential
work by Glaeser and Luttmer (2003) argues that non-price rationing under rent control leads to a
mismatch between renters and apartments, and provides evidence that this allocative inefficiency is
large in New York City’s rent control plan. It is therefore reasonable to conjecture that the unwind-
ing of allocative distortions significantly contributes to Cambridge’s residential price appreciation.
Additional empirical analysis with rich micro-level attributes of residents, however, will be needed
to shed further light on rent control’s allocative consequences.
   A key issue in the evaluation of price controls is the tradeoff between the surplus transferred
from landlords to renters and the deadweight loss from quality or quantity undersupply. Viewed in
this light, a significant portion of the price gains we measure at decontrolled properties are transfers
from renters back to landlords. However, our analysis highlights the importance of another welfare
consequence of price controls: the impact on the non-controlled sector. Our results indicate that
the efficiency cost of Cambridge’s rent control policy was large relative to the size of the transfer to
renters.
   These findings are germane to the analysis of the economic impacts of regulations of the housing
market and, more broadly, the impacts of other place-based policies. The mechanisms by which rent
decontrol impacts never-controlled housing—increased maintenance, upgrading of local amenities,
and improved sorting of consumers to housing—are likely present in other settings involving resi-
dential housing. Our results provide evidence that residential spillovers are large and important in
housing markets, and suggest that public policies related to housing should consider not only direct
impacts but also indirect impacts on neighboring properties and residents.




                                                   31
                                        References
An Act Enabling Certain Cities and Towns to Control Rents and Evictions, 1970 Mass.
    Acts 842.

Arnott, Richard, “Time for Revisionism on Rent Control,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    1995, 9, 99–120.

Atlantic Marketing Research, “Impacts of the Termination of Rent Control on Population,
    Housing Costs and Housing Stock,” Technical Report, Atlantic Marketing Research January
    1998.

Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, “Regulated Prices, Rent-Seeking, and Consumer Surplus,”
    2012. forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

Campbell, John, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, “Forced Sales and House Prices,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 2011, 101(5), 2108–2131.

Cantor, Patricia, “Massachusetts Defeats Rent Control,” 1995.       National Housing Institute,
    April/May, Available at: http://www.nhi.org/online/issues/80/massrent.html, Last accessed:
    December 12, 2011.

Card, David and Alan Krueger, Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
    Wage, Princeton University Press, 1995.

Davis, Lucas and Lutz Killian, “The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S. Residential
    Market for Natural Gas,” Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119(2), 212–241.

Epple, Dennis, “Rent Control with Reputation: Theory and Evidence,” Regional Science and
    Urban Economics, 1988, 28(6), 679–710.

Fallis, George and Lawrence B. Smith, “Uncontrolled Prices in a Controlled Market: The Case
    of Rent Controls,” American Economic Review, 1984, 74, 193–200.

Fetter, Dan, “The Home Front: The Impact of Wartime Rent Control on Home Ownership,” 2011.
    Unpublished paper, Wellesley College.

Finkel, Meryl and James E. Wallace, “Cambridge Housing Survey,” 1987. Abt Associates.

Frankena, Mark, “Alternative models of rent control,” Urban Studies, 1975, 12, 303–308.

Frech, H.E. and William Lee, “The Welfare Cost of Rationing-by-Queuing across Markets:
    Theory and Estimates from the U.S. Gasoline Crises,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987,
    102(1), 97–108.

Fujita, Masahisa, Urban Economic Theory: Land Use and City Size, Cambridge University Press,
    1991.

                                              32
Genesove, David and Chris Mayer, “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the
    Housing Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, pp. 1233–1260.

Gerardi, Kris, Adam Shapiro, and Paul Willen, “Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages,
    Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures,” 2007. FRB Boston Working Paper Series,
    paper no. 07-15.

Glaeser, Edward and Erzo Luttmer, “The Misallocation of Housing under Rent-Control,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 2003, 93(4), 1027–1046.

     and Joseph Gyourko, Rethinking Federal Housing Policy: How to Make Housing Plentiful
    and Affordable, AEI Press, 2009.

Glaeser, Edward L., Cities, Agglomeration, and Spatial Equilibrium The Lindahl Lectures, Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2008.

Gyourko, Joseph and Peter Linneman, “Equity and Efficiency Aspects of Rent Control: An
    Empirical Study of New York City,” Journal of Urban Economics, 1989, 26(1), 54–74.

Hartley, Dan, “The Effect of Foreclosures on Nearby Housing Prices: Supply or Disamenity?,”
    2010. FRB of Cleveland Working Paper No. 10-11.

Haveman, Judith, “Mass. City Gets a New Lease on Life; Cambridge Booms as Rent Control
    Ends, but the Poorer Pay a Price,” 1998. Washington Post, September 19, A1.

Holzer, Harry, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger, “Job Queues and Wages,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1991, 106(3), 739–768.

Hurst, Erik, Veronica Guerrieri, and Dan Hartley, “Endogenous Gentrification and Housing
    Price Dynamics,” 2011. Chicago Booth School, working paper.

Ioannides, Yannis, “Interactive Property Valuations,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2003, 53,
    145–170.

Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, “The Housing Market(s) of San
    Diego,” 2011. Stanford University, working paper.

Leonard, Dutch, “Housing Regulation in Cambridge: Its Goals and Effects,” 1981. Cambridge
    Chamber of Commerce.

Linden, Leigh and Jonah Rockoff, “There Goes the Neighborhood? Estimates of the Impacts of
    Crime Risk on Property Values from Megan’s Law,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98(3),
    1103–1127.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, “Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real
    Economy,” 2011. Chicago Booth, working paper.


                                              33
     and         , “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mort-
    gage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124(4), 1449–1496.

Olsen, Edgar, “An Econometric Analysis of Rent Control,” Journal of Political Economy, 1972,
    86(1), 1081–1100.

Pope, Jaren C., “Fear of Crime and Housing Prices: Household Reactions to Sex Offender Reg-
    istries,” Journal of Urban Economics, November 2008, 64 (3), 601–614.

Rent Control Board, 1982. Archives of the Cambridge Historical Commission.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Raymond Owens, “Housing External-
    ities,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118(3), 829–858.

Schwartz, Amy Ellen, Ingrid Gould Ellen, Ioan Voicu, and Michael Schill, “The External
    Effects of Place-Based Subsidized Housing,” 2005. NYU, Law and Economics Research Paper,
    No. 05-05.

Sims, David P., “Out of Control: What can we learn from the end of Massachusetts rent control?,”
    Journal of Urban Economics, 2007, 61(1), 129–151.

    , “Rent Control Rationing and Community Composition: Evidence from Massachusetts,” The
    B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2011, 11(1).

Suen, Wing, “Rationing and Rent Dissipation in the Presence of Heterogeneous Individuals,” Jour-
    nal of Political Economy, 1989, 97(6), 1384–1394.

Tucker, William, “Anarchy, State and Rent Control,” 1986. The New Republic, December 22,
    20-21.

Wang, Shing-Yi, “State Misallocation and Housing Prices: Theory and Evidence from China,”
    American Economic Review, 2011, 101(5), 2081–2107.




                                               34
                                                                        Figure	  1.	  	  Residential	  Properties	  in	  Cambridge




Notes.	  Residential	  properties	  are	  marked	  with	  gray	  circles.	  Rent	  controlled	  properities	  are	  overlaid	  with	  black	  circles.	  Concentric	  circles	  in	  the	  top	  right	  depict	  
radii	  of	  0.1,	  0.2,	  and	  0.3	  miles.	  
    Figure	  2.	  	  Residential	  Turnover	  in	  Cambridge	  Controlled	  relative	  to	  Never-­‐Controlled	  
                                                     Units,	  1992	  -­‐	  2000


   .14
   .12
   .1
   .08
   .06
   .04
   .02
   0
   -.02




          1992                               1994                               1996                                1998                               2000

                                            Point Estimate                                     95% Confidence Interval


Figure	  plots	  coefficients	  on	  RC	  x	  Year	  variables	  from	  an	  event-­‐study	  regression	  where	  the	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  an	  indicator	  equal	  to	  one	  if	  resident	  was	  not	  present	  in	  current	  Cambridge	  
unit	  in	  prior	  year	  (and	  zero	  otherwise).	  RC	  x	  1994	  is	  the	  omitted	  category.	  RC	  is	  an	  indicator	  for	  a	  
location	  that	  was	  rent	  controlled	  in	  1994.	  This	  specification	  includes	  an	  RC	  main	  effect,	  year	  
controls,	  structure	  type	  dummies,	  and	  geographic	  fixed	  effects	  for	  the	  91	  block	  groups	  in	  the	  
1990	  Census	  containing	  addresses	  listed	  in	  the	  Cambridge	  City	  Census.	  95%	  confidence	  intervals	  
are	  constructed	  from	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  block	  group.	  The	  vertical	  line	  in	  1994	  
indicates	  the	  year	  preceding	  rent	  control	  removal.
                                          !"#$%&'()''*+&,-'.-$/"&0'12%'3%4,045-"2,'6%"5&07'89::';'<==>?'
                                        @&,-'A2,-%2B'C4",'*11&5-'4,/'.D"BB2+&%0'-2'E&+&%;A2,-%2BB&/'F,"-0


                                                                     I. Rent Control Main Effect




                .4
                .3
                .2
                .1
                0
                -.1
                -.2
                -.3
                -.4




                                          1989        1992               1995           1998                2001   2004


                                                         II. Spillover Effect: Never-Controlled Houses
                1.2 1.4
                1
                .8
                .6
                .4
                .2
                0
                -.6 -.4 -.2




                                          1989        1992               1995           1998                2001   2004


                                                         III. Spillover Effect: Never-Controlled Condos
                .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4
                -.6 -.4 -.2 0




                                          1989        1992               1995           1998                2001   2004

                                                             Point Estimate             95% Confidence Interval




!"#$%&0'DB2-'52&11"5"&,-0'1%2G'&+&,-'0-$/H'%&#%&00"2,0'IJ&%&'/&D&,/&,-'+4%"4KB&'"0'B2#'04B&'D%"5&7'I",02%"L&/'-2'
-J&'1"%0-'D&%5&,-"B&'0&D4%4-&BH'12%'J2$0&0'4,/'52,/2G","$G0)'64,&B'M'DB2-0'@A'N'O&4%'52&11"5"&,-0)'64,&B0'P'4,/'
A'DB2-'@AQ'N'O&4%'52&11"5"&,-0)'@A'"0'4,'",/"54-2%'12%'4'B254-"2,'-J4-'I40'%&,-'52,-%2BB&/'",'899R)'@AQ'"0'54B5$B4-&/'
2+&%'4'=)<='G"B&'%4/"$0)'MBB'0D&5"1"54-"2,0'",5B$/&'4,'@A'G4",'&11&5-7'D%2D&%-H'5J4%45-&%"0-"507'H&4%'/$GG"&07'4,/'
#&2#%4DJ"5'1"N&/'&11&5-0'12%'-J&'::'A4GK%"/#&'KB25S'#%2$D0'",'-J&'899='A&,0$0'52,-4",",#'-%4,045-&/'
D%2D&%-"&0)'64,&B0'P'4,/'A'",5B$/&'4,'@AQ'G4",'&11&5-'4,/'",-&%45-'0-%$5-$%&'-HD&'/$GG"&0'I"-J'T$4/%4-"5'-"G&'
-%&,/0'4,/'D%2D&%-H'5J4%45-&%"0-"50)'9>U'52,1"/&,5&'",-&%+4B0'4%&'52,0-%$5-&/'1%2G'%2K$0-'0-4,/4%/'&%%2%0'
5B$0-&%&/'KH'KB25S'#%2$D)'3J&'+&%-"54B'B",&'",'899R'",/"54-&0'-J&'H&4%'D%&5&/",#'%&,-'52,-%2B'%&G2+4B)
                        Figure	  4.	  Event	  Studies	  for	  Investment	  Activity,	  1991	  -­‐	  2005


              I. Probability of Permitted Investment                                   II. Investment Expenditure ($1000s)




                                                                            3
                                                                            2.5
    .03




                                                                            2
                                                                            1.5
    .02




                                                                            1
    .01




                                                                            .5
                                                                            0
    0




                                                                            -.5
                                                                            -1
    -.01




                                                                            -1.5
    -.02




                                                                            -2
             1992        1995        1998         2001        2004                   1992        1995         1998        2001        2004


                                     Point Estimate                                 95% Confidence Interval


Figure	  plots	  coefficients	  on	  RC	  x	  Year	  variables	  from	  event	  study	  regressions	  where	  the	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  (left	  panel)	  an	  indicator	  for	  whether	  a	  structure	  received	  a	  building	  permit	  
and	  (right	  panel)	  the	  permitted	  expenditure	  at	  a	  structure.	  RC	  is	  an	  indicator	  for	  a	  location	  that	  
was	  rent	  controlled	  in	  1994.	  	  Investment	  expenditures	  are	  winsorized	  by	  structure	  type	  and	  year	  
to	  the	  99.5th	  percentile.	  Both	  specifications	  include	  an	  RC	  main	  effect,	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  
geographic	  fixed	  effects	  for	  the	  89	  Cambridge	  block	  groups	  in	  the	  1990	  Census	  containing	  
assessed	  properties,	  structure	  type	  indicators,	  and	  a	  quadratic	  in	  the	  number	  of	  units	  in	  
condominium	  structures.	  1994	  is	  the	  omitted	  RC	  x	  Year	  category.	  95%	  confidence	  intervals	  are	  
constructed	  from	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  block	  group.	  The	  vertical	  line	  in	  1994	  
indicates	  the	  year	  preceding	  rent	  control	  removal.
         U2J"(#4:#U-%/&K(%#2)#.21J%*0R(#@(+*0(/)*2"#V&L2)*&/+E#4<<6A6999
H('(/0(/)#I2%*2J"(W#X/0*L2)&%#YM-2"#)&#Z/(#*G#@(+*0(/)#N2+#/&)#2)#V&L2)*&/#*/#$%*&%#[(2%

                          !""#$%&'(%)*(+         ,&-+(+         .&/0&1*/*-1+          !'2%)1(/)+
                                345                365               375                  385

F(2/#&G#H('(/0(/)#            9:6;<               9:676               9:6<=               9:77>
I2%*2J"(                     39:4<=5             39:4=?5             39:69<5             39:6675

@.                            A9:997            9:9=7BBB           A9:97>BB             A9:9>;BB
                             39:99?5             39:99?5            39:94;5              39:96;5
@.#C#$&+)                   9:9>8BBB            9:96>BBB           9:9=;BBB             9:9>=BB
                             39:99?5             39:99?5            39:9665              39:96>5

D#                           749E<8<            4=6E<<;              =9E>>?              ;=E7<>
H('(/0(/)#K2%*2J"(#*+#2/#*/0*L2)&%#(M-2"#)&#&/(#*G#%(+*0(/)#N2+#/&)#'%(+(/)#*/#L-%%(/)#-/*)#*/#'%*&%#
O(2%#32/0#P(%&#&)Q(%N*+(5:#@.#*+#2/#*/0*L2)&%#G&%#2#"&L2)*&/#)Q2)#N2+#%(/)#L&/)%&""(0#*/#4<<8#2/0#
$&+)#*+#2/#*/0*L2)&%#G&%#O(2%#4<<>#2/0#2G)(%:#!""#+'(L*G*L2)*&/+#*/L"-0(#O(2%#L&/)%&"+E#+)%-L)-%(#)O'(#
0-11*(+E#2/0#R(&R%2'Q*L#G*C(0#(GG(L)+#G&%#)Q(#<4#J"&LS#R%&-'+#*/#)Q(#4<<9#.(/+-+#L&/)2*/*/R#
200%(++(+#"*+)(0#*/#)Q(#.21J%*0R(#.*)O#.(/+-+:#@&J-+)#+)2/02%0#(%%&%+#L"-+)(%(0#JO#J"&LS#R%&-'#
2%(#*/#'2%(/)Q(+(+:#BBB#'T9:94E#BB#'T9:9>E#B#'T9:4
  ;+<&-)$.)=->?@ABCAD-)EC+CA>CA?>F)G>>->>-H)*+&,->)3$%%5)='&&+@>4)
         +IH)=A>C@A<,CA'I)'J)6-IC)7'IC@'&)8IC-I>ACK)36784

                      9-D-@)7'IC@'&&-H             =-?'IC@'&&-H
                      !""#       $%%#            !""#       $%%#
                                        8.)S',>->
&'()*+&,-             !$./$        !0.12        !$.21         !0.1!
                      3%.214       3%.224       3%.#54        3%.#24
678                    %.0%         %.0%         %.0#          %.02
                      3%.!24       3%.!24       3%.!#4        3%.!#4
9)                    /:#$1        /:!#2         5$"           50"

                                   88.)7'IH'LAIA,L>
&'()*+&,-             !$.01        !0.!%        !!.11         !$.//
                      3%.254       3%.#14       3%.1/4        3%.054
678                    %.0$         %.0!         %.#2          %.#0
                      3%.!"4       3%.!54       3%.!#4        3%.!#4
9)                    0:1%$        #:"$!        0:1!5         #:1%%
;+<&-)@-B'@C>)L-+I>)+IH)>C+IH+@H)H-DA+CA'I>)AI)B+@-ICM->->)'J)
+>>->>-H)D+&,->)+IH)6-IC)7'IC@'&)8IC-I>ACK)36784)J'@)@->AH-ICA+&)
>C@,?C,@->)<K)>C@,?C,@-)CKB-:)@-IC)?'IC@'&)>C+C,>)+IH)K-+@.)678)A>)
?+&?,&+C-H)'D-@)+)%.$%)LA&-)@+HA,>.)G>>->>-H)D+&,->)+@-)?'ID-@C-H)C')
@-+&)$%%5)H'&&+@>),>AI()CM-)7'I>,L-@)N@A?-)8IH-O)J'@)G&&)8C-L>)P->>)
EM-&C-@)J'@)G&&)Q@<+I)7'I>,L-@>:)E-@A->)8HF)7QQ6%%%%EG%P$:)9'C)
E-+>'I+&&K)GHR,>C-H.)
           ABQ7C/%+/?TTC843/2T/'CD4/YC82D4;27/2D/Z33C33CE/[B7<C3
      YC=CDECD4/[B;PBQ7C\/G2R/2T/Z33C33CE/1;2=C;4@/[B7<C/!"55&M/$**&#

                                !"#            !$#             !%#            !&#

'(                          )*+,*&---      )*+,*&---       )*+,",---
                              !*+*.,#        !*+*,$#         !*+*,$#
'(/0/1234                   *+$".---       *+$$.---        *+$&5---       *+$$"---
                              !*+*%5#        !*+*%.#         !*+*%&#       !*+*&*#

67289/:;2<=/>?3                  )              @              @              )
A;B84/A;CDE3                     )              )              @              @
FB=/G24/>?3                      )              )              )              @
')3H<B;CE                      *+I*,          *+.,5          *+.I%          *+5%J
K/L/%$M5J*+/NBO=7C/P3/B77/B33C33CE/(BOQ;PERC/S2<3C3/BDE/82DE2OPDP<O/=;2=C;4PC3/
PD/"55&/BDE/$**&+/'(/P3/BD/PDEP8B42;/T2;/B/728B4P2D/4SB4/UB3/;CD4/82D4;277CE/PD/"55&/
BDE/1234/P3/BD/PDEP8B42;/T2;/@CB;/CH<B7/42/$**&+/VCB;/TP0CE/CTTC843/BDE/34;<84<;C)4@=C/
E<OOPC3//B;C/PD87<ECE/PD/B77/;CR;C33P2D3+/67289/R;2<=/TP0CE/CTTC843/82;;C3=2DE/42/
4SC/J5/(BOQ;PERC/Q7289/R;2<=3/PD/4SC/"55*/(CD3<3/82D4BPDPDR/B33C33CE/=;2=C;4PC3+/
A;B84/4;CDE3/B;C/4;B84/0/1234/E<OOPC3/T2;/CB8S/2T/%*//4;B843/T;2O/4SC/"55*/(CD3<3+/
WD/827<OD/&M/'(/OBPD/CTTC843/B;C/BQ32;QCE/Q@/OB=/724/TP0CE/CTTC843+/'2Q<34/
34BDEB;E/C;;2;3/87<34C;CE/Q@/"55*/Q7289/R;2<=/B;C/PD/=B;CD4SC3C3+
---/=X*+*"M/--/=X*+*,M/-/=X*+"
                FGX<H1&.1DUUH=6514U1*H:61]H=4:6@4<1G:I1*H:61+4:6@4<18:6H:5O6E14:1^55H55HI1_G<AH5
                       ]HBH:IH:61_G@OGX<HM1K4Z14U1^55H55HI13@4BH@6E1_G<AH1!"77&S1$--&#

                               !"#           !$#          !%#           !&#          !'#          !(#           !)#

*+                         ,-.&&-/// ,-.&0&/// ,-.'-%///         ,-.&'-/// ,-.&(&///
                             !-.-')#   !-.-'-#   !-.-'$#           !-.-'$#   !-.-'%#
*+1213456                  -.")'/// -."7(/// -.$%%/// -.$-0/// -."7$/// -.$$-/// -."7)///
                             !-.-%0#   !-.-%(#   !-.-%&# !-.-&-#   !-.-%7#   !-.-%(# !-.-%0#
*+81                        ,-.'0"/     ,-.)7$  ,-.7%0/
                             !-.%$'#   !-.&)7#   !-.&7&#
*+81213456                  -.%$0//    -.$'0/  -.'&'/// -.&)'///
                             !-."%(#   !-."%0#   !-."7"# !-."0-#
94:,*+121*+81                                                       ,-.'(0    ,-.(0(
                                                                   !-.'&(#   !-.'("#
94:,*+121*+81213456                                                -.$0"/   -.'"&//  -.&"'/
                                                                   !-."(0#   !-.$$)# !-.$$-#
*+121*+81                                                         ,".$""// ,".&"(//
                                                                   !-.'%'#   !-.'''#
*+121*+81213456                                                     -.$&7  -.('"/// -.(-)//
                                                                   !-.$"'#   !-.$%"# !-.$'(#

;<4=>1?@4AB1CD5                 ,             E            E            ,            E             E            ,
F@G=61F@H:I5                    ,             ,            E            E            ,             E            E
JGB1K461CD5                     ,             ,            ,            E            ,             ,            E
L-M1941NBO<<4PH@5            -.-"0         -.-('        -.--(         -.-"-        -."$(         -.-"-        -.-$0
L-M1NBO<<4PH@51DQAG<                                                               -.7-7         -.'70        -.'"&
*,5QAG@HI                     -.(""        -.)("         -.)('        -.7%0        -.)(&         -.)()        -.7%0
91R1%$S70-.1*+81O51=G<=A<G6HI14PH@1G1-.$-1TO<H1@GIOA51G:I1IHTHG:HI.1*+1O51G:1O:IO=G64@1U4@1G1<4=G6O4:16VG61WG51@H:61
=4:6@4<<HI1O:1"77&1G:I134561O51G:1O:IO=G64@1U4@1EHG@1HQAG<1641$--&.1*+1G:I1*+121*+81TGO:1HUUH=651G@H1GX54@XHI1XE1TGB1
<461CD1O:1=4<AT:51&1G:I1).1YHG@1UO2HI1HUUH=651G:I156@A=6A@H16EBH1IATTOH51G@H1O:=<AIHI1O:1G<<1@HZ@H55O4:5.1;<4=>1Z@4AB1
UO2HI1HUUH=651=4@@H5B4:I16416VH1071+GTX@OIZH1X<4=>1Z@4AB51O:16VH1"77-1+H:5A51=4:6GO:O:Z1G55H55HI1B@4BH@6OH5.1F@G=61
6@H:I51G@H16@G=612134561IATTOH51U4@1HG=V14U1%-116@G=651U@4T16VH1"77-1+H:5A5.1FH561U4@1941NBO<<4PH@51@HB4@651B,PG<AH51
U@4T16H56516VG61*+8121345614@194:,*+121*+812134561G:I1*+121*+812134561=4HUUO=OH:651G@H1[H@4.1FH561U4@1NBO<<4PH@51DQAG<1
@HB4@651B,PG<AH51U@4T16H56516VG616VH5H1<G66H@16W41=4HUUO=OH:651G@H1HQAG<.1*4XA56156G:IG@I1H@@4@51=<A56H@HI1XE1"77-1
X<4=>1Z@4AB1G@H1O:1BG@H:6VH5H5.1///1B\-.-"S1//1B\-.-'S1/1B\-."
                                                                     Table	  5.	  Property	  Conversions,	  1994-­‐2004:
                                    Status	  in	  1994	  of	  Units	  that	  Were	  Designated	  as	  Houses	  and	  Condominiums	  in	  2004

                                                                    2004	  Houses                                                   2004	  Condominiums
                                                                      Formerly	             Never	                 All	  Condo-­‐         Formerly	     Never	  
1994	  Structure	  Type                      All	  Houses         Controlled            Controlled                 miniums            Controlled       Controlled

Same	  as	  2004                          13,480	  (97.3%) 1,567	  (89.9%) 11,913	  (98.3%)                   7,085	  (74.1%) 3,507	  (76.2%) 3,578	  (72.1%)

Converted	  from                              381	  (2.7%)        177	  (10.1%)         204	  (1.7%)           2,476	  (25.9%) 1,093	  (23.8%) 1,383	  (27.9%)
	  	  	  	  	  Houses                                                                                         1,058	  (11.1%) 151	  (3.3%)     907	  (18.3%)
	  	  	  	  	  Condominiums               20	  (0.1%)           3	  (0.2%)          17	  (0.1%)
	  	  	  	  	  Apartments                 153	  (1.1%)         115	  (6.5%)         38	  (0.3%)              647	  (6.8%)         599	  (13%)             48	  (1%)
	  	  	  	  	  Other	  Residential       50	  (0.4%)           35	  (2%)           15	  (0.1%)              347	  (3.6%)         284	  (6.2%)           63	  (1.3%)
	  	  	  	  	  Non-­‐Residential          158	  (1.1%)         24	  (1.4%)          134	  (1.1%)             424	  (4.4%)         59	  (1.3%)            365	  (7.4%)

Total                                             13,861                 1,744                12,117                     9,561                 4,600                   4,961
Counts	  and	  conversion	  rates	  are	  calculated	  from	  Cambridge	  Assessor's	  databases,	  reflecting	  property	  characteristics	  as	  of	  1994	  and	  
2004.	  The	  "Other	  Residential"	  category	  includes	  structures	  zoned	  as	  boarding	  houses,	  mixed	  use,	  or	  multiple	  houses	  on	  a	  single	  
parcel.	  
             PGR@B+(2+DSSBK0/+.S+)B90+TBK.90C.@+G9H+)B90+*.90C.@+790B9/?0O+.9+U//B//BH+VG@FB/+
                                             RO+=0CFK0FCB+PO>B
                    TB>B9HB90+VGC?GR@B<+W.Q+.S+U//B//BH+-C.>BC0O+VG@FB+!"66&I+$11&#

                                          !"#           !$#          !%#          !&#           !'#          !(#

                                                                       72+;.F/B/
)*+,+-./0                             1213"444      121('444     12153444 121(1444          121(6444      121(3444
                                       !121"%#       !121""#      !121"%#     !121""#        !121"&#       !121"%#
)*7+,+-./0                            12&$"444       12$1'4                                 12&"6444
                                       !121(3#       !12"1%#                                 !121(3#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                              12&"&444      12"6&4                     12&"5444
                                                                  !121(3#      !12"1%#                     !121(5#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                                  12&66444      12%"'44                    12&&1444
                                                                  !12""6#      !12"%1#                     !12"$3#

;1<+8.+=>?@@.ABC/                       12111         121'1         12111        121'(        12111         12111
;1<+=>?@@.ABC/+DEFG@                                                12%6"       12131&                      123$(
):/EFGCBH                                123'%        123''         123'%        123''         123'(        123'(
8+                                      "(I$%6       "(I$%6        "(I$%6       "(I$%6        "&I6"5       "&I6"5

                                                                   772+*.9H.X?9?FX/
)*+,+-./0                             12%%1444      12%'&444     12%$3444 12%'1444          12%"5444      12%"6444
                                       !121&3#       !121%3#      !121'1#    !121&1#         !121&3#       !121&5#
)*7+,+-./0                              12$$5        12((644                                  12"13
                                       !12"(1#       !12$'(#                                 !12"(5#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                                 12$'5      12(5344                      :1213(
                                                                   !12"6(#     !12%13#                     !12"1(#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                                     12"5"      12(&344                      12%1"
                                                                   !12$5"#     !12$6"#                     !12%&1#

;1<+8.+=>?@@.ABC/                       12"'6         121""         12%&"        121%3        12'"3         12'&6
;1<+=>?@@.ABC/+DEFG@                                                1231"        126$'                      12%1'
):/EFGCBH                                1251'        125"&         1251'        125"&         125"&        125"'
8+                                      "(I5&"       "(I5&"        "(I5&"       "(I5&"        ""I553       ""I553

J@.KL+MC.F>+ND/                            O            O             O            O             O            O
PCGK0+PCB9H/                               :            O             :            O             :            :
D,K@FH?9Q+*.9ABC0BH+=0CFK0FCB/             :            :             :            :             O            O
)*7+?/+KG@KF@G0BH+.ABC+G+12$1+X?@B+CGH?F/+G9H+HBXBG9BH2+)*+?/+G9+?9H?KG0.C+S.C+G+@.KG0?.9+0YG0+ZG/+CB90+K.90C.@@BH+
?9+"66&+G9H+-./0+?/+G9+?9H?KG0.C+S.C+OBGC+BEFG@+0.+$11&2+79+/>BK?S?KG0?.9/+0YG0+?9K@FHB+)*I+)*7I+8.9:)*+,+)*7+.C+)*+,+
)*7+?90BCGK0BH+Z?0Y+-./0I+XG?9+BSSBK0/+.S+0YB/B+AGC?GR@B/+GCB+?9K@FHBH+RF0+9.0+0GRF@G0BH2+[BGC+S?,BH+BSSBK0/+G9H+
/0CFK0FCB+0O>B+HFXX?B/+GCB+?9K@FHBH+?9+G@@+CBQCB//?.9/2+J@.KL+QC.F>+S?,BH+BSSBK0/+K.CCB/>.9H+0.+0YB+36+*GXRC?HQB+
R@.KL+QC.F>/+?9+0YB+"661+*B9/F/+K.90G?9?9Q+G//B//BH+>C.>BC0?B/2+PCGK0+0CB9H/+GCB+0CGK0+,+-./0+HFXX?B/+S.C+BGKY+
.S+%1+0CGK0/+SC.X+0YB+"661+*B9/F/2+PB/0+S.C+8.+=>?@@.ABC/+CB>.C0/+>:AG@FB/+SC.X+0B/0/+0YG0+)*7+,+-./0+.C+8.9:)*+,+
)*7+,+-./0+G9H+)*+,+)*7+,+-./0+K.BSS?K?B90/+GCB+\BC.2+PB/0+S.C+=>?@@.ABC/+DEFG@+CB>.C0/+>:AG@FB/+SC.X+0B/0/+0YG0+
0YB/B+@G00BC+0Z.+K.BSS?K?B90/+GCB+BEFG@2+).RF/0+/0G9HGCH+BCC.C/+K@F/0BCBH+RO+"661+R@.KL+QC.F>+GCB+?9+>GCB90YB/B/2+
444+>]121"I+44+>]121'I+4+>]12"
                     TLU'($A"$JVV(09$/V$6(,9$S(0/,93/'$L,R$6(,9$+/,93/'$D,9(,)&9W$/,$X))())(R$YL'-()$
                                        V/3$YL3&/-)$6(,9$+/,93/'$D,9(,)&9W$Q(L)-3()
                            S(4(,R(,9$YL3&LU'(G$Z/M$/V$X))())(R$83/4(39W$YL'-($?#==;P$*!!;@
                                                  +(,)-)$                                          +(,)-)$
                                                   .'/01$                                           .'/01$
                       !"#!$%&'() !"*!$%&'()      23/-4     !"5!$%&'()     !"#!$%&'() !"*!$%&'() 23/-4                  !"5!$%&'()

                                                                     D"$X''$H93-09-3()
                                            !"#$%&'()                                              $%*+,#$%&'()
6+$7$8/)9            !"#:;<<<         !"#=*<<< !"*#><<<          !"*!><<<        !"*##<<<     !"**!<<< !"*;!<<<          !"*5*<<<
                      ?!"!5:@          ?!"!5=@     ?!"!5A@        ?!"!;!@         ?!"!5>@      ?!"!5>@      ?!"!5;@       ?!"!5A@
B/,C6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9    !"*#;           !"*:#<       !"#E>          !"**;           !"*#;       !"E#;<<       !"#;=        !"E:!<<
                      ?!"#5:@          ?!"#>:@     ?!"#5;@        ?!"#5A@         ?!"#;!@      ?!"**A@      ?!"#A5@       ?!"*E;@
6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9        !"*5!            !"*;=       !"#5:          !"#>;          !"5::<<     !">E#<<<      !"5**<        !">:A<<
                      ?!"#>=@          ?!"*#E@     ?!"#:#@        ?!"*E=@         ?!"#E>@      ?!"*5#@      ?!"#=#@       ?!"*>*@
F!G$B/$H4&''/I(3)      !"#;>            !"#*>       !";#!          !"**#           !"!55        !"!#!        !"*5A         !"!#>
F!G$H4&''/I(3)$JK-L'   !"=;#            !"=!=       !"=5E          !":5=           !"5;5        !"E=:        !";!;         !"A!E

2(/M3L4N&0$OJ)$            .'/01       .'1$234      .'1$234       .'1$234          .'/01        .'1$234      .'1$234      .'1$234
B                         5*P=:!       5*P=:!       5*P=:!        5*P=:!          5*P=:!        5*P=:!       5*P=:!       5*P=:!

                                                                      DD"$.W$H93-09-3(

                                             -".)&)                                              /"'("01'1.0)
Q(L,$6+D                  !"*::         !"5!#      !"*=#           !"5##           !"5A;        !"5AE     !"5A:            !"5:5
H9L,RL3R$S(I$6+D          !"#>=         !"#;=      !"#>;           !"#;#           !"*!;        !"#A*     !"#:5            !"#5=

6+$7$8/)9            !"!AE<<<         !"!A:<<<     !"!:;<<<      !"!A=<<<        !"55!<<<     !"5*:<<<      !"5;=<<<     !"5;A<<<
                      ?!"!#;@          ?!"!#5@      ?!"!#5@       ?!"!#5@         ?!"!E#@      ?!"!E!@       ?!"!;:@      ?!"!E5@
B/,C6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9 !"5!A<<<          !";#;<<<     !"*=:<<<      !";*:<<<          !"#=E        !"*EA         !"#5=        !"#:*
                      ?!"!>;@          ?!"!>:@      ?!"!A*@       ?!"!A#@         ?!"#>*@      ?!"#=>@       ?!"*!;@      ?!"*5*@
6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9      !"5;E<<<         !";==<<<     !"5E*<<<      !"E5=<<<          !"#EA        !"#A#         !"!E#        !"!5*
                      ?!"#!#@          ?!"##=@      ?!"#!A@       ?!"#5#@         ?!"*#>@      ?!"*A#@       ?!"*#A@      ?!"555@
F!G$B/$H4&''/I(3)      !"!!!            !"!!!        !"!!!         !"!!!           !"5=E        !"5;#         !"AAA        !"A5#
F!G$H4&''/I(3)$JK-L'   !">>:            !"5=#        !"EE*         !"*=5           !"::;        !":!#         !"A>E        !"A#*

2(/M3L4N&0$OJ)             .'/01       .'1$234      .'1$234       .'1$234          .'/01        .'1$234      .'1$234      .'1$234
B                         #>P*5=       #>P*5=       #>P*5=        #>P*5=          #>PA;#        #>PA;#       #>PA;#       #>PA;#
6+D$&)$0L'0-'L9(R$/I(3$M(/M3L4N&()$3(4/39(R$&,$0/'-%,$N(LR&,M)$L,R$R(%(L,(R$&,$(L0N$0L)("$6+$&)$L,$&,R&0L9/3$V/3$L$'/0L9&/,$9NL9$
[L)$3(,9$0/,93/''(R$&,$#==;$L,R$8/)9$&)$L,$&,R&0L9/3$V/3$W(L3$(K-L'$9/$*!!;"$D,$)4(0&V&0L9&/,)$9NL9$&,0'-R($6+P$B/,C6+$7$6+D$/3$6+$7$
6+D$&,9(3L09(R$[&9N$8/)9P$%L&,$(VV(09)$/V$9N()($IL3&LU'()$L3($L')/$&,0'-R(R$U-9$,/9$9LU-'L9(R"$\(L3$V&7(R$(VV(09)$L,R$)93-09-3($9W4($
R-%%&()$L3($&,0'-R(R$&,$L''$3(M3())&/,)"$.'/01$V&7(R$(VV(09)$L,R$U'/01$M3/-4$V&7(R$(VV(09)$0/33()4/,R$9/$9N($E:A$+(,)-)$U'/01)$
L,R$:=$+(,)-)$U'/01$M3/-4)$0/,9L&,&,M$L))())(R$43/4(39&()P$U/9N$R(V&,(R$-)&,M$9N($#==!$+(,)-)"$T3L09$93(,R)$L3($93L09$7$8/)9$
R-%%&()$V/3$(L0N$/V$5!$$93L09)$V3/%$9N($#==!$+(,)-)"$T()9$V/3$B/$H4&''/I(3)$3(4/39)$4CIL'-()$V3/%$9()9)$9NL9$B/,C6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9$
L,R$6+$7$6+D$7$8/)9$0/(VV&0&(,9)$L3($](3/"$T()9$V/3$H4&''/I(3)$JK-L'$3(4/39)$4CIL'-()$V3/%$9()9)$9NL9$9N()($9[/$0/(VV&0&(,9)$L3($
(K-L'"$6/U-)9$)9L,RL3R$(33/3)$0'-)9(3(R$UW$#==!$U'/01$M3/-4$L3($&,$4L3(,9N()()"$Q(L,$?HS@$/V$6+D$IL3&LU'($&)$!"55#$?!"#=*@$L9$
!"#!$%&'()P$!"55=$?!"#>E@$L9$!"*!$%&'()P$!"5;:$?!"#;E@$L9$!"5!$%&'()P$L,R$!"55E$?!"#A=@$L9$9N($+(,)-)$U'/01$M3/-4$'(I('"$$
<<<$4^!"!#P$<<$4^!"!EP$<$4^!"#
       LHU<F21.2DYYF=7625Y2*F:72\F=5:7@5<2H:K2*F:72+5:7@5<28:7F:6I7E25:2L@H:6H=7I5:24@I=F6S2"0112,2$--'
                                     \FBF:KF:72]H@IHU<FN2^5V2OH<F24@I=F2

                                  !"#          !$#           !%#          !&#          !'#           !(#          !)#

*+                           ,-.%-'/// ,-.$-&/// ,-."0%/// ,-."10/// ,-."1'/// ,-."((/// ,-."("///
                               !-.-&%#   !-.-$&#   !-.-$&#   !-.-$'#   !-.-$&#   !-.-$'#   !-.-$&#
*+2324567                      -.-(-/   -."-(/// -.-1(/// -.-1)/// -.-)0/// -.-)0/// -.-(1///
                               !-.-%-#   !-.-$(#   !-.-$)#   !-.-$(#   !-.-$'#   !-.-$'#   !-.-$&#
*+82                                                         ,-.'"-/    ,-.&0&
                                                             !-.%-'#   !-.%")#
*+82324567                                                  -.$-'///   -."((/
                                                             !-.-'(#   !-.-01#
95:,*+232*+82                                                                     ,-.%-'    ,-.$)(
                                                                                 !-.$)&#   !-.$)'#
95:,*+232*+82324567                                                             -."0)///    -."%$
                                                                                 !-.-()#   !-.-10#
*+232*+82                                                                       ,-.11&// ,-.11%//
                                                                                 !-.%(-#   !-.%(1#
*+232*+82324567                                                                  -.$&(/     -.$&(
                                                                                 !-."&(#   !-."))#
;<5=>2?@5AB2CD6                   ,            E             E            E             E            E             E
4@5BF@7E2+GH@H=7F@I67I=6          ,            E             E            E             E            E             E
JAHK@H7I=2L@H=72L@F:K6            ,            ,             E            ,             E            ,             E
M-N2952OBI<<5PF@6                 ,            ,             ,          -.---         -.-0'        -.--$         -.$-1
M-N2OBI<<5PF@62DQAH<              ,            ,             ,            ,             ,          -.))%         -.'"$
*,6QAH@FK                       -.%"1        -.()&         -.(1"        -.()'         -.(1$        -.()1         -.(1&
9R"&S)102+HTU@IKVF2G5A6F2H:K2=5:K5TI:IAT2B@5BF@7IF627@H:6H=7FK2KA@I:V2"01127G@5AVG2$--'.24@I=F62H@F2WI:65@IXFK2
UE267@A=7A@F27EBF2H727GF2YI@672BF@=F:7I<F.2*+82I62KFYI:FK25PF@2H2-.$-2TI<F2@HKIA62H:K2KFTFH:FK.2*+2I62H:2I:KI=H75@2Y5@2H2
<5=H7I5:27GH72WH62@F:72=5:7@5<<FK2I:2"00&2H:K245672I62H:2I:KI=H75@2Y5@2EFH@2I62"00'25@2HY7F@WH@K6.2Z<<26BF=IYI=H7I5:62
I:=<AKF2EFH@25Y26H<F2KATTIF62H:K267@A=7A@F27EBF2KATTIF6.24@5BF@7E2+GH@H=7F@I67I=6S2FH=G2I:7F@H=7FK2WI7G267@A=7A@F2
7EBFS2I:=<AKF2:ATUF@25Y2757H<2@55T6S2UH7G@55T6S2UFK@55T6S2I:7F@I5@26QAH@F2Y557HVFS2H2KATTE2PH@IHU<F2Y5@2XF@52<572
6IXFS2H2QAHK@H7I=2I:2<5726IXFS2H2KATTE2PH@IHU<F2Y5@2TI66I:V2EFH@2UAI<7S2H2QAHK@H7I=2I:27GF2<5V2HVF25Y27GF267@A=7A@FS2H:K2H2
QAHK@H7I=27ITF27@F:K2Y5@2FH=G267@A=7A@F27EBF.2;<5=>2V@5AB2YI3FK2FYYF=762=5@@F6B5:K2752FH=G25Y27GF2112+HTU@IKVF2U<5=>2
V@5AB62I:27GF2"00-2+F:6A62=5:7HI:I:V27@H:6H=7FK2B@5BF@7IF6.2+5<AT:62'2H:K2)2I:=<AKF2QAHK@H7I=27@H=727@F:K62Y5@2FH=G2
5Y2%-2+F:6A627@H=76.2LF672Y5@2952OBI<<5PF@62@FB5@762B,PH<AF62Y@5T27F67627GH72*+8232456725@295:,*+232*+823245672H:K2*+232
*+823245672=5FYYI=IF:762H@F2XF@5.2LF672Y5@2OBI<<5PF@62DQAH<2@FB5@762B,PH<AF62Y@5T27F67627GH727GF6F2<H77F@27W52=5FYYI=IF:762
H@F2FQAH<.2*5UA67267H:KH@K2F@@5@62=<A67F@FK2UE2"00-2U<5=>2V@5AB2H@F2I:2BH@F:7GF6F6.2///2B[-.-"S2//2B[-.-'S2/2B[-."
B=NIC+42+KOOCA0/+.O+)C90+*.90?.I+=9>+)C90+*.90?.I+790C9/@0D+.9+B?=9/=A0@.9+-?@AC/+ND+G0?<A0<?C+BDHCM+
                                            "433+:+$11'
                                 PCHC9>C90+Q=?@=NICF+R.S+G=IC+-?@AC

                                           E.</C/                                   *.9>.T@9@<T/
                                !"#          !$#          !%#                !&#         !'#            !(#

)*+,+-./0                    1213455      12"1"55      12"1$55            1214$555     12163555      121(455
                             !121&$#      !121&%#      !121&'#             !121%1#      !121$4#      !121$6#
)*7+,+-./0                  12%%6555                                       12"'$55
                             !12163#                                       !1216$#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                      12%'4555      12$6&55                           12131         :12116
                                          !1213'#      !12"$3#                          !1213(#       !12"$3#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                            12131        :121$&                          12%135         12%1(
                                          !12$($#      !12$4&#                          !12"''#       !12"46#

;<=>?=0@A+B?=A0+B?C9>/           :           :             D                  :            :             D
E1F+GH@II.JC?/+KL<=I                       12%$(         12%"'              12$%'        12"$&         1266&
E1F+8.+GH@II.JC?/                          12111         1214%                           121((         12$(&
):/L<=?C>                     12(4'        12(4(         1261'              12($3        12(%1         12(%4
8+                            &M3"&        &M3"&         &M3"&              4M46'        4M46'         4M46'
G=THIC+@9AI<>C/+*=TN?@>SC+U.</C+=9>+A.9>.T@9@<T+H?.HC?0@C/+0?=9/=A0C>+><?@9S+"433+0U?.<SU+$11'2+-?@AC/+
=?C+V@9/.?@WC>+ND+/0?<A0<?C+0DHC+=0+0UC+O@?/0+HC?AC90@IC2+)*7+@/+>CO@9C>+.JC?+=+12$1+T@IC+?=>@</+=9>+>CTC=9C>2+
)*+@/+=9+@9>@A=0.?+O.?+=+I.A=0@.9+0U=0+V=/+?C90+A.90?.IIC>+@9+"44&+=9>+-./0+@/+=9+@9>@A=0.?+O.?+DC=?+@/+"44'+.?+
=O0C?V=?>/2+79+/HCA@O@A=0@.9/+0U=0+@9AI<>C+)*M+)*7M+8.9:)*+,+)*7+.?+)*+,+)*7+@90C?=A0C>+V@0U+-./0M+T=@9+COOCA0/+
.O+0UC/C+J=?@=NIC/+=?C+=I/.+@9AI<>C>+N<0+9.0+0=N<I=0C>2+XII+/HCA@O@A=0@.9/+@9AI<>C+DC=?+.O+/=IC+><TT@C/M+
/0?<A0<?C+0DHC+><TT@C/M+NI.AY+S?.<H+O@,C>+COOCA0/+A.??C/H.9>@9S+0.+C=AU+.O+0UC+33+*=TN?@>SC+NI.AY+S?.<H/+
@9+0UC+"441+*C9/</+A.90=@9@9S+0?=9/=A0C>+H?.HC?0@C/M+=9>+A.90?.I/+O.?+H?.HC?0D+AU=?=A0C?@/0@A/M+VU@AU+=?C+
C=AU+@90C?=A0C>+V@0U+/0?<A0<?C+0DHC+=9>+@9AI<>C+9<TNC?+.O+0.0=I+?..T/M+N=0U?..T/M+NC>?..T/M+@90C?@.?+
/L<=?C+O..0=SCM+=+><TTD+J=?@=NIC+O.?+WC?.+I.0+/@WCM+=+L<=>?=0@A+@9+I.0+/@WCM+=+><TTD+J=?@=NIC+O.?+T@//@9S+DC=?+
N<@I0M+=+L<=>?=0@A+@9+0UC+I.S+=SC+.O+0UC+/0?<A0<?CM+=9>+=+L<=>?=0@A+0@TC+0?C9>+O.?+C=AU+/0?<A0<?C+0DHC2+*.I<T9/+
%+=9>+(+@9AI<>C+L<=>?=0@A+0?=A0+0?C9>/+O.?+C=AU+.O+%1+*C9/</+0?=A0/2+BC/0+O.?+8.+GH@II.JC?/+?CH.?0/+H:J=I<C/+
O?.T+0C/0/+0U=0+)*7+,+-./0+.?+8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0+=9>+)*+,+)*7+,+-./0+A.COO@A@C90/+=?C+WC?.2+BC/0+O.?+GH@II.JC?/+
KL<=I+?CH.?0/+H:J=I<C/+O?.T+0C/0/+0U=0+0UC/C+I=00C?+0V.+A.COO@A@C90/+=?C+CL<=I2+).N</0+/0=9>=?>+C??.?/+
AI</0C?C>+ND+"441+NI.AY+S?.<H+=?C+@9+H=?C90UC/C/2+555+HZ121"M+55+HZ121'M+5+HZ12"
    Table	  10.	  Placebo	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Relationship	  between	  Imputed	  Rent	  Control	  Intensity	  and	  Property	  
                               Price	  Appreciation	  in	  Cambridge	  and	  Adjoining	  Cities,	  1988	  -­‐	  2005
                                                    Dependent	  Variable:	  Log	  Sale	  Price	  

                                                         Condo-­‐                                             Condo-­‐                                            Condo-­‐
                                  Houses                 miniums                      Houses                  miniums                      House                  miniums
                                    (1)                    (2)                          (3)                     (4)                         (5)                     (6)
                                                                                                                                         III.	  Somerville,	  Medford	  
                                I.	  Cambridge:	  Actual	  RCI                II.	  Cambridge:	  Predicted	  RCI                             and	  Malden
RCI                               -­‐0.183                  -­‐0.257                -­‐0.203**                -­‐0.504*                    -­‐0.034                   0.101
                                 (0.112)                   (0.226)                     (0.096)                 (0.256)                    (0.057)                    (0.205)
RCI	  x	  Post                0.261***                     0.063                  0.278***                    -­‐0.055                    0.088                -­‐0.574***
                                 (0.088)                   (0.093)                     (0.092)                 (0.102)                    (0.055)                    (0.206)
N	                                4,223                    5,764                      4,223                    5,764                      17,270                   3,346
                                         IV.	  Somerville                                      V.	  Malden                                       VI.	  Medford

RCI                                -­‐0.162                  0.238                     0.023                     -­‐0.176                  -­‐0.056               0.832***
                                  (0.133)                  (0.555)                    (0.077)                   (0.172)                   (0.079)                    (0.268)
RCI	  x	  Post                   -­‐0.090                 -­‐0.406                   0.052                -­‐0.562***                   0.174**                -­‐1.201***
                                  (0.151)                  (0.507)                    (0.066)                   (0.171)                   (0.086)                    (0.278)

N	                                6,605                    1,868                      6,506                    1,197                       4,159                     281
Sample	  includes	  never-­‐controlled	  houses	  and	  condominiums	  in	  Cambridge	  and	  surrounding	  cities	  transacted	  during	  
1988	  through	  2005.	  Prices	  are	  winsorized	  by	  structure	  type	  and	  city	  at	  the	  first	  percentile.	  Actual	  RCI	  is	  Rent	  Control	  
Intensity	  calculated	  at	  the	  1990	  Census	  block	  group	  level.	  Predicted	  RCI	  is	  imputed	  for	  Cambridge	  and	  non-­‐
Cambridge	  block	  groups	  from	  an	  OLS	  regression	  of	  Cambridge	  block	  group	  RCI	  on	  1990	  Cambridge	  Census	  block	  
group	  characteristics.	  All	  specifications	  include	  the	  controls	  used	  in	  column	  1	  of	  Table	  9,	  except	  that	  geographic	  
fixed	  effects	  are	  included	  at	  the	  level	  of	  1990	  Census	  tracts	  rather	  than	  block	  groups.	  Panel	  III	  additionally	  includes	  a	  
full	  set	  of	  city	  by	  year	  effects.	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  1990	  block	  group	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  
***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1
            Table	  11.	  Descriptive	  Statistics	  for	  Cambridge	  Residential	  Building	  Permitting	  Activity,	  1991	  through	  2004
                                                         Permits	  Issued	  and	  Permitted	  Expenditures

                                                                        Houses                                                     Condominiums
                                                       Never	  Controlled    Decontrolled                             Never	  Controlled  Decontrolled
                                                        1991-­‐    1995-­‐  1991-­‐  1995-­‐                            1991-­‐    1995-­‐ 1991-­‐ 1995-­‐
                                                        1994       2004      1994     2004                              1994       2004    1994     2004
                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                      I.	  Permits	  Issued
Number	  of	  Permits                                 1,507      4,385     259         694                             247        852     185     672
Mean	  Annual	  Fraction	  of	  Units	  Permitted 0.030       0.035    0.029    0.031                              0.014      0.019   0.011   0.016
Mean	  Units	  in	  Permitted	  Structures           1.72       1.72     2.54     2.81                              12.06      10.95   15.69   16.34

                                                                                          II.	  Aggregate	  Expenditure	  (1,000s	  of	  2008	  dollars)
Mean	  Annual	  Total	  Expenditure                                14,044          29,954 1,588              3,486          3,723           7,595       1,451                        4,435
Mean	  Annual	  Expenditure	  per	  Unit                           1.11            2.37          0.72        1.57           0.82           1.67         0.34                        1.05

                                                                            III.	  Annual	  Expenditure	  per	  Permitted	  Unit	  (1,000s	  of	  2008	  dollars)
Mean                                                                    37.3           68.3       24.5         50.2          60.3            89.1            31.4         66.0
Standard	  Deviation                                                  164.5          178.0       46.8        105.6         190.2           338.4           118.1        269.6
Median                                                                  10.3           18.0       8.3          13.8          12.4            19.3            11.2         19.2
Min                                                                     0.1            0.1        0.4           0.3           0.5             0.3             0.4          0.4
Max                                                                   5,675.5 4,365.5 451.2 1,208.9                        2,121.2 6,589.3 1,480.1 4,450.3
Data	  source	  is	  the	  universe	  of	  Cambridge	  Inspectional	  Services	  permits	  issued	  during	  1991	  through	  2004.	  We	  count	  all	  permits	  
issued	  to	  a	  given	  structure	  in	  a	  given	  year	  as	  a	  single	  permit	  and	  sum	  their	  expenditures.	  When	  calculating	  units	  permitted	  or	  
expenditures	  per	  unit	  in	  a	  year,	  we	  attribute	  the	  structure's	  permitted	  status	  and	  expenditures	  to	  only	  one	  unit.	  Expenditures	  are	  
converted	  to	  real	  2008	  dollars	  using	  the	  Consumer	  Price	  Index	  for	  All	  Items	  Less	  Shelter	  for	  All	  Urban	  Consumers,	  Series	  Id:	  
CUUR0000SA0L2,	  Not	  Seasonally	  Adjusted.	  
  LDG9%<+';<QG$%?>%4<D34<2"#3@%?EDC@#D9<2FD3H%$<63<8$$%$$%4<RD9#%$<"E<B%C"3@?"99%4<D34<=%>%?M
                   2"3@?"99%4<A36@$(<+))7<@"<'..7<S63<56996"3$<"E<'..0<4"99D?$T

                      +))7<              '..7<                                  N%3@<           1<"E<8JJ?%M
                    8$$%$$%4<          8$$%$$%4<        '..7<2"#3@%?M         B%C"3@?"9<<      C6D@6"3<B#%<@"<
                     S569&T             S569&T          EDC@#D9<S569&T      :5JDC@<S569&T        B%C"3@?"9

                                         :;<=%>%?<2"3@?"99%4<A36@$
      !"#$%$         &'()*+             &,(-'.             &*(/..               &0'.                +)1
2"34"5636#5$         &+(.+,             &'(*))             &'(/.7               &+)/                +'1
          899        &-(),0             &+.(.+)            &)(..7              &+(.+/               +,1

                                           ::;<B%C"3@?"99%4<A36@$

                                        !"#$%&'!$%()&#(*'+,,$%&'-)*.
      !"#$%$          &'*,               &,*.              &,''                 &-0                  01
2"34"5636#5$          &/+0              &+(,7*            &+('+)                &/',                7-1
          899         &,0/              &'(/.*            &+()7+                &/*/                --1

                                          /00")1'23"**(4$#'+,,$%&5
      !"#$%$          &'*,               &,*.              &*.-                 &+/,                -'1
2"34"5636#5$          &/+0              &+(,7*           &+(+-7                 &*+'                /.1
          899         &,0/              &'(/.*           &+(,-,                 &,*)                7/1
8$$%$$%4<>D9#%$<D?%<E?"5<@F%<+))/<D34<'../<2D5G?64H%<8$$%$$"?I$<4D@DGD$%$(<?%E9%C@63H<J?"J%?@K<>D9#D@6"3$<
D$<"E<+))7<D34<'..7(<?%$J%C@6>%9K;<2"#3@%?EDC@#D9<9"H<J?"J%?@K<>D9#%$<D?%<%$@65D@%4<$%JD?D@%9K<E"?<F"#$%$<
D34<C"34"$<#$63H<@F%<$J%C6E6CD@6"3<63<C"9#53</<"E<LDG9%<7;<2"#3@%?EDC@#D9$<E"?<3%>%?MC"3@?"99%4<#36@$<$#G@?DC@<
="3MN2<O<N2:<O<P"$@<%EE%C@$<D34<C"#3@%?EDC@#D9$<E"?<4%C"3@?"99%4<#36@$<$#G@?DC@<N2<O<P"$@<D34<N2<O<N2:<O<P"$@<
%EE%C@$<E?"5<DC@#D9<9"H<J?"J%?@K<>D9#%$;<8HH?%HD@%<%EE%C@$<63<'..0<4"99D?$<D?%<CD9C#9D@%4<GK<$#5563H<
%OJ"3%3@6D@%4<C"#3@%?EDC@#D9<9"H<J?"J%?@K<>D9#%$;
L#N3"(-76()"0G.+@&+*"(%&#&+0&+G0(H?.(>?@=3#&+?$(#$'(D"0+'"$&+#3(E$+&0(#$'(%&.=G&=."0(H?.(O#.+?=0(
                                          K"?P.#@Q+"0

                                       !"#$         %&'()"*         !+$           !#,           !"'+#$

                                                               R6(<"$0=0(I3?GJ0
-."#(/01(2+3"04                          5657         5658         5655          569:              5655
7;;5(<"$0=0(>?@=3#&+?$                 7:9659       7A86B7         5655       8C::655             ;;655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(E$+&0                  A86BB        9C6B7         5655       FF7655              F9655
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(E$+&0                 886;8        :F6FC         5655       8:A655              77655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(%&.=G&=."0             7C69:        7865C         5655         C7655             7A655
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(%&.=G&=."0             F65C         :6BB         5655         87655              :655
<?=$&(?H(I3?GJ0                                                       9CB

                                                           RR6(<"$0=0(I3?GJ(K.?=@0
-."#(/01(2+3"04                          565B         565B         5657         569A               5659
7;;5(<"$0=0(>?@=3#&+?$                 ;CA67B       95A655        ;C655       :5;:655            C:A655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(E$+&0                 F8C679       89:6A8        8:655       7F7C655            :CB655
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(E$+&0                7996B9       79967;         A655       C9F655             75B655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(%&.=G&=."0            7886;:        9C69:         ;655       :C8655             78F655
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(%&.=G&=."0            8B68A        7A6:5         :655        A7655              8F655
<?=$&(?H(I3?GJ(K.?=@0                                                 C;

                                                               RRR6(<"$0=0(L.#G&0
-."#(/01(2+3"04                         5688          567B           5659         56B8            567A
7;;5(<"$0=0(>?@=3#&+?$                :7FF6B:       78;76AB       7B:A655      B78:655          8A95655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(E$+&0                78;76AC       9756A5         ::A655      8;CF6FA          78FF65B
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(E$+&0               FB56BB        :F76B7         757655      79:F655          :B;695
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(%&.=G&=."0           :A9655        7F;65A         77B655       CA5655          ::C695
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(%&.=G&=."0           C56;5         :56F7          8B655       79A655           B:655
<?=$&(?H(L.#G&0                                                         :5

                                                              RO6(568(2+3"(.#'+=0
-."#(/01(2+3"04                         567:           M           567:          567:             567:
7;;5(<"$0=0(>?@=3#&+?$                :7A56FC       7BA9658        5655       79B;A6;5          8;:96FC
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(E$+&0                77F7679       9B:675         9655        :F8B69F          75AA67A
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(E$+&0               F886:F        ::569;         5655        7B58655          :BA655
8557(D"0+'"$&+#3(%&.=G&=."0           :FC6F5        77A6B8         7655        ABA655           :97655
7;;F(D"$&(<?$&.?3(%&.=G&=."0           C5679         FA698         5655        7C5655            BB655
<?=$&(?H(!#@3?&0                                                    75S;AC
>#$"30(R(&Q.?=PQ(RRR(@.?*+'"(0&#&+0&+G0(H?.(#33(G"$0=0(P"?P.#@Q+G0(G?$&#+$+$P(#&(3"#0&(?$"(#00"00"'(
."0+'"$&+#3(Q?=0+$P(0&.=G&=."6(>#$"3(RO(@.?*+'"0(0&#&+0&+G0(H?.(&Q"(=$+*".0"(?H(568(2+3"(.#'+=0(
P"?P.#@Q+"0S(G"$&"."'(#&("#GQ(."0+'"$&+#3(Q?=0+$P(0&.=G&=."6
                                               Table	  A2.	  Descriptive	  Statistics	  for	  Transacted	  Properties

                                                  Houses                                                                       Condominiums
                               Never	  Controlled       Decontrolled                                           Never	  Controlled       Decontrolled
                            1988-­‐1994 1995-­‐2005 1988-­‐1994 1995-­‐2005                                  1988-­‐1994 1995-­‐2005 1988-­‐1994 1995-­‐2005

log	  Price                  12.84              13.26               12.59               13.03                    12.56               12.81               12.20               12.57
                              (0.69)             (0.74)              (0.67)              (0.67)                   (0.51)              (0.55)              (0.56)              (0.55)
Total	  Rooms                 9.16               9.40               10.24               10.27                     4.77                5.03                4.40                4.41
                              (3.33)             (3.43)              (3.57)              (3.67)                   (1.53)              (1.91)              (1.60)              (1.55)
Bedrooms                       4.05               4.10                4.56                4.61                     2.00                2.12                1.68                1.75
                              (1.69)             (1.72)              (1.80)              (1.85)                   (0.78)              (0.96)              (0.70)              (0.81)
Bathrooms                      2.77               2.81                2.93                2.91                     1.57                1.63                1.17                1.24
                              (0.94)             (0.95)              (0.87)              (0.85)                   (0.67)              (0.75)              (0.44)              (0.52)
Interior	  sq.	  ft.       2363.41   2387.34                     2408.88             2409.76                  1202.67             1269.57              927.85              949.69
                            (1131.25) (1071.66)                    (920.96)            (902.49)                 (834.76)            (819.75)            (434.02)            (449.68)
Has	  Lot	  (y/n)            0.99               0.99                0.99                0.99                     0.02                0.04                0.04                0.03
                              (0.11)             (0.09)              (0.09)              (0.09)                   (0.14)              (0.19)              (0.18)              (0.17)
Lot	  Size	  sq.	  ft.    4211.71   4253.09   3320.15   3462.02                                              113.24    157.66    191.18    151.38
                            (3433.26) (3437.64) (1964.22) (2031.41)                                            (1595.75) (1145.06) (1222.04) (1148.19)
Year	  Built                1903.25           1903.31             1890.81             1892.71                  1944.51             1935.16             1915.12             1916.42
                             (36.93)           (37.81)             (24.67)             (24.94)                  (44.72)             (45.58)             (27.94)             (30.86)
N	                           1,624              2,599                 255                 336                    2,138               3,626               1,446               2,765
Sample	  includes	  Cambridge	  houses	  and	  condominiums	  transacted	  during	  1988	  through	  2005.	  Sales	  price,	  winsorized	  by	  
structure	  type	  to	  the	  1st	  percentile,	  are	  converted	  to	  real	  2008	  dollars	  using	  the	  Consumer	  Price	  Index	  for	  All	  Items	  Less	  
Shelter	  for	  All	  Urban	  Consumers,	  Series	  Id:	  CUUR0000SA0L2,	  Not	  Seasonally	  Adjusted.	  Has	  Lot	  indicates	  whether	  property	  
has	  a	  non-­‐zero	  lot	  size.
  Table	  A3.	  Seemingly	  Unrelated	  Regression	  Estimates	  for	  Changes	  in	  Attributes	  of	  Transacted	  Houses	  Following	  
                                                           Rent	  Control	  Removal

                                                                                                 Interior	  Sqft	   Lot	  Size	  Sqft	                                               χ2	  Test	  
                                       Total	  Rooms Bathrooms                         Bedrooms     (10s)               (100s)                                   ln(Age)                  (row)
                                            (1)           (2)                              (3)        (4)                     (5)                                   (6)                      (7)

                                                                                           I.	  Models	  with	  Common	  RCI	  Effect
Constant                                   7.26***                 2.46***                3.16***               204.17***                23.40***                 4.83***
                                            (0.36)                  (0.12)                 (0.22)                (13.20)                  (4.19)                   (0.11)
RC	  x	  Post                              -­‐0.16                 -­‐0.05                -­‐0.00                1.53                     1.62                    -­‐0.09                 6.44
                                            (0.20)                  (0.06)                 (0.12)                 (7.04)                  (2.38)                   (0.06)                  (0.38)
RCI	  x	  Post                              0.20                    0.03                   0.02                 18.09                    -­‐0.44                   0.04                   3.13
                                            (0.46)                  (0.14)                 (0.28)                (15.83)                  (5.35)                   (0.13)                  (0.79)

                                                                                         II.	  Models	  with	  RC	  x	  RCI	  Interactions
Constant                                   8.10***                 2.46***                3.17***               204.17***                25.91***                 4.76***
                                            (0.38)                  (0.12)                 (0.22)                (13.20)                    (4.46)                 (0.10)
RC	  x	  Post                              -­‐0.09                 -­‐0.04                 0.03                    2.87                     2.09                  -­‐0.09                 6.04
                                            (0.21)                  (0.07)                 (0.13)                  (7.27)                   (2.46)                 (0.06)                  (0.42)
Non-­‐RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post             0.46                    0.06                   0.19                  22.36                      1.54                   0.03                   4.22
                                            (0.48)                  (0.15)                 (0.30)                (16.70)                    (5.64)                 (0.14)                  (0.65)
RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post                  -­‐1.92                 -­‐0.24                -­‐1.14               -­‐18.13                 -­‐15.26                  0.11                   2.43
                                            (1.43)                  (0.45)                 (0.88)                (49.45)                  (16.70)                  (0.41)                  (0.88)
H0:	  No	  Spillovers                      0.257                   0.792                   0.350                  0.380                   0.634                   0.939
H0:	  Spillovers	  Equal                   0.114                   0.518                   0.151                  0.437                   0.340                   0.856
N	  =	  4,814.	  Table	  reports	  estimates	  from	  Seemingly	  Unrelated	  Regressions	  of	  characteristics	  of	  transacted	  houses	  on	  1994	  
rent	  control	  status	  and	  Rent	  Control	  Intensity	  (RCI)	  calculated	  at	  the	  0.20	  mile	  radius.	  All	  specifications	  include	  main	  effects	  
for	  RC,	  	  RCI	  or	  Non-­‐RC	  x	  RCI	  and	  RC	  x	  RCI,	  year	  of	  sale	  dummies,	  structure	  type	  dummies,	  block-­‐group	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  an	  
indicator	  for	  whether	  year	  built	  was	  imputed.	  Column	  7	  reports	  Chi2(6)	  tests	  for	  the	  null	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  given	  row's	  
coefficients	  are	  jointly	  equal	  to	  zero	  (with	  p-­‐values	  in	  parentheses).	  Test	  for	  No	  Spillovers	  reports	  p-­‐values	  from	  tests	  that	  
RCI	  x	  Post	  or	  Non-­‐RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post	  and	  RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post	  coefficients	  are	  zero.	  Test	  for	  Spillovers	  Equal	  reports	  p-­‐values	  from	  
tests	  that	  these	  latter	  two	  coefficients	  are	  equal.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  ***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1
    Table	  A4.	  Seemingly	  Unrelated	  Regression	  Estimates	  for	  Changes	  in	  Attributes	  of	  Transacted	  Condominiums	  
                                                    Following	  Rent	  Control	  Removal

                                                                                              Interior	  Sqft	                                                                   χ2	  Test	  
                                     Total	  Rooms Bathrooms                        Bedrooms     (10s)                              Has	  Lot             ln(Age)                 (row)
                                          (1)           (2)                             (3)        (4)                                 (5)                    (6)                     (7)

                                                                                       I.	  Models	  with	  Common	  RCI	  Effect
Constant                                 3.41***                1.50***               1.43***               91.64***                1.05***                 2.01***
                                            (0.17)                 (0.07)              (0.08)                (7.34)                  (0.02)                   (0.09)
RC	  x	  Post                          -­‐0.15**                  0.03                -­‐0.03               -­‐2.67               0.02***               -­‐0.55***               186.46
                                            (0.07)                 (0.03)              (0.04)                (2.95)                  (0.01)                   (0.04)               (0.00)
RCI	  x	  Post                             0.04               -­‐0.19**                0.04                 -­‐4.50                 -­‐0.00                  0.09                 9.77
                                            (0.22)                 (0.08)              (0.11)                (9.16)                  (0.02)                   (0.13)               (0.13)

                                                                                     II.	  Models	  with	  RC	  x	  RCI	  Interactions
Constant                                  3.40***               1.59***               1.49***               97.19***                1.04***                 2.51***
                                            (0.16)               (0.06)                (0.09)                 (6.66)                 (0.02)                   (0.11)
RC	  x	  Post                         -­‐0.19***                  0.03                -­‐0.05                -­‐3.46              0.02**                -­‐0.55***               180.96
                                            (0.07)               (0.03)                (0.04)                 (3.02)                 (0.01)                   (0.04)               (0.00)
Non-­‐RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post            -­‐0.28              -­‐0.17               -­‐0.12                -­‐9.62                  0.01                   0.02                17.86
                                            (0.26)               (0.10)                (0.13)                (11.09)                 (0.03)                   (0.15)               (0.01)
RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post                 0.71*                 -­‐0.24             0.40**                    6.54                  -­‐0.02                  0.25                 2.70
                                            (0.38)               (0.15)                (0.20)                (16.19)                 (0.04)                   (0.22)               (0.85)
H0:	  No	  Spillovers                    0.101                  0.072                  0.082                 0.633                  0.873                  0.531
H0:	  Spillovers	  Equal                 0.033                  0.668                  0.028                 0.410                  0.605                  0.399
N=9,975.	  Table	  reports	  estimates	  from	  Seemingly	  Unrelated	  Regressions	  of	  characteristics	  of	  transacted	  condominiums	  on	  
1994	  rent	  control	  status	  and	  Rent	  Control	  Intensity	  (RCI)	  calculated	  at	  the	  0.20	  mile	  radius.	  All	  specifications	  include	  main	  
effects	  for	  RC,	  	  RCI	  or	  Non-­‐RC	  x	  RCI	  and	  RC	  x	  RCI,	  year	  of	  sale	  dummies,	  structure	  type	  dummies,	  block-­‐group	  fixed	  effects,	  
and	  an	  indicator	  for	  whether	  year	  built	  was	  imputed.	  Has	  Lot	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  for	  whether	  the	  transacted	  condominium	  
had	  an	  accompanying	  lot.	  Column	  7	  reports	  Chi2(6)	  tests	  for	  the	  null	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  given	  row's	  coefficients	  are	  jointly	  
equal	  to	  zero	  (with	  p-­‐values	  in	  parentheses).	  Test	  for	  No	  Spillovers	  reports	  p-­‐values	  from	  tests	  that	  RCI	  x	  Post	  or	  Non-­‐RC	  x	  
RCI	  x	  Post	  and	  RC	  x	  RCI	  x	  Post	  coefficients	  are	  zero.	  Test	  for	  Spillovers	  Equal	  reports	  p-­‐values	  from	  tests	  that	  these	  latter	  
two	  coefficients	  are	  equal.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  ***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1
 K=L@A+R'2+*.>?=GB/.9+.I+S/0B>=0AE+)A@=0B.9/FB?+LA0JAA9+)A90+*.90G.@+<0=0D/;+)A90+*.90G.@+
 790A9/B0N;+=9E+KG=9/=C0AE+-GBCA/+M/2+R//A//AE+T=@DA/+I.G+U9B0/+KG=9/=C0AE+B9+"33&+=9E+$11&
                  VA?A9EA90+T=GB=L@AW+X.H+.I+KG=9/=C0AE+.G+R//A//AE+-GBCA

                                KG=9/=C0AE+-GBCA/                 R//A//AE+T=@DA/W+KG=9/=C0AE+U9B0/
                            !"#        !$#        !%#                !&#         !'#         !(#
                                                           72+Y.D/A/
)*+,+-./0                  12"33       12"$4        12%'$55         12""&         121'3         12"3&
                          !12"$&#     !12"$'#       !12"(%#        !12146#       !1216"#       !12"%4#
)*7+,+-./0                            12(1(55                                    12&'$55
                                      !12$3&#                                    !12"63#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                124%(555                                  12'$$555
                                                    !12$46#                                   !12"3%#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                      :12'%3                                    :12"4$
                                                    !126$6#                                   !12("'#
8+                          (6'          (6'          (6'              ('$         ('$          ('$

                                                      772+*.9E.>B9BD>/
)*+,+-./0                12"(%55       1216'         1214%         12"(655       12"%%5        12"$$5
                         !1214$#      !121(6#       !121(%#        !1214"#       !1214&#       !121(3#
)*7+,+-./0                            12'"$55                                     12$''
                                      !12$11#                                    !12$1"#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                  12&1(                                      12""1
                                                    !12$61#                                    !12$3&#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                                     1241355                                     12'"(
                                                    !12$3"#                                    !12%((#
8+                          3%4          3%4          3%4           4;634         4;634         4;634
<=>?@A/+B9C@DEA/+F.D/A/+!-=9A@+7#+=9E+C.9E.>B9BD>/+!-=9A@+77#+0F=0+0G=9/=C0AE+B9+"33&+=9E+$11&2+
)AHGA//B.9+>.EA@/+I.@@.J+C.@D>9+%+.I+K=L@A+(2+79+C.@D>9/+&:(;+0FA+EA?A9EA90+M=GB=L@A+B/+0FA+=//A//AE+
M=@DA+.I+=9N+D9B0+0F=0+B/+.9+=+>=?+@.0+=0+JFBCF+=0+@A=/0+.9A+D9B0+0G=9/=C0AE+B9+0FA+HBMA9+NA=G2+KFA+
9D>LAG+.I+.L/AGM=0B.9/+I.G+F.D/A/+B/+@=GHAG+B9+C.@D>9/+":%+0F=9+B9+C.@D>9/+&:(+LAC=D/A+=+D9B0+>=N+
0G=9/=C0+>.GA+0F=9+.9CA+?AG+NA=G2+KFA+9D>LAG+.I+.L/AGM=0B.9/+I.G+C.9E.>B9B>D>/+B9+C.@D>9/+&:(+B/+
@=GHAG+0F=9+B9+C.@D>9/+":%+LAC=D/A+C.9E.>B9BD>+/0GDC0DGA/+C.90=B9+>D@0B?@A+D9B0/2+OA+.L/AGMA+0FA+
>=GPA0+?GBCA+I.G+0G=9/=C0AE+D9B0/+=9E+0FA+=//A//AE+?GBCA+I.G+=@@+D9B0/+B9+0FA+/0GDC0DGA+LD0+C=99.0+
EA0AG>B9A+JFBCF+/?ACBIBC+D9B0+B9+=+/0GDC0DGA+F=/+0G=9/=C0AE2+79+/?ACBIBC=0B.9/+0F=0+B9C@DEA+)*;+)*7;+8.9:
)*+,+)*7+.G+)*+,+)*7+B90AG=C0AE+JB0F+-./0;+>=B9+AIIAC0/+.I+0FA/A+M=GB=L@A/+=GA+=@/.+B9C@DEAE+LD0+9.0+
0=LD@=0AE2+).LD/0+/0=9E=GE+AGG.G/+C@D/0AGAE+LN+"331+L@.CP+HG.D?+=GA+B9+?=GA90FA/A/2+<AA+9.0A/+0.+
K=L@A+(+I.G+=EEB0B.9=@+EA0=B@/2+555+?Q121";+55+?Q121';+5+?Q12"
  KHM=L+N(2+)L=H0J.9/OJC+ML0PLL9+)L90+*.90A.=;+)L90+*.90A.=+790L9/J0F+H9I+KAH9/H>0J.9+
  -AJ>L;+"366+:+$11'Q+E=JRJ9H0J9S+T9J0/+0OH0+ULAL+*.9VLA0LI+WA.R+0OLJA+"33&+X0AB>0BAL+
                  KFCL+H9I+KAH9/H>0J.9/+DJ9H9>LI+MF+XBMCAJRL+YL9ILA/
                           ZLCL9IL90+[HAHJHM=LQ+Y.S+XH=L+-AJ>L

                                      \.B/L/                          *.9I.RJ9JBR/
                             !"#        !$#        !%#            !&#      !'#     !(#

                                    72++E=JRJ9H0J9S+*.9VLA0LI+X0AB>0BAL/
)*+,+-./0                 1213%44 12"1&44       12"1(44        1215(44 1215$44 121('44
                           !121&'# !121&(#      !121&5#        !121%"# !121$6# !121$5#
)*7+,+-./0                12%("444                              121$3
                           !1216$#                             !1215$#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                12%63444     12$3144                 :121$'  :12"'%
                                    !1213"#     !12"%(#                !12"15# !12"&(#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                      121'&       :121%&                  12"&3   12"3'
                                    !12$6$#     !12$35#                !12"'&# !12"61#
8+                          &;'$5    &;'$5        &;'$5         5;65'    5;65'   5;65'

                                     772++E=JRJ9H0J9S+XBMCAJRL+YL9ILA/
)*+,+-./0                 1216'44 1213(44       1213544       1213'444 1216"444 1215"44
                           !121&"# !121&$#      !121&%#        !121%1# !121$3# !121$5#
)*7+,+-./0                12%%3444                            12"'$44
                           !12153#                             !1215%#
8.9:)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                12%("444     12$(644                  1215&   :121"&
                                    !1216(#     !12"$(#                 !1216(# !12"%1#
)*+,+)*7+,+-./0                      1213$       :121"%                12%"544 12%15
                                    !12$'%#     !12$6$#                 !12"'&# !12"35#
8+                          &;51(    &;51(        &;51(         3;55$    3;55$    3;55$

<=.>?+@A.BC+DE/               F          F          F              F          F          F
GBHIAH0J>+KAH>0+KAL9I/        :          :          F              :          :          F
KHM=L+ALC.A0/+L/0JRH0L/+W.A+O.B/L/+H9I+>.9I.RJ9BR/+/LCHAH0L=F+W.==.PJ9S+KHM=L+32+-H9L=+7+IA.C/+
0AH9/H>0J.9/+.W+B9J0/+J9+/0AB>0BAL/+>.9VLA0LI+WA.R+0OLJA+"33&+/0AB>0BAL+0FCL2+-H9L=+77+IA.C/+
0AH9/H>0J.9/+PJ0O+R.A0SHSL/+WA.R+=L9ILA/+JIL90JWJLI+MF+\TZ+H/+J//BJ9S+/BMCAJRL+R.A0SHSL/2+
).MB/0+/0H9IHAI+LAA.A/+>=B/0LALI+MF+"331+M=.>?+SA.BC+HAL+J9+CHAL90OL/L/2+XLL+KHM=L+3+9.0L/+W.A+
HIIJ0J.9H=+IL0HJ=/2+444+C]121";+44+C]121';+4+C]12"
Data Appendix
Assessor’s Data
The Cambridge Assessor’s Database delineates the universe of residential housing located on each
“map-lot,” which is Cambridge’s internal parcel numbering system. We assembled Assessor’s database
for 1995 and 2005, which contain property valuations as of January 1 of the prior year (thus, we
designate these files as “1994” and “2004” property assessments in the text). We obtained from the
Cambridge Historical Commission and subsequently digitized bound copies of the 1995 Commit-
ment Books, which contains the property type classification and assessed value of each Cambridge
property, used for property tax purposes. We obtained a copy of the 2005 Assessor’s Database
in electronic form directly from the Cambridge Assessing Department. Unlike the 2005 data, the
1995 Commitment Books do not enumerate the number of units at each structure. In place of this
enumeration, we use a file provided to us by Clifford Cook of the Cambridge Planning Department
providing the count of units in each structure at each map-lot in 2001. To calculate the latitude and
longitude of each map-lot, we merged a geocoded version of the 2008 Assessor’s Database provided
by the MIT GIS Laboratory. We identified structure type conversions by comparing the structure
types assessed at each maplot in 1994 and 2004. The combined Assessor’s files, augmented with
structure counts and latitude and longitude data, comprise our residential structures file. For all
assessment, transaction and investment data, we inflated nominal dollar values to 2008 dollars us-
ing the All Items Less Shelter CPI for All Urban Consumers, Series Id: CUUR0000SA0L2, Not
Seasonally Adjusted, available from http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/srgate, last accessed May 2012.

Decennial Census Data
To determine the 1990 Census block, block group, and tract corresponding to each map-lot code,
we used ESRI ArcMap and MassGIS ArcGIS shape-files containing Census geography boundaries,
which allowed us to match map-lots to geographies by latitude and longitude. We obtained block
group-level demographic data for the cities of Cambridge, Malden, Medford, and Somerville from
the 1990 Census Summary Tape Files (STF-1 and STF-3), which enumerate detailed demographic
and housing data by block group using either a 100 percent extract (STF-1) or 15 percent sample
(STF-3) of the 1990 Census of Populations.

Rent Control Data
Our measure of rent control status and the geographic distribution of rent controlled properties is
drawn from the Cambridge Rent Control Board’s database of actively controlled properties as of
1994. This database was generously provided by David Sims of Brigham Young University, who
obtained it from the City of Cambridge via an earlier Freedom of Information Act request. The
Rent Control Board database lists the address and map-lot code of all structures that were actively
rent controlled as of 1994. We designate a given map-lot as rent controlled for the purpose of our
analysis if there are any actively rent-controlled units on the map-lot as of 1994.

                                                  i
Sales Data
Data on transactions of houses and condominiums from 1988 and 2005 in Cambridge, Malden,
Medford, and Somerville are from the residential real estate sales database, which we purchased
from the Warren Group, a commercial vendor which assembles data from town deed’s offices. Since
not all changes in ownership are conventional sales, we eliminated transactions that do not appear to
be standard arms-length transactions, specifically: transactions where deeds are marked as coming
from a foreclosure process or bearing a land court certification; transactions where the last name of
the buyer or seller appears in the name of the party on the other side of the transaction; transactions
involving the Cambridge Housing Authority or affordable housing entities such as Just-A-Start;
properties where a seller and a buyer both buy and sell the same property from each other on the
same day; property share transactions, identified as an individual being on the same side of multiple
transactions of the same property on the same day or the same individual being on both sides of
any transaction; and transactions where the buyer resells the property later the same day. We also
removed transactions with zero total rooms or zero interior square footage and retain only one copy
of any duplicate transaction (those with the same street address, sale date, and price). In cases
where the year built field for a given transacted property was missing, we first attempted to fill
it in with the listed year built from other transactions for that property. For the two percent of
transactions where year built could not be identified, we imputed its value as the mean year built for
its structure type. In regressions that include property characteristics, we include a dummy variable
equal to one if the year built value was imputed. We excluded 359 rent controlled condominium
sales made between November 21, 1989 and December 31, 1989, during which time a portion of
the rent control statute limiting condominium conversions and sales was temporarily overturned
by the Massachusetts court.49 To reduce the influence of outliers, we winsorized sales prices by
structure type to the first percentile for the entire sample. Thus, transaction prices are defined as
          
p̃i = max pi , ps(i),(.01) , where pi is the (real) reported sales price of property i, and ps(i),(.01) is the
first percentile of housing sale prices for structure type s(i).

Investment Data
To measure residential investments, we obtained from the Cambridge Inspectional Services Depart-
ment a database of all residential building permits issued by the City of Cambridge between 1991 and
2005. For 389 permits missing expenditure amounts but containing information on the permit fee,
we replaced the missing expenditure value with 100 times the 1% permit fee. We removed permits
duplicate permits and permits that were not designated for residential properties, specifically those
that mention a non-residential usage in the description field (e.g., business, office, tent, educational,
store, mixed, commercial, research, etc.). Since the investment permit data do not contain map-lot
  49
     See     Massachusetts       Supreme      Judicial    Court      406     Mass.             147,      detailed    at
http://masscases.com/cases/sjc/406/406mass147.html, last accessed May 2012. The City of Cambridge was
able to quickly revise the rent control statute to comply with the court ruling while again limiting the conversion and
sale of rent-controlled apartments.



                                                          ii
codes, we pooled the Assessor’s Database with the Cambridge Rent Control Board database and
the 2001 structures file to form a crosswalk between address strings and map-lot codes. For permits
lacking an address string that matched to a map-lot code, we matched the permit to the nearest
map-lot code based on straight-line distance, calculated using the StreetMaps USA address locator
in ArcGIS. To construct our investment analysis sample, we merged the investment data to the
housing structures file using map-lot codes to determine rent control status, proximity to rent con-
trol, property type, and geographic location. We summed all permitted expenditures at a map-lot
in a year to form an annual panel of residential map-lot codes containing total expenditure for each
map-lot and winsorized real investment expenditures to the 99.5th percentile for each structure type
and year.

Cambridge City Census Data
To build a longitudinal panel database of all adult Cambridge residents for the years 1991 through
2000, we digitized the Cambridge City Census files from 1991 through 2000, obtained from the
Cambridge Election Office, to form a comprehensive list of adult Cambridge residents containing
for each resident full name, address, birth year, occupation, country of birth, and optionally, gender
and political party. Cambridge collects and makes publicly available these data in accordance with
Massachusetts law requiring each municipality to conduct an annual census for purposes of voter
registration and state reimbursements. We contracted with Equifax, Inc., a major U.S. credit bureau,
to match the names and addresses of the approximately 436,000 adult Cambridge residents (39,000
to 48,000 unique individuals per year) identified in the city census. Equifax provided a unique
identification number for each queried Cambridge resident, which allowed us to link residents across
years and addresses to identify individuals who remained at the same address in consecutive years,
moved between Cambridge addresses, left Cambridge, or entered Cambridge from a non-Cambridge
address. Because the City Census files do not contain map-lot codes, we matched the address of each
resident to its map-lot using the crosswalk between map-lot code and address strings constructed
for the investment analysis sample.

Abt Associates Survey Data
We analyze rent differentials at controlled relative to non-controlled units using data from an Abt
Associates study (Finkel and Wallace, 1987) commissioned by the City of Cambridge to gather data
on the characteristics of households living in rent-controlled housing. These data, provided to us by
Clifford Cook of the Cambridge Planning Department, enumerate contract rent, rent-control status,
tenant awareness of rent-control status, unit characteristics (bedrooms, bathrooms, total rooms, an
indicator for elevator in building, and indicators for whether furnishings, heat, electricity, or water
were included in the rent), zip code, and variables indicating unit condition for a sample of 906
units.




                                                  iii
Merging Assessor, Transaction, Investment and Geographic Data
To form the analytic sample for assessments and transactions, we merged the housing structures file
with the 1990 decennial census file by latitude and longitude and then merged the combined database
to the Rent Control Board file according to map-lot code or, where necessary, street address. We
calculated Rent Control Intensity (RCI) at each map-lot as the fraction of housing units within a
given radius, according to longitude and latitude, that were rent controlled (excluding the map-lot’s
own rent control status from the calculation).
      To append pair RCI information to transactions data, we merged the Warren Group data with
the housing structures file by map-lot code. For transactions with a missing map-lot code or with
a map-lot code that did not merge with the structures file, we queried the street address in Cam-
bridge’s online property database (http://www2.cambridgema.gov/fiscalaffairs/propertysearch.cfm)
and recorded the online entry’s map-lot code.


Theory Appendix
We ground our empirical analysis in a stylized spatial equilibrium model of the housing market,
which considers the relationship between rent control and house prices.50

Neighborhoods. A city consists of n = 1, ..., N neighborhoods. There is a continuum of locations
in each neighborhood indexed by ` ∈ [0, 1]. The pair (`, n) refers to location ` in neighborhood n.

Landlords. Each location is owned by an absentee landlord who decides on the level of maintenance
m. Maintenance includes inputs such as painting, upgrading, and repairs. These produce housing
services according to the following increasing and concave technology

                                                      h = f (m).

While the model is static, we interpret housing services as a per-period flow variable. The price of
housing services, p, is a per-period price.
      The cost of maintenance is an increasing and convex function c(m). The problem of the landlord
is to choose a maintenance level m to maximize profits:

                                                   max ph − c(m).
                                                    m

The first-order condition for an interior solution implies that maintenance is an increasing function
of the price of housing services. Denote this function as m∗ = m(p) where m0 (p) > 0.

Residents. There are an infinite number of potential residents with preferences given by:

                                             U (c, h) = φ(c, h, α) + A,
 50
      Glaeser (2008) presents a recent survey of these models.




                                                           iv
where φ is an increasing function of a composite commodity c and housing services h, and α is a taste
parameter. A is the total level of amenities in the resident’s neighborhood. The only heterogeneity in
the model comes from differences in α, which governs residents’ taste for housing versus consumption
of other goods. The outside utility for a resident with parameter α is denoted by Ūα . The price of
housing at location ` in neighborhood n is denoted pn (`), so a resident who lives at (`, n) faces the
budget constraint
                                          c + pn (`)hn (`) = y,

where y denotes income.
   Amenities depend on various neighborhood attributes. To capture the most relevant dimensions
for our study, we assume that amenities in neighborhood n depend on the level of maintenance and
the types of residents in the neighborhood:
                                          ˆ    1
                                   An =            A(mn (`), αn (`), `)d`.
                                           0

A(·, ·, ·) aggregates neighborhood maintenance and tastes into a single index of amenities. The
equilibrium concept is based on spatial equilibrium, with free-entry and perfect mobility of residents.

Equilibrium definition. An equilibrium is a triple hαn (`), pn (`), hn (`)i where αn (`) is the type of
the resident, pn (`) is the price, and hn (`) is the level of housing services for each neighborhood n
and location ` such that

   • each resident obtains at least their outside option,

   • no resident wishes to move to another neighborhood or location within a neighborhood, and

   • landlords maximize profits.

Benchmark model. We impose particular functional forms to motivate our estimating equations
and to keep the model tractable. For the supply side, assume that housing is produced by the
                                                                                          1 2
technology h = f (m) = m and there are quadratic costs of maintenance, c(m) =             2m .   These
assumptions imply that the optimal level of maintenance at each location is exactly equal to the
price of housing:
                                                    m∗ = p.

For the demand side, assume that φ(c, h, α) = c + α ln h and y is large enough for an interior
solution, but not larger than Ūα . The demand for housing decreases with price:

                                                    h = α/p.

The quasi-linear specification implies that α is the total amount of income a resident spends on hous-
ing. This assumption is made for tractability, since housing demand is unlikely to be independent
of income in practice. Let the function for amenities at location ` be A(mn , αn , `) = ln(mn ) + βαn .


                                                        v
where β > 0 is the weight on neighbor type. This representation implies that within a neighborhood,
all locations share amenities. For simplicity, suppose the economy has N different types of residents,
where the taste heterogeneity is ordered from highest to lowest: α1 > . . . > αN > 1.

Equilibrium without rent control
We consider a symmetric equilibrium where all αn type residents live in neighborhood n. The
indirect utility for a resident of neighborhood n is:

                            Uαn = (y − αn ) + αn ln αn − αn ln(pn (`)) + An .

Free-entry and perfect mobility of residents implies that in all locations ` in neighborhood n, each
resident’s utility is equal to Ūαn . Hence, the price of housing is:

                                                     1
                             ln(pn (`)) = ln αn +      (y − Ūαn − αn + An ).                              (4)
                                                    αn

Since landlords optimally set the level of maintenance to the price of housing and because all residents
of neighborhood n are type αn , we have
                                                     ˆ       1                        
                                 1
           ln(pn (`)) = ln αn +       y − Ūαn − αn +             ln(mn (`))d` + βαn       = ln(mn (`)).
                                αn                        0

Symmetry among landlords implies that maintenance levels within a neighborhood are the same at
each location location (mn (`) = mn ), so that

                                    1                               
                       ln(αn ) +      y − Ūαn − (1 − β)αn + ln(mn ) = ln(mn ).
                                   αn

This relationship captures the feedback between overall maintenance in the neighborhood and loca-
tion specific maintenance choices. The maintenance levels in the uncontrolled economy mun are
                                                                         
                            αn                   1
                 ln(mn ) =            ln(αn ) +    (y − Ūαn − (1 − β)αn ) ≡ ln(mun ),
                           αn − 1               αn

and prices are identical at all locations ` within the neighborhood. Using the expression for the level
of maintenance, the price of housing pun in neighborhood n in the economy without rent control is:
                                                                         
                             αn                  1
                  ln(pn ) =           ln(αn ) +    (y − Ūαn − (1 − β)αn ) ≡ ln(pun ).
                            αn − 1              αn

The pricing relationship illustrates intuitive patterns under our parameter assumptions (αn > 1
and Ūαn > y). Prices are higher in neighborhoods where residents spend more of their income on
housing, they are higher when residents have more income, and they are lower when residents have
better outside options.



                                                     vi
Equilibrium with rent control
Let RCn denote the set of rent controlled locations in neighborhood n. Suppose that a fraction λn
of locations are rent controlled and 1 − λn are not. We first examine the pricing and maintenance
decisions at controlled locations.

Rent controlled locations. Suppose the rent control authority sets prices at controlled loca-
tions p̄n (`), and we assume that for each controlled location, the controlled price is less than the
corresponding price in the uncontrolled economy, p̄n (`) < pun .
    This price will determine the level of maintenance according to the producer’s first-order condi-
tion, which yields:
                                                       m̄n (`) = p̄n (`).

In turn, the amount of housing services at location ` is given by:

                                                hn (`) = f (m̄n (`)) = p̄n (`).

Uncontrolled locations. Spatial arbitrage determines the prices of uncontrolled locations and,
hence, the arbitrage relation in equation (4) determines prices. Since m̄n (`) = p̄n (`) and landlords
are symmetric at uncontrolled locations, the level of amenities in the controlled economy is:
                                 ˆ                                                         ˆ   1
                       Acn   =               ln(p̄n (`))d` + (1 − λn ) ln(mn ) + β                 αn (`)d`.
                                     `∈RCn                                                 0

As with the uncontrolled economy, we focus on the equilibrium where αn (`) = αn for all uncontrolled
locations `. This yields:
                             ˆ
                     Acn =               (ln(p̄n (`)) + βαn (`)) d` + (1 − λn )(ln(mn ) + βαn ).
                                `∈RCn

    In practice, the price of all controlled locations in neighborhood n differs at each location, so we
cannot further simplify the first term. The second term, αn (`), for controlled locations, depends on
the way that residents are assigned to controlled housing. Let
                                     ˆ                                                 ˆ
                       λn κ1n    ≡             ln(p̄n (`))d`    and       λn kn2   ≡               αn (`)d`.
                                      `∈RCn                                            `∈RCn

Since p̄n (`) < pun , it is clear that
                                                        κ1n < ln(pun ).

    While we do not explicitly model how residents are assigned to controlled housing, we assume
that
                                                          κ2n ≤ αn ,

which implies that the rationing mechanism imposed by rent control yields misallocation relative



                                                               vii
to the equilibrium in the uncontrolled economy.51 The basis for this assumption is the following.
If, prior to the implementation of rent control, the allocation were as in the symmetric equilibrium
without rent control above, then once rent control is implemented, maintenance levels and hence
housing services fall at controlled units (since landlords choose maintenance levels facing a regulated
price). The combination of reduced rents and lower maintenance has one of two effects on incumbent
residents: either they are sufficiently compensated by reduced rents so that they remain at their
current locations, although the bundle of maintenance and amenities is not optimized for their
tastes; or alternatively, they choose to relocate to areas with higher amenities and higher rents. In
the latter case, they will be replaced by residents who prefer lower housing services, i.e., lower types.
The average taste for housing services at controlled locations will therefore weakly decline following
the imposition of rent control.
       As a result, amenities in neighborhood n in the presence of rent control are given by:

                                 Acn = λn (κ1n + βκ2n ) + (1 − λn )(ln(mn ) + βαn ).

To compute the level of maintenance in uncontrolled locations in the presence of rent control, we
follow similar steps to find:
                                                                                                 
                           αn                   1
          ln(mcn )   ≡               ln(αn ) +                          1     2
                                                  (y − Ūαn − αn + λn (κn + βκn ) + (1 − λn )βαn ) .
                       αn + λn − 1             αn

We can write this in terms of the level of maintenance at uncontrolled locations in the economy
without rent control:

                                       αn − 1                    λn
                        ln(mcn ) =                ln(mun ) +            (κ1 + β(κ2n − αn )).
                                     αn + λ n − 1            αn + λn − 1 n

Summing up, since neighborhood amenities are a function of the maintenance of all units in a
neighborhood and the preferences of their residents for housing services, the supply of amenities at
non-controlled locations in neighborhoods with rent controls—as well as maintenance and rents—are
also impaired by rent control. This causes lower types to move into non-controlled locations. Hence,
imposition of rent control causes inefficiently low maintenance and misallocation of residents at both
controlled and non-controlled locations within a neighborhood.
  51
    See, e.g., Suen (1989) for a canonical model of rationing in the presence of price controls. Bulow and Klemperer
(2012) further investigate how consumer surplus is impacted by rationing and develop a model of rationing with
rent-seeking.




                                                         viii
The effect of rent control removal on rents, maintenance and resident allocation
Consider finally the impact of the removal of rent control on prices at uncontrolled locations. To
form this comparative static, we compare price levels in the economy without and with rent control:

                                                           1        1 u
             ∆ ln(pn (`)) = ln(pun (`)) − ln(pcn (`)) =      ∆An =   [A − Acn ]
                                                          αn       αn n
                                                                   |   {z    }
                                                                       change in amenities
                                λn                             βλn
                          =             [ln(mun ) − κ1n ] +                           [αn − κ2n ]        .   (5)
                            αn + λn − 1 |     {z       }    αn + λn − 1               | {z }
                                            maintenance effect>0                   allocative effect>0

   This expression shows that the end of rent control generates price impacts through two channels.
Under rent control, maintenance is inefficiently low and there are allocative inefficiencies due to
the assignment of residents at controlled locations. This expression also illustrates three natural
comparative statics. When a neighborhood has a higher fraction of locations that are controlled
(λn increases), the change in prices for locations without rent control increases. As κ1n increases (as
would be expected when the prices of controlled locations are further depressed from their market
values), the change in the price of uncontrolled locations due to the elimination of rent control also
increases. Moreover, when there is greater misallocation due to the rent control (κ2n decreases), the
elimination of rent control further increases prices.
   The price impact due to the end of rent control for locations that are controlled involves an
additional term which can be decomposed as follows:
                                                                                                 

            ln(pun (`)) − ln(p̄cn (`)) = ln(pun (`)) − ln(pcn (`)) + ln(pcn (`)) − ln(p̄cn (`)) .        (6)
                                                                  
                                           |          {z          }     |           {z           }
                                               amenity effect                   decontrol effect


The first term, the amenity effect, is the price change for uncontrolled locations due to the end of
rent control, which is in turn due to maintenance and allocative effects as in equation (5). The
second term, the decontrol effect, is the price change in a controlled economy going from a rent
controlled location to an uncontrolled location. For a formerly controlled location, the direct effect
of the end of rent control is larger when the controlled price at the location is further depressed.
The following proposition summarizes the relevant considerations from this model:

Proposition 1 When rent control ends, the price change for uncontrolled locations is greater for
neighborhoods

   • with a larger fraction of locations with rent control (λ ↑),

   • where the price of controlled locations is further depressed from their market price (κ1 ↓),

   • where there is greater misallocation of resident types relative to the types in the uncontrolled
      economy κ2 ↓).



                                                       ix
Furthermore, when rent control ends, controlled locations experience an additional price increase due
to the direct effect of decontrol.

   This model guides our analysis of the data, but its simplicity also imposes some limitations
for our setting. First, the price of housing services is an abstraction that allows for no distinction
between house prices and rents, which might be especially relevant in a dynamic setting. The model
does not therefore allow for realistic dynamics to capture expectations of neighborhood appreciation
and the option value of ownership. Second, amenities within a neighborhood are assumed to be pure
public goods, so residents have no desire to substitute between locations within a neighborhood. If
housing services were instead differentiated, there might be substitution between different locations
within a neighborhood. In this case, new construction stimulated by the end of rent control might
have a price impact at nearby uncontrolled housing (due to increased housing supply). Finally, the
model only allows for a restrictive form of taste heterogeneity: within a neighborhood, all residents at
uncontrolled locations (though not generally at controlled locations) have the same taste parameter
α and, due to spatial arbitrage, obtain the same utility.




                                                   x
