SUFFRAGE, SCHOOLING, AND SORTING IN THE
        POST-BELLUM U.S. SOUTH

              Suresh Naidu


         WORKING PAPER 18129
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SUFFRAGE, SCHOOLING, AND SORTING IN THE POST-BELLUM U.S. SOUTH

                                             Suresh Naidu

                                        Working Paper 18129
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18129


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




I thank Morgan Kousser, Jeremy Atack, Jim Snyder, and Michael Haines for data. Raj Arunachalam,
Jesse Driscoll, Jeremy Dittmar, Arindrajit Dube, Oeindrila Dube, Ethan Kaplan, Claudia Goldin, Danny
Hidalgo, Rick Hornbeck, Benjamin Lava, Trevon Logan, Bob Margo, Lindsay Mayka, Ted Miguel,
Neal Richardson, James Robinson, and Noam Yuchtman all provided helpful comments. I also thank
Edward Copenhagen and the staff at the Gutman Library Special Collections and Hi-Tech BPO. Monali
Agarwal, Natalie Bau, Ferran Elias, and Raul Sanchez de la Sierra provided excellent research assistance.
Financial assistance from the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs and the Canadian Institute
for Advanced Research is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South
Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 18129
June 2012
JEL No. H7,N11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the political and economic effects of the 19th century disenfranchisement of black
citizens in the U.S. South. Using adjacent county-pairs that straddle state boundaries, I examine the
effect of voting restrictions on political competition, public goods, and factor markets. I find that poll
taxes and literacy tests each lowered overall electoral turnout by 8-22% and increased the Democratic
vote share in elections by 1-7%. Employing newly collected data on schooling inputs, I show that
disenfranchisement reduced the teacher-child ratio in black schools by 10-23%, with no significant
effects on white teacher-child ratios. I develop a model of suffrage restriction and redistribution in
a 2-factor economy with migration and agricultural production to generate sufficient statistics for welfare
analysis of the incidence of black disenfranchisement. Consistent with the model, disenfranchised
counties experienced a 3.5% increase in farm values per acre, despite a 4% fall in the black population.
The estimated factor market responses suggest that black labor bore a collective loss from disenfranchisement
equivalent to at least 15% of annual income, with landowners experiencing a 12% gain.


Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
MC 3328
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu
      1     Introduction
      A core question in political economy is the economic incidence of democracy. Who wins and
      who loses from changes in democratic institutions? Authors from Barrington Moore (1966) to
      Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) have argued that economic interests are pivotal in the social
      decision to extend the electoral franchise. In particular, scholars have argued that landowners
      have historically been hostile to democratic transitions, owing to the economic effects of democ-
      racy on agricultural land and labor (Rueschemeyer et al., 1992). In this paper, I test this idea
      by estimating local factor market responses to changes in 19th century Southern U.S. political
      institutions and redistribution. The reduced form estimates together with a simple model quan-
      tify how much disenfranchisement altered the distribution of income across factor owners.


          Between 1870 and 1910, eleven Southern states passed legal restrictions on voting, such as
      poll taxes and literacy tests, which were aimed at lowering black electoral participation, but also
      affected poor whites. These suffrage restrictions in the U.S. South provide a unique opportunity
      to study the direct and indirect economic effects of changes in the electoral franchise. The effect
      of these laws on political competition, public good provision, and factor markets is estimated
      using a panel of counties matched into adjacent county-pairs that straddle state boundaries.1
      This spatial-discontinuity based identification strategy controls for a variety of institutional fea-
      tures that may confound cross-country analyses, as well as unobservable variables that could
      bias within-country, cross-state analyses. Historical data for counties that lie on state borders
      allow me to examine how changes in voting rights alter the mix of public goods available. In the
      empirical analysis, I also address general equilibrium and spillover effects that may arise from
      focusing on economically integrated treatment and control counties.


          To motivate the estimation strategy and interpret the results, I provide a simple 2-factor
      political economy model, linking political institutions and redistribution with production and
      endogenous migration. The model predicts that following disenfranchisement, taxation and re-
      distribution falls, inducing black outmigration in the spirit of interjurisdictional competition
      (Tiebout, 1956) and an increase in the value of land, despite higher wages. The model can be
      used to generate formulas that relate the land price and migration responses to the economic
      incidence of disenfranchisement on landowners and black labor.


          Using the contiguous county-pair identification strategy, I find that poll taxes and literacy
      tests lower turnout, increase the Democratic party vote share, and lower the teacher-child ratio
    1
      This identification strategy has been used most recently by Dube et al. (2009) to estimate local labor market
effects of minimum wages. The research design addresses concerns about omitted variables, such as labor market
conditions, that vary smoothly across political boundaries.


                                                        1
       for blacks, with no effect on the ratio of white teachers to children. My results on turnout
       and partisan voting are consistent with historical evidence that these disenfranchisement laws
       independently lowered black political participation.2 The consequent fall in black educational
       inputs is consistent with many theoretical political economy models, including the one in this
       paper, as well as existing research.


          Besides public goods, the focus on economically similar counties also makes it possible to
       estimate the effects of disenfranchisement on land and labor markets. Despite the outmigra-
       tion of black labor, the value of land increased in disenfranchised counties relative to adjacent
       counties where black Americans could vote more easily. While the empirical evidence highlights
       lowered redistribution as a main channel, landowners may have also benefited from increased
       segregation and discrimination in the labor market following black disenfranchisement. Since
       land values are an asset price that reflect actual and expected future profits, this result suggests
       that landowners were beneficiaries of restricted voting in the U.S. South.


          With some assumptions and auxiliary estimates, the land price and migration results can
       be used to calculate average gains and losses for landowners and black workers. Unsurprisingly,
       black citizens, via reduced access to public goods as well as potentially many other discrimina-
       tory policies, bore the brunt of the welfare losses from disenfranchisement; my results suggest
       that poor whites benefited little, while landowners gained substantially. These combined results
       shed light on key debates in Southern political history about whether poor or rich whites bene-
       fited the most from changes in Southern political institutions (Woodward, 1951; Kousser, 1974;
       Perman, 2001).


          The political economy of democratic and non-democratic institutions has been the subject
       of much recent economics literature.3 Recent theoretical work has modeled the motivations for
       landlord opposition to democracy (Llavador and Oxoby, 2005; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006;
       Galor et al., 2009). One explanation given is that the incidence of redistribution on an inelas-
       tic factor such as land motivates landowners to oppose extending the franchise. In examining
   2
     That the laws even affected political outcomes such as voter turnout is controversial. V.O. Key (1949) held that
the laws disenfranchising poor and black Southerners were largely rubber-stamping a de facto situation of low black
and poor white turnout, suggesting that black political exclusion was a “fait-accompli” before 1890. Acemoglu and
Robinson (2008) echo this perspective in their paper arguing that Southern elites used de facto power to maintain
control despite the constraints of formal elections. Scholars since Kousser (1974) have documented voting laws’ impact
on turnout using larger datasets (Heckelman, 1995; Redding and James, 2001), although no paper has attempted
to construct valid county-level control groups. The focus of the empirical literature on disenfranchisement has been
using ecological regressions (Kousser, 2001) to infer the extent to which blacks were disenfranchised relative to whites.
   3
     A large cross-country literature is devoted to estimating the effects of democratic institutions on economic growth,
redistribution, and inequality (Barro, 1996; Rodrik, 1999; Przeworski, 2000; Mulligan et al., 2004; Gradstein and
Milanovic, 2004).



                                                           2
       the effects of political reforms on economic outcomes, this paper is perhaps closest to Baland
       and Robinson (2008), who look at the effect of introducing the secret ballot on employer vote
       buying, and find that land prices fell more in high-inquilino (roughly sharecropper) Chilean
       communas post-reform, as land no longer capitalized the ability to control inquilino votes. A
       few recent papers in economics have looked at Southern history for insights into the political
       economy of development, although none use the same data or identification strategy as this
       paper. Besley et al. (2010) look at state-year variation in the abolition of suffrage restrictions
       to estimate the effect of political competition on state-level economic growth. However, their
       sample period is well after the one considered here, and they do not consider the same mar-
       gins of factor markets and public good provision. Similarly, Husted and Kenny (1997) examine
       the effect of voting restriction abolition on the size of government. Miller (2008) finds that
       laws extending the franchise to women induced improvements in public health. All of these
       papers study the 20th century removal of voting restrictions across US states, while this pa-
       per looks at their post-Civil War implementation within the South and is able to control for
       a substantial amount of unobserved variation by looking at counties just across state boundaries.


           The paper proceeds, in Section 2, by reviewing the relevant literature and background on
       Southern history, describing the mechanisms tested in the paper. Section 3 provides a simple
       model that generates predictions about the effect of disenfranchisement on redistribution, mi-
       gration, and land prices under different assumptions about the labor market. The model also
       generates simple formulas relating the reduced form estimates to welfare. Section 4 explains
       the data and empirical strategy, and discusses potential biases. Section 5 presents results and
       a variety of robustness checks. Section 6 calculates the incidence of disenfranchisement across
       different groups and Section 7 concludes.



       2     Historical Context
       The American Civil War (1861-1865) and the subsequent military occupation and Reconstruc-
       tion4 overturned Southern society, freeing and enfranchising a vast number of slaves with the
       13th, 14th, and 15th amendments to the constitution.5 Many of these institutional changes were
       implemented at bayonet-point, and only lasted in practice so long as the Union army remained
       willing to enforce the new constitutional amendments. With the withdrawal of Union troops in
       in 1870s, the rollback of black voting and civil rights began (also known as Southern “Redemp-
       tion”). However, while the Democratic party, at the time controlled by elite Southern whites,
   4
      Reconstruction generally refers to the period between 1863 and 1877, when the Union army occupied the Southern
states that had attempted to secede.
    5
      While the 13th amendment abolished slavery and the 14th amendment guaranteed ex-slaves constitutional rights,
it is the 15th amendment that expanded the franchise to all male citizens over the age of majority.


                                                         3
successfully dominated state-level elections, it still had to contend with political competition
from Republicans, Populists, and politically organized blacks. The federal government contin-
ued to prosecute white electoral fraud and violence. Locally, black officials and politicians, often
Civil War veterans, still held a measure of political power. Legal disenfranchisement, running
into the early 20th century, was designed to eliminate this remaining electoral competition, and
it further reduced government expenditure on black services such as schools.




2.1    Black Political Participation After the Civil War
Black Americans enjoyed a brief window of participation in electoral politics immediately fol-
lowing the Civil War. The extension of the franchise under military occupation did not, unsur-
prisingly, convince all Southern whites that ex-slaves should be allowed to participate in politics.
The presence of Northern troops allowed the Republican party to incorporate blacks as a key
political constituency despite widespread white hostility towards black enfranchisement. Once
states were admitted back into the union, elections were fiercely contested, with the Democratic
party platform centering on returning the South to “home rule”.


   Black participation in elections during Reconstruction was extensive, and overwhelmingly
partisan. The Republican Party was the vehicle for black claims on the state for civil and po-
litical rights, as well as whatever redistribution they could secure. As late as 1876, black male
turnout rates in Louisiana and South Carolina (the two states which have voting data by race)
were 75% and 78% of the eligible population (King, 2001, 2002). In fact, turnout rates during
Reconstruction were much higher than in the next 50 years.


   Political participation also brought representation. Foner (1988) lists 18 African Americans
who served as state executives during Reconstruction. But the presence of black officials in local
government was also pervasive, with blacks serving as justices of the peace, county commission-
ers, and sheriffs. Foner writes that “In virtually every county with a sizable black population,
blacks served in at least some local office during Reconstruction ... assumed such powerful of-
fices as county supervisor and tax collector, especially in states where these posts were elective.”
South Carolina, in 1868, had 74 black legislators out of 128, and it retained a majority black
legislature until 1876.


   With effective representation came redistribution, particularly in the form of public goods
provision. Education was by far the most important of these, and the most sensitive to racial
tensions. Schooling black Americans was a particularly sharp break from the pre-Civil War pe-



                                                 4
      riod, and one opposed by many Southern whites, both rich and poor. However, the Freedman’s
      Bureau6 and Republican state education superintendents saw public education as necessary for
      ex-slaves to gain human capital, as well as a substitute for politically infeasible land reform.
      An educated black population was also seen as an electoral block that would politically favor
      the Republican Party. Republican educational superintendents levied property taxes to pay for
      an expanded education system, sometimes having to build school administrations completely
      from scratch. While constrained by hostility to taxes and racial integration, “Republicans had
      established, for the first time in Southern history, the principle of state responsibility for public
      education” (Foner, 1988).




      2.2    Redemption and Disenfranchisement
      Southern Redemption in the mid-1870s began reversing many of the gains made by blacks dur-
      ing Reconstruction. Northern troops were gradually withdrawn, allowing the Ku Klux Klan and
      White Leagues, together with less organized white violence (often called electoral “bulldozing”)
      to coerce black voters. The resulting tilt in the balance of power restored the Democrats to
      power beginning in the early 1870s, a process completed with the 1876 Hayes-Tilden electoral
      compromise. Gerrymandering, local electoral changes and continued electoral fraud and force
      kept the Democrats in power. This came along with increased political representation of agrarian
      landowners and their favored policies. Politicians cut taxes, reduced expenditure, and passed a
      slew of labor and tenancy laws that clearly favored landowners at the expense of merchants and
      workers (Woodman, 1995). Redemption was a large blow to the political and economic rights
      of Southern blacks in particular. “In illiteracy, malnutrition, inadequate housing, and a host of
      other burdens, blacks paid the highest price for the end of Reconstruction and the stagnation
      of the Southern economy” (Foner, 1988).


         Despite this reassertion of white political power, Redemption did not create the “Solid
      South”: effective one-party rule had to wait until after the franchise restrictions studied in
      this paper. Kousser (1974) writes that “The methods that the Democrats had employed to
      end Reconstruction had not caused either turnout or opposition to cease by 1880.” Black rep-
      resentation, even at the federal level, persisted after Redemption. George Henry White, a black
      congressman from North Carolina, served from 1897 to 1901, right before the state passed suf-
      frage restrictions. Ten other Republican black congressmen, from North and South Carolina,
      Virginia, and Mississippi served in Congress between 1877 and 1900 (Middleton and Smith,
      2002). In North Carolina’s Second Congressional District “hundreds of other blacks held lesser
  6
    The Freedman’s Bureau was a Federal agency that was intended to solve many of the problems faced by newly
freed slaves, such as securing jobs and housing, but was disbanded in 1868.


                                                       5
positions” (Anderson, 1980). While the Republican party was severely diminished and blacks
were largely denied direct representation, political competition still existed. Even when black
votes were controlled or manipulated, it often involved making transfers to black political brokers
or having to engage in a panoply of electoral manipulation tactics. Goldman (2001) provides
data showing that federal prosecutions of 15th amendment violations continued with equal vigor
post-1877, and this was a perpetual concern to Democrats during the 1880s. To secure votes of
blacks, patronage and public goods still had to be distributed, if perhaps in diminished quanti-
ties, and black legislators still “introduced resolutions that expressed black desires and demands
for education” (Moneyhon, 1985) into the 1890s.


   The 1890s, sometimes referred to as the “Restoration”, marked the beginning of uncontested
Democratic rule and racial segregation enshrined in law, either via legislative statutes or con-
stitutional amendments that restricted the franchise. Historians and political scientists have
discussed a number of motivations for legal disfranchisement. The first is a response to a wave
of political challenges to the Democratic leadership. The Populist party in Georgia and North
Carolina, fusion tickets between Republicans and Populists in Louisiana and South Carolina,
and rival Democratic factions in other states all posed threats to the propertied whites that ran
the Democratic party. The potential black votes to be tapped by “opportunistic” whites were a
threat to the existing political elite. The hazard posed by black political participation became
clear with the large gains made by rivals to the Democratic leadership during the 1880s, when
Independent and Republican parties won between a third and half of the vote in gubernatorial
elections. This was a far cry from the overwhelming dominance Democrats would exercise post-
1910, when turnout and non-Democratic votes were abysmally low until after the Civil Rights
movement.


   One reason why Redemption did not completely eliminate black voting was that the 15th
amendment came with a set of Enforcement Acts, designed to allow federal agents to police
elections and repress Klan political violence. Recent scholarship has shown that effective and
widespread federal enforcement of the 15th Amendment did not end after Redemption. Instead
Cresswell (1987), Wang (1997), and Goldman (2001) have all shown that illegal electoral prac-
tices were prosecuted by the federal government into the 1890s. The Lodge “Force” Bill of 1890
would have increased the federal supervision of elections, and was the last Republican attempt
to use the Federal government to secure black voting rights.


   National Democrats successfully blocked passage of the Lodge bill, and proceeded to repeal
the 1870 Enforcement acts in 1894. Republicans, preoccupied with Northern economic issues
and foreign policy, acquiesced. With the abandonment of Republican support for black suffrage,


                                                6
      Southern states were free to legally restrict the franchise without worrying about federal inter-
      vention. The Republican retreat from federal enforcement of electoral law is often given as a
      reason for the particular timing of Southern disenfranchisement. Importantly for my identifica-
      tion strategy, this was national legislation, and therefore exogenous to the county and state-level
      variation considered in this paper.


          A third postulated determinant of black disenfranchisement is that the laws were just one
      of a set of social institutions implemented in the late 19th century as the South experienced a
      nadir of race relations. In this story, a cultural tide of anti-black sentiment swept whites in the
      South, generating a wave of lynchings, even more formal segregation laws, and formal political
      exclusion. Conjectured causes of the wave of racial tension include demographics (Rabinowitz,
      1978), lowered transportation and communication costs (Redding, 2003), and changing North-
      ern ideas about black economic and political rights (Richardson, 2001). Again, much of this
      variation is at the national or regional level, and, to the extent that it varies within the South,
      it is unlikely to vary within the contiguous county pairs used in this paper. One strength of the
      identification strategy is that cultural trends that may be correlated with disenfranchisement
      are effectively controlled for.



      2.2.1    Disenfranchisement Laws

      The details of disenfranchisement varied from state to state. For example, in some states
      disenfranchisement was enacted via statute, while in others it was enacted by constitutional
      amendment. Figure 1 presents the pattern of disenfranchisement over time, and shows few re-
      versals of the overall trend to disenfranchise. Generally, the poll tax required one to show a
      receipt for payment of the poll tax prior to voting registration.7 While it was no more than 2
      dollars, other features of the poll tax administration and context made it much more onerous
      than just the sum of money involved, although that alone was clearly costly for cash-strapped
      sharecroppers. Firstly, they often had to be paid between 9 and 6 months before the election.
      Secondly, in some states the tax was cumulative, so that all poll taxes for all preceding years of
      residence had to be paid before registering to vote.


          Literacy tests generally consisted of a requirement to read a section of the national or state
      constitution prior to voting registration. In the low-education environment of the rural U.S.
      South, the literacy test was likely to bind for a large segment of the population, particularly
      for poor blacks and whites. Georgia’s literacy test, for example, entailed being able to correctly
7
    Ogden (1958) summarizes the poll taxes as they existed in the early 1950s.



                                                        7
      read and write any paragraph of the state or U.S. Constitution. Virginia’s test involved a citizen
      applying to the registrar “in his own handwriting” (Key, 1949). While there were a variety of
      other pieces of disenfranchisement legislation passed simultaneously, the poll tax and literacy
      tests were the most important for restricting voting, and were the object of the 1965 Voting
      Rights Act.




      2.3    Economic Effects of Disenfranchisement
            There is no surer way to drive the best of them [Black Americans] from the state than
            by keeping up this continual agitation about withdrawing from them the meager edu-
            cational opportunities that they now have. Their emigration in large numbers would
            result in a complication of the labor problem. -J.W. Joyner North Carolina School
            Superintendent 1910



          Attributing the dismal state of Southern black education to the restricted franchise has a
      long history. Horace Mann Bond (1934), Charles Dabney (1936), and Louis Harlan (1968) all
      linked discrimination in public education provision to political exclusion of African Americans.
      Statistically, the fall in the quality and quantity of black education following disenfranchise-
      ment has been shown in a number of papers. Margo (1982) uses Louisiana data and finds that
      disenfranchisement increased racial gaps in school expenditure. Kousser (1980) and Pritchett
      (1989) find similar results in North Carolina, where racial gaps in education expenditures jump
      sharply after disenfranchisement. As a counterfactual, Kentucky, the only state without vot-
      ing restrictions, in fact passed an 1881 referendum proposal to equalize black-white schooling
      expenditures, although it is unclear how binding it was. The unequal provision of schooling in
      the South, and its consequences, has a comprehensive treatment in Margo (1990) and Collins
      and Margo (2006), complementing a large literature studying segregated schooling and wages
      (Welch, 1973; Orazem, 1987; Fishback and Baskin, 1991; Card and Krueger, 1992).


          The economic history of the post-bellum U.S. South contains a vibrant debate on the extent
      of black labor market mobility (Higgs, 1977; Wright, 1986; Alston and Kauffman, 2001; Ransom
      and Sutch, 2001). While many authors argue that black labor was mobile, others suggest that
      non-economic mechanisms such as laws or paternalist norms kept black labor at least partially
      immobile. Nonetheless, blacks moved regularly during Reconstruction and likely even later
      (Shlomowitz 1984).8 The role of mobility and interjurisdictional competition in providing the
      efficient level of local public goods has been an influential idea in economics since Tiebout and
8
    See the results in Appendix Table A4-A5.


                                                      8
recent research has integrated the local political economy of taxation and public good provision
into models of interjurisdictional sorting (Epple and Romer, 1991). These themes were brought
together by Margo (1991), who found that labor market mobility induced local jurisdictions in
the South to provide some level of education to disenfranchised blacks.


   Margo documents that black citizens migrated in response to school quality, and writes that
“Although black parents could not vote at the ballot box, they could, and did, vote with their
feet in search of schools for their children.” In Lowndes county, Alabama, Foner and Lewis
(1980) find “there [were] perhaps a hundred Negro farmers ... Not one of these men has been
attracted away ... they remain on account of the good schools for their children.” (Foner and
Lewis, 1980, p. 241)


   Political forces and redistribution were motivations for migration more generally. Faced with
the loss of political representation and civil rights after Redemption, the first of the notable mi-
gration waves out of the South began. While small in actual numbers, the famous Kansas
exodusters were the first large scale migration of blacks out of the South, in 1879-1880. Con-
temporaneous newspapers were stunned at the large movement of blacks out of the historically
slave states. “Kansas Fever” was used to describe the understandable migration response to the
de facto loss of civil and political rights that accompanied Redemption (Painter, 1992). While
the magnitudes involved in the Kansas migration wave turned out to be fairly small (Cohen,
1991), it had an effect on national politics, even instigating the formation of a Senate Committee
on the Colored Exodus. The later Indiana Exodus was portrayed in the Northern press as being
explicitly for the purposes of winning political representation and redistribution (Richardson,
2001). Hahn (2003) writes that black migration between Southern states leapt during the 1880s
and 1890s, consistent with my argument in this paper, and that they were hoping for “better
schools, better economic prospects, and better social circumstances.”


   Landlords benefited from the restricted franchise in a variety of ways. Property owners
reaped any tax savings allowed by reducing government expenditures on black public goods,
and the elimination of political competition allowed for a slew of additional policies that favored
rural landowners. Insecurity of black person and property, allowed employers to offer protection
rather than increased wages to retain black labor (Alston and Ferrie, 1999). Legal labor mo-
bility restrictions (Naidu, 2010; Cohen, 1991; Bernstein, 2001) as well as an extensive convict
leasing system (Lichtenstein, 1996) kept agricultural labor costs low. In addition, the weak
political institutions and one-party system of the post-disenfranchisement South allowed the
easy translation of landowner wealth into political influence, ensuring extensive representation
of landowners at all levels of government. At the federal level, disenfranchisement guaranteed


                                                 9
      an elite white lock on Senate and House representation, and landowners were effectively able
      to stymie federal intervention into the Southern political economy. As an example, Alston and
      Ferrie (1999) suggest that these Southern Democratic representatives were able to dilute the
      impact of many New Deal welfare programs, which they did to protect the private labor-market
      paternalism that guaranteed a steady workforce to agricultural employers.


          The economic effects of disenfranchisement on poor whites is a controversial area in Southern
      history. While it is clear that some poor whites were disenfranchised by the laws, some states
      and counties were selective in enforcing them or had “grandfather clauses” that enabled whites
      of all classes to vote. However, while existing evidence suggests that whites as a whole benefited
      from a superior public-goods and taxation package following black political exclusion, scholars
      differ over the distribution of these benefits between rich and poor whites.



      3      A Simple Model of Suffrage Restriction
      In order to generate predictions and interpret the empirical results, I model disenfranchisement
      in a jurisdiction with taxes and race-specific public goods chosen under probabilistic voting, with
      competitive factor markets and endogenous migration. Poll taxes and literacy tests increase the
      costs of voting for black citizens, which lowers their probability of being pivotal, decreasing the
      weight politicians put on their welfare and lowering taxes on land and black public goods. Factor
      markets respond, with black labor leaving in response to the lowered redistribution and land
      prices rising, reflecting the lower taxes increase the returns to purchasing land and engaging in
      production. Wages increase to offset the lower public goods, but does not fully compensate for
      the lowered redistribution in political equilibrium. Besides generating predictions, the model
      can be used to translate the estimated effects of disenfranchisement on factor markets into for-
      mulas for the economic welfare of factor owners.9


          The model shares some features with Austen-Smith (2000), although I have a two-factor
      economy and use a variant of probabilistic voting instead of legislative bargaining. I construct
      a 1-period model of in a jurisdiction, such as a county, where land is fixed and labor is mobile.
      Assume a mass 1 of agents, with races B and W , indexed by κ, which is an input into agricul-
      tural production and also raises the return to migration. κ is an index of wealth, although it
      could also measure human capital or ability. Blacks have κ distributed with a convex cumulative
      distribution function FB (κ), and the distribution of κ for whites is given by FW (κ). Assume
      that θB is the fraction of the population that is black, so that the population distribution of
      κ is given by the mixture F (κ) = (1 − θB )FW (κ) + θB FB (κ). FB is first order stochastically
9
    This is in the spirit of “sufficient statistics” from public finance (Chetty, 2009).


                                                           10
       dominated by FW , so FB (κ) ≥ FW (κ). I restrict κ to be positive, so that FW (0) = FB (0) = 0,
       and assume that F is strictly increasing. Thus blacks have lower κ than whites, reflecting either
       lower capital, education, or lower security of person and property.


          Agents have utility given by c + Gi , including both private consumption c and local pub-
       lic goods Gi that depend on race i. Agents can work locally for an endogenous race-specific
       wage wi , where i ∈ (B, W ), migrate, or engage in local production. Agents have 1 unit of
       labor, and engaging in own production requires 1 unit of land, at price v, and gives access to
       a Cobb-Douglas production function that takes κ and an aggregate of black and white labor
       (nb and nw ), which are imperfect substitutes. The supply of land is fixed at L < 1, and can
       be thought of as being initially owned by absentee landowners. Agricultural output y is given by:



                                                    κα (nw 1−α + nb 1−α )
                                               y=                                                           (1)
                                                            1−α
          The 1 − α in the denominator is a normalization that simplifies the algebra. Labor demands
                                   −1
       will be given by ni = κwi   α    , so before-tax profits from production are equal to:

                                                       ακ  1− 1        1
                                                                          
                                   Π(wB , wW )κ =          wB α + wW 1− α                                   (2)
                                                      1−α

          To capture the incidence of the land tax, I assume a tax rate on profits, τ and separate
       public goods for black and whites, GW and GB , all of which are constrained to be non-negative.
       So the post-tax welfare of a (white) landowner with given κ is given by:



                                                   ακ  1− 1        1
                                                                      
                             W L (κ) ≡ (1 − τ )        wB α + wW 1− α + GW − v                              (3)
                                                  1−α
          Workers of either race i can choose to either migrate (M), earning mκ, or stay locally as
       a worker, earning wi + Gi , from the local wage and the local public goods. I further assume
       no black employers, so that θW > L and black wealth is below the minimum that would make
       purchasing land and producing more profitable than migration, which is both tractable and
       empirically justifiable.10 The assumption that the returns to migration are increasing in κ cap-
       tures the empirical fact that migrants tended to be more educated in this period11 . So the
       indirect utility of an agent of race i and wealth κ is given by the maximum utility over the three
       occupations landowner, migrant, or worker:
  10
    Blacks owned minimal land in the South in 1870.
  11
    All the results would go through if instead the returns to wage-labor were increasing in κ, returns to outmigration
were fixed at a sufficiently low level so that outmigrants were at the bottom of the κ distribution.




                                                          11
                                         Wi (τ, Gi , κ) ≡ max(W L (κ), mκ, wi + Gi )                            (4)

            The government budget constraint implies that revenues R raised from taxing profits fund
       black and white public goods, which each cost C(Gi ), which is an increasing and convex function
       of the amount of the public good provided.12


                                         R ≡ C(GB ) + C(GW ) = τ Π(wB , wW )κL                                  (5)


       Where κ is the mean level of wealth across landowners. This then implies that the taxes are
                              R
       given by τ =     Π(wB ,wW )κL .


                                                                         wi +Gi
       Assumption 1: (1 − τ )Π(wB , wW ) > m > maxi                    F −1 (1−L) .



            While this is an assumption on endogenous variables, it is sufficient to ensure that agents
       sort into occupations by wealth, with the poorest agents working locally and receiving public
                                                                                      wi +Gi
       goods and wages according to their race. Those with wealth κ >                   m      but not greater than
           −1
       F        (1 − L) migrate, while those who have enough wealth, with κ > F −1 (1 − L)), to make
       buying land and producing profitable receive W L (κ). Given policies τ, GW , GB , an economic
       equilibrium exists with market clearing in land and labor markets of both races. Wages are set
       by labor markets for each race clearing:

                                                    κL                wi + Gi
                                                         1   = Fi (           )                                 (6)
                                                    wi   α               m

            Land prices will be set by the land market clearing, with all agents with κ ≥ κ∗ = F −1 (1−L)
       become landowners with (1 − τ )Π(wB , wW )κ∗ + GW − v = mκ∗ , or:13


                                   v = ((1 − τ )Π(wB , wW ) − m)F −1 (1 − L) + GW                               (7)

            To capture disenfranchisement, I use a variant of probabilistic voting(Coughlin and Nitzan,
       1981; Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987), where the idiosyncratic shocks are to the cost of voting
       rather than the preference for one party. I assume two parties, Democrat D and Republican
       R competing for votes in the election. Each party can commit to a vector of taxes and public
       goods (τ, GB , GW ). Voters receive a uniformly distributed cost of voting η − η, with η dis-
       tributed on [0, 1] and η ∈ (0, 1), except that black citizens have their turnout cost increased by
  12
     If instead costs of public good provision were specified as C(GB + GW ) then increases in black public goods would
increase the cost of white public goods, which would result in positive effects of disenfranchisement on white public
goods and local white population.
  13
     The assumption of no blacks landowners is ((1 − τ )Π(wB , wW ) − m)FB −1 ( 1−LθB
                                                                                      ) < 0.



                                                                12
                  1
       a factor   Φ   with Φ ≤ 1. Φ will be the weight that politicians put on black welfare in equilibrium,
       and disenfranchisement can be modelled as a decrease in Φ, which increases turnout costs. So
       an agent votes Democrat if: Wi (τ D , GD             R   R
                                              i , κ) − Wi (τ , Gi , κ) + η > η and votes Republican if:

       Wi (τ R , GR             D   D
                  i , κ) − Wi (τ , Gi , κ) + η > η. That is, only voters whose partisan preferences are

       greater than their cost of voting cast a ballot. Total votes are then given by V = (θW + θB Φ)η.


       Assumption 2: C 00 is sufficiently high to ensure that
                                                                        R
                                                                            k
                                                                                W (κ)dF (κ) − C(GB ) − C(GW ) is
       concave in GB and GW at τ = 0.


           Under these assumptions, it is relatively straighforward to obtain the following two proposi-
       tions (all proofs in Appendix A).


       Proposition 1: An interior political equilibrium exists, is symmetric and unique, with τ, GB , GW
       that solve:
                                     Z                                   Z
                          max θW          WW (τ, GW , κ)dFW (κ) + ΦθB           WB (τ, GB , κ)dFB (κ)                  (8)
                        τ,GW ,GB      k


       subject to (5) and market clearing conditions (6) and (7).


       Proposition 2: With competitive labor markets for black and white labor and probabilistic
       voting, an increase in turnout costs (decrease in Φ) for blacks lowers turnout ( dV
                                                                                        dΦ = ηθB > 0), de-
                                                                                                         wB (GB )+GB
                                                                                                 dFB (                 )
       creases black public goods ( dG
                                     dΦ > 0), and increases black out-migration (θB
                                       B
                                                                                                          dGB
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                           >
       0) while the price of land decreases        dv
                                                 ( dΦ   < 0), despite lower wages    ( dwB
                                                                                        dΦ   < 0).


           While the intuition behind most of these comparative statics is obvious, the land price results
       follows from the fact that an interior choice of GB equates the marginal benefit for landowners
       plus the marginal benefit for black workers with the marginal cost, which is borne by landown-
       ers. Since black workers always benefit from more GB , any increases in GB at the optimum
       must make landowners worse off, lowering the demand for land and lowering the land price.


           The assumption of locally competitive labor markets, while natural, may not reflect the
       institutional reality of the U.S. South. Two other possibilities include wages set exogenously
       by a competitive fringe labor market, holding black wages fixed at wB , or monopsonistic labor
       markets, with efficient rationing, where black wages are set to maximize profits. Nonetheless all
       the comparative statics in Proposition 2 remain true under these alternative assumptions about
       the labor market.14
14
     When wages are exogenous, this follows easily. When wages are set monopsonistically, then at the political



                                                             13
           The model also generates formulas for the implied changes in economic welfare across groups.
       Political changes, such as disenfranchisement, result in a variety of policy changes, not all of
       which are observed. For example, in this model both wages and public goods change after
       disenfranchisement. Nonetheless, by looking at the appropriate economic responses, the distri-
                                                                                   R∞
       butional consequences of a policy change can still be inferred. Define W L ≡ κ∗ W (κ)dF (κ) as
                                                              R κ∗
       the aggregate welfare of landowners, and define W i ≡ 0 Wi (κ)dFi (κ) as the aggregate welfare
       of white and black workers/migrants. The assumption that land is in fixed supply implies that
       the price of land reflects the welfare of the marginal producer. An assumption on the distri-
       bution of the κ for landowners together with the linearity of landowner welfare in κ will allow
       me to translate the impact on the marginal landowner to average landowner welfare. Similarly,
       the assumption that the marginal migrant is the same under disenfranchisement as would be in
       response to a wage change allows me to convert the migration response to disenfranchisement
       into a measure of the change in worker welfare.


       Proposition 3: If F (κ|κ > κ∗ ) is Pareto with shape parameter b, then at equilibrium:
               dW L        1 dv
           •    dΦ    =   b−1 dp
                          dFi
               dW i
           •    dΦ    =   dΦ
                          dFi
                          dwi

           The Pareto distribution relates the marginal κ to the average by a simple multiplicative
       factor, and will also receive empirical justification below. While the specific formulas depend
       on details of the model, they reflect very general economic intuition: the price response of an
       inelastic factor and the quantity response of an elastic factor reveal the incidence on factor
       owners.



       4       Identification Strategy: Contiguous County Pairs
       My identification strategy relies on matched adjacent county-pairs that lie on state boundaries.
       This empirical strategy extends the spatial discontinuity methodology of Holmes (1998), Dube
       et al. (2009), and Duranton et al. (2011) to estimate the effect of disenfranchisement on political
       and economic outcomes. The sample consists of counties that lie on state borders in 1870, as
       shown in Figure 3. Counties are then matched into adjacent pairs p. Note that the same county
       can be in multiple pairs. Therefore the same county is included multiple times, which induces
       correlations in the unobservables across county-pairs.15 Multidimensional clustering (Cameron

equilibrium it remains true that the effect of public goods on the wage does not offset the losses from additional
taxes. See Appendix A for more details.
   15
      I also estimate a specification where the unit of observation is single counties, but the variables are all differenced
from the mean of the adjacent counties. Results are very similar and available upon request.


                                                             14
et al., 2008) is used to adjust the standard errors for both within-state over time correlations of
county residuals, as well as within border-segment (the set of counties on both sides of a given
border) within-year correlations. This not only accounts for the multiple instances of a given
county in the data, but also the cross-pair correlations in the error term that can propagate, via
the multiple county pairs a county can be part of, over the entire border segment. There are
only 12 states in the sample, so there may be concerns about too few clusters. Standard fixes
for this problem, such as the wild bootstrap, do not yet have multidimensional analogues, and
in any case the standard errors are uniformly larger with clustering than without.


   I balance the sample of counties over time on 5 core variables presidential turnout, pres-
idential fraction Democratic, white teacher-child ratios, land value per acre, and log fraction
black population. The other core dependent variable, black teacher-child ratio, is missing a
large number of observations in 1870, and for that variable I instead balance the sample over
pair-years. I estimate the following model for a variety of outcome variables y:

                                      1920
                                      X
                       P     L
         yp(c)cst = β(Dst + Dst )+            αt Xc,1860 + γlog(popct ) + δc + δp(c)t + p(c)cst   (9)
                                     t=1870


Where c indexes county, p(c) denotes a county adjacent to c from another state, s denotes state,
                     P       L
and t denotes year. Dst and Dst are dummies denoting the presence of a poll-tax and literacy
test, respectively. Xc,1860 denotes a vector of county characteristics in 1860, described below.
δc denotes a county fixed effect, and δp(c)t denotes a county-pair cross year fixed effect.


   For all of these regressions I report the estimate of β, which is the effect of an additional poll
tax or literacy test. As the laws are highly collinear, particularly when looking at census year
variation, there is little independent information in the individual dummies, and the coefficients
on each of the separate laws are very unstable. Results are very similar when the coefficients
are estimated separately and summed.


4.1    Threats to Identification
While the county fixed effects control for any time-invariant county characteristics, it is the pair-
year fixed effects that provide the novel identification in this empirical model. Spontaneous racial
violence, time-varying geographic or climatic conditions, land productivity, labor market shocks
or cultural values are all unlikely to respect state borders, and so the within-pair identification
effectively deals with these sources of potential bias. My identification strategy is particularly
important for the economic outcomes, as agricultural land, climate and usage patterns are likely
highly variable across states. In addition, labor market conditions are also highly heterogeneous



                                                   15
across space, something the pair-year fixed effects control for. In the context of the American
South, a key confounding variable is racist cultural values or discriminatory beliefs, which are
also unlikely to vary discontinuously at the state boundaries.


   However, there are potential confounds to the identification strategy. Other state-year legis-
lation that is contemporaneous with disenfranchisement is the most obvious source of potential
bias. While legislation passed after disenfranchisement was likely the results of a shrunken elec-
torate, and therefore part of the changed political equilibrium induced by disenfranchisement, it
is not possible to rule out all unobserved state-year variation that may have caused changes at
the state border. As discussed in the historical background section, however, the main source of
unobserved state-year variation likely correlated with disenfranchisement is the political threat
to the Democratic party. The dynamic evidence below will suggest that this is not a confound
in the border sample. The political threats leading to disenfranchisement were happening at the
federal and state levels, and were independent of changes between cross-state border counties.
Another concern is laws that are contemporaneous with disenfranchisement. This includes fran-
chise restrictions that were not just the poll tax or the literacy test, which I deal with below, as
well as potentially a wide variety of segregation laws. Besides the fact that transportation and
public services were largely de facto segregated before the legal changes, it is difficult to see how
segregation alone can account for the patterns on political variables and public goods found in
this paper. Finally, disenfranchisement implied a whole suite of additional policies that vary at
the state-year level but are consequences of the new political equilibrium created by suffrage
restriction, and are part of the estimated coefficients.


   Another potential confound is unobserved county-year variables that vary at state bound-
aries that could contaminate the effects estimated here. Relevant factors that vary include
particularly racist or lenient sheriffs or county registrars, differential landlord control of local
politics, or local black political power. Some of this can be examined by looking at heterogeneity
on observable variables, but inability to rule out all other sources of county-year variation is a
key limitation of this research design.


   A further problem with interpreting the estimates arises from potential general equilibrium
effects, as treated counties are being compared to their spatially contiguous neighbors, which
are most vulnerable to spillover or substitution effects from treatment. Particularly with re-
spect to migration, my results may be overstating the true effect. I address this by looking
at heterogeneity in migration and transportation costs across both county-pairs and individual
counties.




                                                 16
4.2     Data
Data on poll-tax and literacy test laws is obtained from Kousser (1974), Davidson and Grofman
(1994), and Ogden (1958), and are shown in Figure 1. I obtain county-decade-level data for
Southern states (census regions 31, 32, and 33) from 1870 to 1920. The sample period is cho-
sen to be post-Civil War and pre-Depression, since these two events radically altered Southern
society.


   County pairs are formed using the 1870 census boundary file map, downloaded from the
National Historical Geographic Information System at www.nhgis.org. ArcGIS is used to first
find the set of southern counties that are touching state boundaries. Then for each county in the
resulting sample, the counties that are tangent to that county are selected. Each border county
is therefore matched into n ≥ 1 adjacent counties. The sample is restricted to the county-pairs
where each county belongs to a different state. Homogeneous 1870 counties are constructed by
intersecting all the census maps from 1870 to 1920, matching the resulting polygons to the other
data for the relevant year, and then averaging the polygons over the 1870 county boundaries,
weighting by the polygon’s share of the 1870 county area. The map is shown in Figure 2.


   Historical election returns for presidential and congressional elections are from ICPSR. Gu-
bernatorial returns are provided by Jim Snyder, and used previously in Hirano and Snyder
(2008). County-level agricultural and population census data is obtained from ICPSR and
Michael Haines. I use cotton suitability measured by potential cotton yields calculated by the
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), and ruggedness measured by the county-level stan-
dard deviation of altitude, from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Education data was constructed using census data combined with state education reports, with
details and additional robustness checks provided in Appendix B (Table A1).


   I balance the main sample on 5 key observable variables: presidential turnout, democratic
vote share, white teacher-child ratios, land value per acre, and fraction black. The other key
variable is black teacher-child ratios, but many observations are missing in 1870, owing to the
poor quality of both the census and the state education reports. Nonetheless, in the robustness
checks I confirm that the main results are robust to balancing the sample on this variable as
well.




                                               17
5     Empirical Results
Some basic patterns can already be seen in the summary statistics, presented in Table 1. Turnout
in all elections decreases as the number of disenfranchisement laws increases, as does the vote
share of Democrats, and the per-acre value of land. However, it is difficult to see much at this
level of aggregation in black teacher-child ratio, while the white teacher-child ratio increases
with the number of disenfranchisement laws. Finally, disenfranchised counties have a higher
fraction black population in this crude comparison, likely reflecting the characteristics of the
states that disenfranchised first.


    Table 2 examines pre-disenfranchisement differences in the sample. I construct a dummy vari-
able for “early disenfranchisement”, indicating if the state disenfranchised prior to 1896, which
is the mid-year of the sample. I check to see on what 1860 variables counties on state borders
differ based on states being “early” vs “late” disenfranchisers, to see if timing of disenfran-
chisement is systematically related to county-level outcomes in 1860. There are few statistically
significant effects, and reassuringly, geographic variables that are not expected to change across
state boundaries show no differences based on timing of disenfranchisement. The significant
differences, on farm acreage, farm equipment, and urbanization, suggest that early disenfran-
chising border counties are less agricultural and rural than late disenfranchisers. I will control
for year-specific effects of the significant covariates (as Xc,1860 ) in all specifications, and add all
the other 1860 outcomes as covariates as specification checks.


    Figures 3 and 4 show the results of a dynamic specification on presidential turnout and the
fraction voting Democratic in presidential elections. While gubernatorial elections are highly
heterogeneous in timing and congressional elections are plagued by pervasive gerrymandering
as well as missing data, presidential elections are both high-frequency and regularly timed. The
high frequency allows inclusion of leads and lags, and the fixed timing eliminates concerns of
endogenous election timing. Formally, the points on the graph at time T relative to the passage
                                                                     Pk=T
of a disenfranchisement law is the cumulated sum of the coefficients k=−3 βk , where the βk
are the coefficients from a regression of the form:

                             3
                             X                             X
                                         p       L
          log(yp(c)cst ) =          βk (Dst+k + Dst+k )+       βt Xc,1860 + δc + δp(c)t + cp(c)st   (10)
                             k=−3

    The cumulative effect of disenfranchisement laws on presidential turnout shows no pre-
existing trend, but does register a large 25% drop in turnout immediately following the passage
of the laws. The effects on partisan vote share are similar, showing a 2% increase the fraction
voting Democrat with a significant increase following disenfranchisement and no pre-existing



                                                    18
       differences within the county-pair.


           Table 3 shows the effect of disenfranchisement on turnout and fraction Democratic vote
       share using the main specification. The election data is averaged over the decade following the
       census year for consistency across specifications. For turnout, poll taxes or literacy tests reduce
       presidential turnout by 8-12%, congressional turnout by 10-15% and gubernatorial turnout by
       20-22%. This is consistent with other numbers in the literature (as discussed by Kousser (1974)).
       The next 3 columns of Table 2 show the effect of disenfranchisement on fraction Democratic
       vote share. There is a 0.6% increase in Democratic presidential vote share significant at the 5%
       level, a 1.4% increase in congressional vote share, and a 5-7% effect on gubernatorial vote shares.
       In sum, this Table shows that legal disenfranchisement lowered turnout to the advantage of the
       Democratic party.


           The differences across elections are instructive, although they could be due to changing
       samples, as the available election data changes across the ICPSR and Hirano-Snyder samples.
       The largest effect on turnout is in gubernatorial elections, which falls by around 20% in both
       specifications after a disenfranchisement law. This is consistent with state level redistribution
       as the mechanism that is the focus of this paper. Because federal elections were generally be-
       tween 2 parties, the laws would naturally favor the Democrats when partisan Republicans were
       disenfranchised, which could explain the significant coefficient on the Democratic vote share
       in presidential and congressional elections. However, the difference in magnitude between the
       effects on turnout and on vote-share suggest that likely not all the disenfranchised were voting
       Republican, or the changing composition of the electorate changed voting behavior.


           In sum, the results on turnout and voting support the view of more recent Southern histo-
       rians (e.g. Kousser) rather those of older political historians (exemplified by Key): the formal
       legal institutions of the South were important for reducing turnout, benefiting the Democrats,
       and potentially altering the political equilibrium of the South.




       5.1     Education
       Tables 4A and 4B show results on education, measured as black and white teachers per child
       and per pupil. As schools were effectively segregated, the number of black teachers is a proxy
       for black schooling inputs. Column 1 of Table 4A reports the effect of disenfranchisement on
       the log of the black teacher to eligible student ratio, with a constant k > 0 added.16 The
16
     The constant is chosen to make the distribution skew-free, but none of the results depend on the choice of k.



                                                         19
estimated coefficient implies a semi-elasticity of -0.23. In order to rule out that this is driven
by the log(x + k) transformation, Column 2 uses the level of teachers/child and obtains a sig-
nificant negative effect, implying a roughly 10% negative effect over the pre-disenfranchisement
mean. Column 3 uses Teacher-pupil ratios instead of teacher-child, and implies a roughly 15%
fall over the pre-disenfranchisement mean. Finally Column 4 uses pupil-child ratio, and while
the coefficient is negative it is small and insignificant in both of the main specifications. The
slightly larger effects on teacher-pupil ratios and the negative coefficients on pupil-child ratios
may reflect an additional effect of parents withdrawing their children from lower-quality schools.


   Table 4B shows the same results for white school inputs. In contrast to the effects on black
schooling inputs, there is no effect of disenfranchisement on white teacher-child ratios. There is
a negative effect on teacher-pupil ratios in Column 3, but inspection of Column 4 reveals that
this is driven by an increase in enrollment among whites rather than an increase in teachers.
The difference between the teacher-child and teacher-pupil ratios likely reflects the poorer data
quality in the latter, but it may also reflect the endogeneity of pupils. The increase in white en-
rollment may be due to improvements in other dimensions of school quality or the white returns
to schooling, but it is difficult to interpret in the absent of any effect on teacher-child ratios.
While data availability does not allow me to pursue analysis of other measures of school quality,
the evidence in Table 4A and 4B shows that disenfranchisement was associated with lower black
educational inputs, with little discernible effect on white educational inputs. While it is difficult
to rule out, for example, differential state trends in black schooling, owing to the few states
and years in the sample, the evidence is consistent with the model’s predictions: the altered po-
litical equilibrium induced by black disenfranchisement lowered public spending on black schools.




5.2    Factor Markets
Table 5 presents the effects of disenfranchisement on a variety of variables from the agricultural
census. Columns 1 and 2 look at the effect on farm values and farm values per acre, and re-
port that an additional instance of a poll tax or literacy test is associated with a 7% increase
in farm values and a 3% increase in farm values per acre. Column 3 looks at the effect of
disenfranchisement on farm output, and finds smaller and not robustly significant impacts of
disenfranchisement on output. This is indirect evidence that the increase in farm values per
acre is not coming from an increase in productivity, but rather a reduction in costs.


   The next three columns of Table 5 look at the effects of disenfranchisement on population
changes, and finds that black population falls relative to the white population. Column 5 shows



                                                 20
a fall in the fraction black of 0.1-0.4%, and Columns 6 and 7 show that this is driven by a 3-4%
fall in the black population, with at most a 1% increase in the white population, depending on
covariates. Thus, disenfranchisement caused a change in the racial composition of counties by
increasing black outmigration, consistent with the predictions of the model.


   In Appendix C Table A2, I show other margins of landowner and population adjustment.
I find some evidence of increased investment in land and capital by landowners, although the
latter could be an appreciation of capital values analogous to the rise in land values. I also find
no significant effect on urbanization.


5.3    Robustness
Together, the results from Tables 3-5 show that disenfranchisement was effective in reducing
turnout and increased vote shares for the Democratic party. Consistent with the model, the
results also show that black public goods fell following disenfranchisement, with little effect
on white public goods, measured as teacher-child ratios. The results also document that farm
values went up, and that this is not solely due to increased acreage or productivity. Finally,
disenfranchisement resulted in a reduction in the fraction black of a county, a result driven
largely by black emigration rather than white in-migration.


   Tables 6-8 show a number of robustness tests. The outcomes are the 6 core variables that
are the focus of the paper: Presidential turnout, Democratic vote share, black and white teach-
ers/child, farm value per acre, and fraction black. Table 6 shows a variety of alternative groups
of control variables, ranging from no controls at all, to only controlling for population, to subsets
of controls based on the partition in Table 2. The decreases in turnout, increases in Democrat
vote shares, decreased black teacher-child ratios, no effects on white teacher-child ratios, and
increases in farm values together with decreases in the fraction of the population that is black,
all remain robust to these specifications.


   Table 7 holds the specification fixed, but varies the sample. Panel A uses the full unbalanced
sample. Panel B restricts attention to the counties that reported black teachers throughout the
1870 -1920 period. Panel C replicates the analysis using the 1920 census county map instead of
the 1870, to account for any possible changes in county borders (and potential changes in pairs).
Again, the pattern of results remains unchanged. Panel D estimates the difference-in-differences
specification (standard errors clustered by county) on the entire county-year panel, including
both border and non-border counties:




                                                 21
                          p
                                          X
                                L
                ycst = β(Dst + Dst )+         βt Xc,1860 + γlog(popct ) + δc + δt + ct

   While the effects of disenfranchisement on elections and schooling are very similar to the
border-pair sample and specification, the effect on land values is about 50% smaller and in-
significant, while the effect on fraction black is positive in sign, although insignificant. This
suggests differences between the border identification strategy and the full sample, particularly
with respect to factor markets. One interpretation could be that the border sample and specifi-
cation controls much more effectively for unobserved differences in economic variables that may
confound the straight county-year panel, although another interpretation could be that general
equilibrium effects cause the effects on the border sample to be overstated. I return to this point
in the next section.


   Finally, Panel E reports a placebo specification, where I match each county that lies on a
state border with its neighboring counties that lie in the same state, which I counterfactually
assume are not affected by the disenfranchisement laws. I then re-estimate the main specifica-
tion. If my identifying assumption is correct, then the effect of poll taxes and literacy tests in
this regression should be insignificant. As Panel E shows, there is no significant effect of dis-
enfranchisement on any of the outcome variables, suggesting that there is not a spurious effect
occurring at the state borders.


   Table 8 examines robustness to different variants of the definition of disenfranchisement.
Panels A and B disaggregate the main disenfranchisement variable, using the full set of 1860
controls, while Panels C and D include other covariates or interactions that may alter the in-
terpretation of the disenfranchisement variable, so I include only the baseline 1860 covariates.
Panel A examines the effect of the poll tax and literacy test separately, as well as reporting
the sum of the coefficients. Results on the sum of the coefficients are very similar to the main
specification, although the effect on fraction black loses some precision. To the extent that the
effects of the individual laws are interpretable, they suggest that while the poll tax reduced
turnout, both laws increased Democrat vote shares. The literacy test reduced education (for
both blacks and whites, it seems), while the poll tax induced the land value appreciation as well
as the black outmigration. Panel B disaggregates the independent variable differently, instead
counting the number of disenfranchisement laws passed rather than the particular types. Panel
B suggests that it was both laws that together that had an effect on all the dependent variables
of interest, rather than one law alone.


   Panel C controls for alternative disenfranchisement laws, in particular the secret ballot and



                                                  22
       the property requirement. The effects of the poll tax and the literacy test on voting remain
       unchanged in sign and significance, although they fall somewhat in magnitude. Validating our
       focus on the two disenfranchising laws is the fact that the secret ballot and the property re-
       quirement have no effect on voting outcomes. Controlling for the other two laws does reduce
       the size and significance of the effect on black teacher-child ratios, with the secret ballot being
       significant and substantial. Nevertheless the effect of the poll tax and the literacy test on black
       schooling is substantial and almost significant at 10%. None of the laws have any effect on white
       schooling, and the effects of poll taxes and literacy tests on farm values per acre and fraction
       black remains unchanged.


           Panel D of Table 8 interacts the disenfranchisement variable with the lagged log of the black
       population, to see if the effect of disenfranchisement was concentrated in counties with large
       black populations. The interaction is demeaned to keep the main coefficient comparable with
       previous specifications. The only significant heterogeneity is on the turnout and fraction black
       variables, where a larger black population is associated with a larger decrease in voting and
       a larger change in the fraction black. At least with this linear interaction, the results do not
       appear to be driven by just the counties with large black populations, as the main effects of the
       poll tax and literacy test remain unchanged.


           In Appendix C, I estimate the effect of disenfranchisement on racial violence. Results using
       lynchings17 , measured both as a count and a binary variable, give an imprecise (i.e. largely
       not significant) but negative coefficient. This 0 effect is consistent with the idea that violence
       was not an effective substitute for legal disenfranchisement; otherwise lynchings may have fallen
       substantially. There are difficulties of interpretation; a fall in lynchings post-disenfranchisement
       could suggest that, since lynchings could be politically motivated, the de jure disenfranchise-
       ment of blacks made the de facto use of violence unnecessary. However there could also be
       an increase in racist violence following disenfranchisement, as local law enforcement would no
       longer be under as much political pressure to enforce the rule of law vis-a-bis black citizens.
       Owing to these contradictory interpretations, this paper does not pursue the analysis of lynch-
       ings. Nonetheless, identifying the effect of disenfranchisement from contiguous counties does
       provide more confidence that voter intimidation and coercion, which are not likely to respect
       state boundaries, are not confounding the estimates of the impact of the legal changes.


17
     The lynchings data is from the Historical American Lynchings project, collapsed to the county-decade level.




                                                         23
5.4    Addressing Spillovers
Given the focus on contiguous county-pairs, there may be concerns that the effects are driven by
general equilibrium effects. For example, the effects could be overstated due to black migrants
leaving the treated county for the within-pair control county. Table 9 uses two approaches to
empirically examine the possibility of spillovers. In Panel A of Table 9, I attempt to deal with
this by constructing an alternative set of control counties. Instead of matching counties to their
immediate neighbors, counties are matched to the interior “neighbors of their neighbors” in the
adjacent state. If the effects were driven by spillovers, we would expect the effects in this sam-
ple to be smaller than the immediately adjacent comparison. However, as Panel A shows, the
results are of the same order of magnitude as the border county sample and robustly significant
across specifications.


   Panel B of Table 9 takes another approach to assessing spillovers. I test for heterogeneous
effects by the distance between the centroids of the two counties in a pair. This is an imperfect
measure, potentially correlated with many other county characteristics such as area, and does
not account for the distribution of population within a county. Nonetheless, if spillovers are a
substantial concern, then effects should be attenuated in county-pairs whose centroids are very
far apart on average, at least under the assumption of a uniform distribution of population
within a county. Agents are less likely to move over longer distances, and less likely to move to
adjacent counties that have more of their area farther away.


   Very few of the interactions are significant across specifications. Only fraction Democrat
shows a robustly larger increase in response to disenfranchisement in farther away counties.
One reason for the mixed results can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, which shows the coefficients
from subsamples of counties with centroids within 35 kilometers of each other through 105 kilo-
meters, in increments of 10 km. In Figure 5, the effect of disenfranchisement on fraction black
is larger, albeit more imprecise, in counties whose centroids that are very close together. I inter-
pret this as a larger outmigration of blacks (and indeed the interaction is driven by the effect on
the black population rather than the white population). This should imply a potentially greater
increase in wages, and the positive effect on the land value should be attenuated. This is what
we see in Figure 6. Despite this heterogeneity, the coefficients very quickly reach the sample
average, suggesting that the spillovers are only present in a small part of the sample. While it
is difficult to completely rule out the presence of general equilibrium effects, the two exercises
conducted in this section suggest that the estimates in this paper are not merely an artifact of
the adjacent border county empirical design.




                                                24
       6     The Incidence of Disenfranchisement on Land and La-
       bor
       In order to apply Proposition 3 to calculate incidence, I need two auxillary parameters. First
       I need to benchmark the migration response to income differences between counties, allowing
                                                                                                       dFB
       an estimate of the income-equivalence of disenfranchisement. I obtain an estimate of            dwB   from
       regressions using the linked census schedules from 1870-1880. As Proposition 3 shows, under the
       assumptions of the model, where the marginal migrant is the same for both disenfranchisement
       as well as labor income changes, this translates an aggregate migration response into a “money
       metric” that can then be used to calculate welfare of the potentially migrating populations. To
       obtain the effect on the average landowner I need an estimate of the scale parameter for the
       tail of the α distribution, which I obtain from the individual farm schedules extracted from the
       1880 agricultural census by Ransom and Sutch (2001).


           In Appendix D, I use linked 1870-1880 IPUMS census schedules to estimate the individual
       migration response to agricultural income growth, controlling for land value growth. For my
       calibration, I need to calculate an elasticity of migration with respect to black wages, which are
       not available in the 1880 data, so I assume that black wages wB are equal to a constant share of
       agricultural labor income Y , so that growth rates of the two variables are identical. Expressed
       as a percentage of local black income18 , Proposition 3 implies that:


                                                                   ∆FB
                                                   ∆WB              FB
                                                    ∆Φ             ∆Φ
                                                             =     ∆FB
                                                                                                             (11)
                                                FB × wB            ∆wB
                                                                    wB



           The numerator is the semi-elasticity of black population with respect to disenfranchisement
       from Table 5. The denominator, under the assumption that black wages grow at the same rate
       as agricultural labor income, the coefficient βy from the black IPUMS border sample estimated
       in the Appendix. This yields a 19% implied fall in per-worker black income from disenfran-
       chisement. Using different estimates from Table 5 and Table A5 yield effects between 15-41% of
       rural black labor income per worker, implying elasticities of black labor income with respect to
       voting turnout between 1 and 2. Using Ng and Virts (1993) estimate of black per-worker labor
       income in 1880 of wB = $66.21, and border county black population in 1880 (1.9 million), to
       get that total black income falls between 19 and 52 million 1880 dollars. The historical price
   18
      Note that this calculation assumes all blacks in the South were eventually disenfranchised, so that the migrants
left the region entirely. This is so that we can ignore potentially complicated effects of agents moving to states that
have not yet disenfranchised, but will. If agents are sufficiently forward looking and know all southern states are going
to disenfranchise, then the response to disenfranchisement could be to either not move or leave the region entirely.



                                                           25
conversion calculator at eh.net suggests a conversion rate of 20 in purchasing power terms from
1880 to 2000, resulting in an implied loss of black income from disenfranchisement is between
382 million and 1 billion current-day dollars.


6.1    Tail Parameter for κ
Second, to obtain an estimate for the welfare gains of landowners, I need to obtain an estimate
of the shape parameter of the distribution of κ to use Proposition 3. I use the Ransom and
Sutch farm sample from the 1880 agricultural census to estimate the shape parameter of the
distribution of κ, under the assumption that the distribution of κ will be close to the distribution
of capital stocks across farms.


    Figure 5 plots the log of the rank of a farm’s equipment stock against the log of the equip-
ment stock for all white-owned farms with more than 250 acres. The linearity of the resulting
graph corroborates the Proposition 3 assumption that the distribution has a Pareto tail. Us-
ing the Gabaix and Ibragimov (2011) estimator, which regresses the log of the capital stock
                         1
rank of a farm minus     2   on the log of the capital value, gives a Pareto shape coefficient of
b = 1.29. Using the formula from Proposition 3 yields an increase in landowner welfare of 12%,
implying an elasticity with respect to turnout of just below 1. Aggregate 1880 farm value in
the border counties is 400 million which implies an aggregate increase in landowner wealth of
.12 × 400 = 48.4 million. To convert this stock into a flow requires an assumption about the
discount rate, which at 6% per year (Davis 1965) becomes 79% per decade, which implies a
flow increase of 0.79 × 48.4 = 38.2 million dollars in landlord income. Transforming this into
current day dollars would yield an equivalent transfer of roughly 764 million dollars.


    While the calculations in this section should be taken with many caveats, given the reliability
and availability of historical data, they suggest large losses borne by black labor and large gains
for landowners. Given the mobility levels of black workers in response to agricultural income,
the effect of disenfranchisement on black migration looks substantial, and given the inequality
in capital across farms, the increase in land price implies sizeable increases in inframarginal
producer profits.


7     Conclusion
This paper has estimated the impacts of Southern disenfranchisement on political competition,
public good provision, land values, and migration using contiguous cross-state county pairs. I
find that poll taxes and literacy tests lowered turnout, increased Democratic vote shares, and
lowered black school quality. I also find that land and labor markets respond to the fall in

                                                 26
redistribution, resulting in higher land prices and increased black out-migration. By looking
at land prices and migration decisions, I am able to infer the welfare implications of franchise
restriction across groups, and find evidence of substantial black losses and landowner gains.


   While this paper has not directly estimated long-run impacts of Southern disenfranchisement,
it is likely that the effects of black political exclusion and educational under-provision persist
through the intergenerational transmission of human capital and wealth (Sacerdote, 2005). Be-
sides the effects on national racial inequality and skewed public-goods provision in the region,
the “Solid South” engendered by formal disenfranchisement shaped the political and economic
landscape of the United States for much of the 20th century, impeding welfare state expansion
during the New Deal and later serving as a regional haven for low-wage manufacturing (Alston
and Ferrie, 1999; Cobb, 1982; Holmes, 1998).


   The results in this paper suggest that, consistent with a large body of formal theory and
historical evidence, restricting the franchise lowers redistribution and public good provision.
When decentralized in an open economy, as in the U.S. South, these effects are capitalized into
land values and migration decisions. This paper suggests that the landowners of the U.S. South
benefited from franchise restriction, so much so that it outweighed the ensuing loss of black
labor. Historically, large landowners have often been the social group most opposed to democ-
ratization around the world, and the U.S. was no exception. Understanding how markets adapt
to and constrain nondemocratic politics in settings like the U.S. South is a promising area for
future research.




                                               27
References
D. Acemoglu and J.A. Robinson. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Cambridge
  University Press, 2006.
D. Acemoglu and J.A. Robinson. Persistence of Power, Elites, and Institutions. American
  Economic Review, 98(1):267–293, 2008.
L.J. Alston and J.P. Ferrie. Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare State. 1999.
L.J. Alston and K.D. Kauffman. Competition and the compensation of sharecroppers by race:
  A view from plantations in the early twentieth century. Explorations in Economic history, 38
  (1):181–194, 2001.
E. Anderson. Race and Politics in North Carolina, 1872-1901: The Black Second. Louisiana
  State University Press, 1980.
D. Austen-Smith. Redistributing income under proportional representation. Journal of Political
  Economy, 108(6):1235–1269, 2000.
J.M. Baland and J.A. Robinson. Land and Power: Theory and Evidence from Chile. American
  Economic Review, 98(5):1737–1765, 2008.
R.J. Barro. Democracy and growth. Journal of economic growth, 1(1):1–27, 1996.
D.E. Bernstein. Only One Place of Redress: African Americans, Labor Regulations, and the
  Courts From Reconstruction to the New Deal. Duke University Press, 2001.
T. Besley, T. Persson, and D.M. Sturm. Political competition, policy and growth: theory and
  evidence from the us. Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1329–1352, 2010.
H.M. Bond. The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order. Prentice-Hall, inc., 1934.
A.C. Cameron, J.B. Gelbach, and D.L. Miller. Bootstrap-based improvements for inference with
  clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):414–427, 2008.
D. Card and A.B. Krueger. School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
  Assessment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 151–200, 1992.
R. Chetty. Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and reduced-
  form methods. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):451–488, 2009.
J.C. Cobb. The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development, 1936-
  1980. Louisiana State University Press, 1982.
W. Cohen. At Freedom’s Edge: Black Mobility and the Southern White Quest for Racial Control,
  1861-1915. Louisiana State University Press, 1991.
W.J. Collins and R.A. Margo. Historical perspectives on racial differences in schooling in the
  united states. Handbook of the Economics of Education, 1:107–154, 2006.
P. Coughlin and S. Nitzan. Electoral outcomes with probabilistic voting and nash social welfare
  maxima. Journal of Public Economics, 15(1):113–121, 1981.
S. Cresswell. Enforcing the Enforcement Acts: The Department of Justice in Northern Missis-


                                              28
  sippi, 1870-1890. Journal of Southern History, pages 421–440, 1987.
C.W. Dabney. Universal Education in the South. University of North Carolina Press, 1936.
C. Davidson and B. Grofman. Quiet Revolution in the South: the Impact of the Voting Rights
  Act, 1965-1990. Princeton University Press, 1994.
A. Dube, T.W. Lester, and M. Reich. Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders: Estimates
  Using Contiguous Counties. Review of Economics and Statistics, 157:07, 2009.
G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, and H.G. Overman. Assessing the effects of local taxation using
  microgeographic data. The economic journal, 2011.
D. Epple and T. Romer. Mobility and Redistribution. Journal of Political Economy, pages
  828–858, 1991.
P.V. Fishback and J.H. Baskin. Narrowing the Black-White Gap in Child Literacy in 1910:
  The Roles of School Inputs and Family Inputs. Review of Economics and Statistics, pages
  725–728, 1991.
E. Foner. Reconstruction: America’s unfinished revolution, 1863-1877. Harper Perennial Modern
  Classics, 1988.
P.S. Foner and R.L. Lewis. The Black Worker From 1900 to 1919. Temple University Press,
  Philadelphia, 1980.
X. Gabaix and R. Ibragimov. Rank- 1/2: a simple way to improve the ols estimation of tail
  exponents. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(1):24–39, 2011.
O. Galor, O. Moav, and D. Vollrath. Inequality in landownership, the emergence of human-
  capital promoting institutions, and the great divergence. Review of Economic Studies, 76(1):
  143–179, 2009.
R.M. Goldman. A Free Ballot and a Fair Count: The Department of Justice and the Enforcement
  of Voting Rights in the South, 1877-1893. Fordham University Press, 2001.
M. Gradstein and B. Milanovic. Does liberté= égalité? a survey of the empirical links be-
  tween democracy and inequality with some evidence on the transition economies. Journal of
  Economic Surveys, 18(4):515–537, 2004.
S. Hahn. A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South, from Slavery
  to the Great Migration. Belknap Press, Cambridge, Massachussetts, 2003.
L.R. Harlan. Separate and Unequal: Public School Campaigns and Racism in the Southern
  Seaboard States, 1901-1915. Scribner Paper Fiction, 1968.
J.C. Heckelman. The Effect of the Secret Ballot on Voter Turnout Rates. Public Choice, 82(1):
  107–124, 1995.
R. Higgs. Competition and Coercion: Blacks in the American Economy, 1865-1914. Cambridge
  University Press, 1977.
S. Hirano and J.M. Snyder. The Decline of Third-Party Voting in the United States. Journal
  of Politics, 69(01):1–16, 2008.


                                             29
T.J. Holmes. The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from
  State Borders. Journal of Political Economy, 106(4):667–705, 1998.
T.A. Husted and L.W. Kenny. The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the Size
  of Government. Journal of Political Economy, pages 54–82, 1997.
V.O. Key. Southern Politics in State and Nation. AA Knopf, 1949.
R.F. King. Counting the Votes: South Carolina’s Stolen Election of 1876. Journal of Interdis-
  ciplinary History, 32(2):169–191, 2001.
R.F. King. A Most Corrupt Election: Louisiana in 1876. Studies in American Political Devel-
  opment, 15(02):123–137, 2002.
J.M. Kousser. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of
  the One-party South, 1880-1910. Yale University Press, 1974.
J.M. Kousser. Progressivism-For Middle-Class Whites Only: North Carolina Education, 1880-
  1910. Journal of Southern History, pages 169–194, 1980.
J.M. Kousser. Ecological Inference from Goodman to King. Historical Methods, 34(3):101–126,
  2001.
A. Lichtenstein. Twice the work of free labor: The political economy of convict labor in the New
  South. Verso Books, 1996.
A. Lindbeck and J.W. Weibull. Balanced-budget redistribution as the outcome of political
  competition. Public Choice, 52(3):273–297, 1987.
H. Llavador and R.J. Oxoby. Partisan Competition, Growth, and the Franchise. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 120(3):1155–1189, 2005.
R.A. Margo. Race Differences in public school expenditures: Disfranchisement and school finance
  in Louisiana, 1890-1910. Social Science History, pages 9–33, 1982.
R.A. Margo. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History. University Of
  Chicago Press, 1990.
R.A. Margo. Segregated Schools and the Mobility Hypothesis: A Model of Local Government
  Discrimination. Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 61–73, 1991.
S. Middleton and J.D. Smith. Black Congressmen During Reconstruction: A Documentary
  Sourcebook. Greenwood Press, 2002.
G. Miller. Women’s Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in American History.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3):1287–1327, 2008.
C.H. Moneyhon. Black Politics in Arkansas during the Gilded Age, 1876-1900. Arkansas His-
  torical Quarterly, pages 222–245, 1985.
B. Moore. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of
  the Modern World. Beacon Press, Boston, Massachussetts, 1966.
C.B. Mulligan, R. Gil, and X. Sala-i Martin. Do democracies have different public policies than
  nondemocracies? Journal of Economic Perspectives, pages 51–74, 2004.


                                              30
S. Naidu. Recruitment restrictions and labor markets: Evidence from the postbellum us south.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2):413–445, 2010.
F.D. Ogden. The Poll Tax in the South. University of Alabama Press, 1958.
P.F. Orazem. Black-white Differences in Schooling Investment and Human Capital Production
  in Segregated Schools. American Economic Review, pages 714–723, 1987.
N.I. Painter. Exodusters: Black Migration to Kansas after Reconstruction. WW Norton &
  Company, 1992.
M. Perman. Struggle for Mastery: Disfranchisement in the South, 1888-1908. University of
  North Carolina Press, 2001.
J.B. Pritchett. The Burden of Negro Schooling: Tax Incidence and Racial Redistribution in
  Postbellum North Carolina. Journal of Economic History, pages 966–973, 1989.
A. Przeworski. Democracy and development: political institutions and well-being in the world,
  1950-1990, volume 3. Cambridge Univ Press, 2000.
H.N. Rabinowitz. Race Relations in the Urban South, 1865-1890. Oxford University Press New
  York, 1978.
R.L. Ransom and R. Sutch. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of Emancipa-
  tion. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
K. Redding. Making Race, Making Power: North Carolina’s Road to Disfranchisement. Uni-
  versity of Illinois Press, 2003.
K. Redding and D.R. James. Estimating Levels and Modeling Determinants of Black and White
  Voter Turnout in the South, 1880 to 1912. Historical Methods, 34(4):141–158, 2001.
H.C. Richardson. The Death of Reconstruction: Race, Labor, and Politics in the Post-Civil War
  North, 1865-1901. Harvard University Press, 2001.
D. Rodrik. Democracies pay higher wages. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3):707–738,
  1999.
D. Rueschemeyer, E.H. Stephens, and J.D. Stephens. Capitalist Development and Democracy.
  Polity, 1992.
B. Sacerdote. Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 87(2):217–234, 2005.
C.M. Tiebout. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy, 64(5):416,
  1956.
X. Wang. The trial of democracy: Black suffrage and northern Republicans, 1860-1910. Uni-
  versity of Georgia Press, 1997.
F. Welch. Black-white Differences in Returns to Schooling. American Economic Review, pages
  893–907, 1973.
H.D. Woodman. New South, New Law: The Legal Foundations of Credit and Labor Relations
  in the Postbellum Agricultural South. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, 1995.


                                             31
C.V. Woodward. Origins of the New South, 1877-1913. Louisiana State University Press, 1951.
G. Wright. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil War.
  Basic Books, 1986.




                                            32
Appendix A: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 and 2: Integrating over η, the expected net votes for Democrats are
given by:
                                         Z
                         D
                    ∆V        = θW 2          WW (τ D , GD             R   R
                                                         W , κ) − WW (τ , GW , κ)dFW (κ)
                                          Z
                              + θB 2Φ          WB (GD             R
                                                    B , κ) − WB (GB , κ)dFB (κ)



   The Democrats will choose τ, GB , GW to maximize ∆V D and the Republicans will try to
minimize ∆V D , each taking the other’s policy vector as given. With Assumption 1, the equilib-
                                                                                    wW +GW               wB +GB
rium will be characterized by 3 cutoffs, κ∗ = F −1 (1 − L), κW ∗ =                     m     and κB∗ =      m   ,
that designate thresholds for when agents enter into production or migration or wage labor
(with the latter being race-specific). Thus I can the use the market-clearing expressions for the
wage and land price to write the political equilibrium as the following optimization problem,
using the budget constraint to eliminate τ , the land market clearing constraint to eliminate v,
and writing the labor market clearing constraints as wB (GB ) and wW (GW ):


                   max W L (GB , GW ) + W P W (wW (GW ) + GW ) + ΦWB (wB (GB ) + GB )
                GW ,GB


   Where


            W L (GB , GW )    =
                      Z ∞           
                                      α
                  θW                       (κL)α−1 ((θB FB (κB∗ ))1−α + (θW FW (κW ∗ ))1−α )
                         κ∗          1−α
                                                     
                                    C(GB ) + C(GW )
                              −                        (κ − κ∗ ) + mκ∗ dFW (κ)
                                          κL

and                                                    Z       κ∗
                   PW
               W        (wW (GW ) + GW ) = θW                       max(mκ, wW (GW ) + GW )dFW (κ)          (12)
                                                           0

                                                    Z      κ∗
                   W B (wB (GB ) + GB ) = θB                    max(mκ, wB (GB ) + GB )dFB (κ)              (13)
                                                       0

   To show that the net effect of increased public goods on black welfare is positive, the fall in
                                                 dwB
the wage cannot be too large, that is:           dGB    ∈ (−1, 0). Implicitly differentiating the black labor
                                   κL
market clearing condition.           1   = θB FB (κB∗ ) yields:
                                  wB α

                               dwB         −fB ( wB m
                                                    +GB
                                                        )
                                   =     w  +G         mκL
                                                              ∈ (−1, 0)                                     (14)
                               dGB   fB ( m ) +
                                          B   B
                                                          α+1
                                                                     θB αwB   α




                                                               33
           Note also that if fB 0 > 0, then wB (GB ) is concave in GB .19 .


           Thus the first-order condition for black public goods is:

                                                               dWB   dW L
                                                          −Φ       =                                                      (15)
                                                               dGB   dGB

               dWB                               dW L
       Since   dGB     > 0, at the optimum       dGB      < 0. Expanding this expression yields:

                                dwB (GB )          wB (GB ) + GB    C 0 (GB )      F −1 (1 − L)
                           Φ(             + 1)FB (               )=           (1 −                                        (16)
                                  dGB                   m               θB               κ

       and the analogous condition for GW is:

                                             wW + GW dwW                        F −1 (1 − L)
                            L + θW FW (             )(     + 1) = C 0 (GW )(1 −                                           (17)
                                                m      dGW                            κ

       Clearly, if C is sufficiently convex, then (12) has negative second-derivatives in GB , GW . Also
       clearly from the fact that GW does not appear in the first-order condition for GB , the cross-
       partials between GW and GB are 0. Thus the Hessian is positive definite and the function is
       concave.
                                                                                        dGB
       From (16) and the assumption on C it is immediate that                            dΦ   > 0.
       From (17) it also follows          that dG
                                                dΦ
                                                  W
                                                      = 0.
               dFB         dFB dwB        dFB dGB         dFB          dwB dGB
       Thus     dΦ   =   ( dw B dGB
                                      +   dGB ) dΦ    =   dGB (1   +   dGB ) dΦ     > 0.
       Write the land price as:


               v   = ((1 − τ )Π(wB , wW ) − m)F −1 (1 − L) + GW
                                                           F −1 (1 − L)
                   = (W L (GB , GW ) − mF −1 (1 − L)L)                      + GW − mF −1 (1 − L)
                                                        L(κ − F −1 (1 − L))

       And since none of the other terms beside W L in the expression depend on GB , and the optimum
                                      dW L                                  dv
       from (15) implies that         dGB    < 0, it must be that           dΦ   < 0.
       Proof of Proposition 3:
       First consider the equation for the land price (with κ∗ = F −1 (1 − L) as above):


                                          (1 − τ )Π(wB , wW , GB )κ∗ + GW − v = mκ∗                                       (18)
                                                                                                             w +G
  19                                                                                                 κθB FB ( B m B   )
     If black labor markets are monopsonistic with efficient rationing, each employer gets           κL
                                                                                                              black work-
ers, and if an interior optimum exists, black wages are set according to ∂Π(w      B ,wW )
                                                                                 ∂wB
                                                                                           = 0. The assumption  of efficient
rationing implies that it does not matter if I consider firms as individually setting wages or whether the government
is regulating them in order to maximize aggregate profits: both yield the same first-order condition for black wages.
It can be seen that wBdG (GB )
                          B
                               is still in (−1, 0) and decreasing in GB , so the comparative statics will remain the same
under this assumption about wage setting. It is also easy to see that all the comparative statics will remain true
under exogenously fixed wages wB , as any offsetting effects of public goods on black wages can be ignored.


                                                                       34
           Differentiating (18) it can be seen that a small change in Φ yields:

                                            d(1 − τ )Π(wB , wW ) ∗   dv
                                                                κ L=                                           (19)
                                                     dΦ              dΦ

       By decreasing the tax rate (and possibly the wage), disenfranchisement increases the price
       of land, just enough to make the marginal producer indifferent. Thus the land price change
       captures the welfare change for the marginal producer. To convert this into the effect on the
       average welfare of all producers, I integrate over the conditional distribution of κ


                      ∞
        dW L              d(1 − τ )Π(wB , wW )                   d(1 − τ )Π(wB , wW )
                  Z
                                                  dv                                                  dv
             =                                 κ−    dF (κ) = L(                      )E[κ|κ > κ∗ ] −    )
         dΦ        κ∗              dΦ             dΦ                      dΦ                          dΦ

           Suppose F is a Pareto distribution with shape parameter b > 1 and scale parameter a < κ∗ ,
                                                       bκ∗ 20
       then the conditional mean E[κ|κ > κ∗ ] =        b−1
           Therefore, using (18) the average change in producer welfare is given by:



                  d(1 − τ )Π(wB , wW )                dv   dv E[κ|κ > κ∗ ]   dv   dv   1
                                       E[κ|κ > κ∗ ] −    =                 −    =( )
                           dΦ                         dΦ   dΦ     κ∗         dΦ   dΦ b − 1
           Thus the change in average producer welfare is given by:

                                                          1 dv
                                                        b − 1 dΦ

       which establishes the result.


           The second part of the proposition follows from the following equations:
       dWB              +GB d(wB +GB )
        dΦ    = FB ( wB m  )   dΦ
       dMB               +GB d(wB +GB )
        dΦ    = −fB ( wB m  )   dΦ
       dMB
       dwB    = −fB ( wB m
                         +GB
                             )
       Putting these together yields:

                                                                 dFB
                                                      dWB         dΦ
                                                          =      dFB
                                                                                                               (20)
                                                       dΦ        dwB


  20
     The cdf of the Pareto distribution is G(κ) = 1 − ( κa )b , so the pdf of the truncated Pareto distribution is g(κ|κ >
           ab
       b             ∗                 R∞      ∗                b ∗ 1−b
κ∗ ) = ( κab+1
             )b
                = b(κ
                   κb+1
                       )b
                          . Integrating κ∗ b(κκb )b dκ gives ba b−1
                                                                 κ
                                                                        . Dividing this by 1 − G(κ∗ ) = ( κa∗ )b yields the
         κ∗
                                         bκ∗
conditional expectation E[κ|κ > κ∗ ] =   b−1
                                             .




                                                            35
Appendix B: Education Data Details
To construct the education variables, I draw the relevant variables (teachers, pupils, and eligible
children (aged 5-20) by race and gender) from the 1890 census, which was the first census to
collect education data at the county level. Unfortunately, the 1890 census microdata was de-
stroyed, but the individual 10% IPUMS sample is available for the other census years, and they
are used to construct analogs to the 1890 variables. Note that these are not directly comparable,
as the 1890 numbers are not constructed by aggregating the individual schedules, but instead
are compiled by the census bureau. The other years are likely to be unrepresentative due to
undersampling, as only the 10% census sample is available, and self-reported occupation is used
rather than administrative reports. The census also measured school attendance by asking if
the child had attended school at least once. Needless to say, this is a poor metric of true school
attendance. While this should not effect the point estimates, the mismeasurement in the census
is likely to increase the standard errors.


   State education reports were collected for available years closest to census years and data
from additional education reports collected by Morgan Kousser was added. The reports are
idiosyncratic and often report very different information for each state, particularly in the early
years. While there exists a great deal of data, for example teachers’ wages or value of school
property in some states for some years, very few variables exist for all Southern states over all
census years in my sample. The variables selected are those that can be compared with the data
constructed from the census. The data from the state education reports is combined with the
census variables. From the reports, white and black teachers, pupils, and eligible students are
extracted. Often the eligible students are from the most recent census, so the data is occasion-
ally redundant. I then average all the observations from all the sources over each decade, and
use that as my measure of educational inputs.


   In Table A1, I show the effect of disenfranchisement on schooling inputs measured separately
in the census data and in the state report data. As can be seen, the sample size for the
state-report data is much smaller than from the census. In the census data, the effect of
disenfranchisement on black teacher-child ratios is negative and significant in specifications
with both the restricted and full-set of 1860 control variables, while it is insignificant in the
state-report data. For black teacher-pupil ratios, the effect of disenfranchisement in negative in
both samples and both specifications, and, save for the fuller specification on the census data,
significant. For the white schooling input variables, the effects of disenfranchisement are almost
always insignificant.




                                                36
Appendix C: Other Outcome Variables and Heterogeneity
In Table A2, I estimate the effect of disenfranchisement on a variety of other variables of in-
terest. In Panel A, I example the effect of disenfranchisement on alternative political variables,
including a measure of lynchings. Columns 1-4 use the Hirano-Snyder data on congressional
voting, which are corrected for errors in the ICPSR data, but are not as comprehensive. Effects
are consistent with Table 3, with large significant falls in turnout of roughly the same magni-
tude as Table 3 and much larger increases in Democrat vote share, either perhaps non-classical
measurement error or a consequence of the different sample available. The next four columns,
5-8, examine lynchings, both as a continuous measure and as a binary variable. The data are
from the Historical American Lynchings project, and only go back to 1880. The effect of dis-
enfranchisement is mixed, with most specifications showing no effect, but the specification with
controls showing a significant positive effect of disenfranchisement on lynchings.


   In Panel B I look at other variables from the agricultural and population censuses. Columns
1-2 look at equipment per acre, and find a positive effect of disenfranchisement on the value of
equipment. This is consistent with increased value of already purchased equipment (owing to
lower taxation or labor costs), but it is also consistent with increased investment. Columns 3-4
use log farm size as a dependent variable, and find a negative effect, consistent with increased
sharecropping (the census counted operators, not owners, as separate farms), but it could be
consistent with entry of more smaller farmers or the fragmentation of larger farms. Columns
5-8 show that disenfranchisement resulted in a increase in improved acreage as well as overall
farm acreage. While the model assumed fixed supply of land, this result suggests that farmers
could indeed bring new land into cultivation. Without information on the costs of improving
land or bringing new land into cultivation, it is difficult to adjust the implied incidence for this,
but we can interpret the true effect as lying between the effect on land value per acre and total
land value. Columns 9 and 10 examine the effect on the log of urban population (controlling
for log population), to check if disenfranchisement resulted in additional migration to or away
from cities, but the effects are insignificant and of mixed signs, suggesting no large impact on
urbanization.


   In Table A3 I interact the disenfranchisement independent variable with a variety of fixed
county characteristics that proxy for institutional characteristics of the South that may have
exacerbated the effects of disenfranchisement. I am interested in proxies for the parts of the
South that were particularly dependent on low-cost black agricultural labor. As proxies, I use
the log of the fraction slave in 1860, a dummy for bordering the Mississippi River, the measure
of cotton suitability from FAO, and finally a “plantation” dummy, using the list of designated



                                                 37
       plantation counties in Brannen (1924) as the source.21 I estimate the same specification as in
       section 5.4.


          Table A3 shows the results on the 6 main variables of interest. Reassuringly, the main effects
       remains unchanged from Tables 3-5. The political effects of disenfranchisement are uniformly
       and substantially larger in the black labor intensive parts of the South. The effects on land
       values are also larger, which is unsurprising as plantation districts are both highly productive
       as well as highly dependent on black labor. The falls in fraction black population are somewhat
       larger in magnitude, but this effect is not robust across proxies or specifications with the full
       set of controls (not shown).


          There also seems to be substantial heterogeneous results on public good provision, although
       the coefficients switch sign depending on the proxy used. Both black and white education
       seems to increase following disenfranchisement in the Mississippi border areas, perhaps reflect-
       ing economic and political transfers towards these areas following disenfranchisement. White
       education decreases following disenfranchisement in the plantation counties and in the highly
       cotton suitable counties, but black education increases in the former and decreases in the latter.
       This likely reflects heterogeneity in school system funding across these various locations, where
       labor-intensive jurisdictions responded to disenfranchisement with a variety of mixes of black
       and white public goods in order to attract different types of labor. Some counties could have
       reacted to state-level disenfranchisement by increasing school provision to retain black labor,
       even at the expense of white labor, while other labor-intensive counties could have cut spending
       on both types of public goods following disenfranchisement.


  21
    While likely endogenous, the plantation measure in Brannen has been widely used by economic historians. See
Alston and Kauffman (2001).




                                                      38
Appendix D: Estimating Individual Income-Migration Elas-
ticities
I use the linked 1870-1880 IPUMS sample for two reasons. First, it is the only 10-year linked
census, as the linkage is to the 1880 individual schedules and the 1890 individual schedules
have been destroyed (which is why I cannot use these for reliable estimates of the impact of
disenfranchisement on migration), and therefore lets me look at the shortest migration window.
1870-1880 is also the beginning of my sample period, and therefore unlikely to be contaminated
by the effects of the disenfranchisement laws. I restrict my sample to men aged 16-60, and
match them to the agricultural census data for their county of residence in 1870. Sample
summary statistics are in Table A4. Notably, the mean levels of migration are very high,
with approximately 40% of men changing counties between 1870 and 1880. Agricultural wages,
unfortunately, are not available at the county level in 1880. Therefore, I look at black migration
as a function of county growth in agricultural income. I estimate the following model at the
individual level:


                      M igratei = β0 + βy gya + βv gva + Xa βa + Xi βi + ia                  (21)

   Where i denotes individual and a denotes county. M igrate is a dummy indicating that
the individual changed counties between 1870 and 1880. gya is the growth rate in agricultural
output in county a, and gva is the growth rate in the land value. By controlling for gva I am
adjusting for the share of the agricultural income growth that is going into land values, and thus
making gya a better estimate of the returns to labor. Xa is a vector of county-level covariates
(growth of black teachers, and total population), and Xi is a vector of individual covariates (age,
age-squared, urban, and literacy). For comparison, I estimate the same regressions for whites
and blacks separately. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.


   Results are in Table A5. On the full set of Southern blacks, I estimate a βy of -0.12 without
controls, decreasing in magnitude to -0.11 when individual controls are added. A 1% increase
in the growth rate of agricultural income is associated with an 11 percentage point increase in
the probability of staying in the county. The coefficient on the growth rate of black teachers is
also positive and significant at 10% confidence without the individual controls, falling slightly
(and becoming marginally insignificant) when controls are added.


   When estimated on the sample of border county residents, the migration response to income
growth increases by almost a factor of 2. Thus a 1% increase in the growth rate of agricultural
income in a border county is associated with a 18 to 22 percentage point fall in the probabil-



                                                39
ity of outmigration. This may reflects greater state-level opportunities for residents of border
counties. The coefficient on black teacher growth falls substantially in magnitude and becomes
insignificant.


   The results for whites are included to illustrate that a) whites did not respond nearly as much
as blacks to county-level income growth, and b) the summary statistics indicate that while the
migration rates for both whites and blacks are high, blacks are on average more likely to migrate
than whites. While this could be due to the poor quality of the linkage, owing to black illiteracy
and general difficulties with the 1870 census, it could also be evidence that black mobility during
the decade following Reconstruction was high in both levels (as seen in the summary statistics)
and in its responsiveness to agricultural income.




                                                40
Figure 1: Timing of Southern Disenfranchisement




Notes: Y axis fraction of counties affected by law in sample.


Figure 2: Sample Counties (after balancing)
Figure 3: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Log(Total Votes) in Presidential Elections

   0.15

   0.10

   0.05

   0.00
                   ‐12                ‐8                ‐4                 0                  4     8   12
  ‐0.05

  ‐0.10

  ‐0.15

  ‐0.20

  ‐0.25

  ‐0.30

  ‐0.35

Notes: Coefficients from dynamic specification discussed in text, with 95% confidence intervals.


Figure 4: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Log(Fraction Democrat) in Presidential Elections
   0.05



   0.04



   0.03



   0.02



   0.01



       0
                  ‐12                 ‐8                ‐4                 0                 4      8   12

  ‐0.01



  ‐0.02

Notes: Coefficients from dynamic specification discussed in text , with 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 5: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Log(Fraction Black) by Distance Between County Centroids

   0.001
                                                                                                                       km between county centroids
        0
                    35                45                 55                65                75                85                 95        105
  ‐0.001

  ‐0.002

  ‐0.003

  ‐0.004

  ‐0.005

  ‐0.006

  ‐0.007

  ‐0.008

  ‐0.009

   ‐0.01

Notes: Coefficients from subsamples with distance between county centroids less than magnitude of x‐axis , with 95% confidence intervals.


Figure 6: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Log(Land Value/Acre) by Distance Between County Centroids

   0.08

   0.07

   0.06

   0.05

   0.04

   0.03

   0.02

   0.01

       0
                   35                 45                 55                 65                 75                 85                   95         105
  ‐0.01
                                                                                                                              km between county centroids
  ‐0.02

Notes: Coefficients from subsamples with distance between county centroids less than magnitude of x‐axis , with 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 7: Log Rank‐ Log Capital Value Plot from 1880 Agricultural Census




Notes: Sample from Ransom and Sutch extract of 1880 census, restricted to white owned farms with more than 250 acres.
                                                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics


  Variable                                                         Neither Poll Tax nor Literacy Test   Either Poll Tax or Literacy Test    Both Poll Tax and Literacy Test

                                                                   Obs       Mean          Std. Dev     Obs       Mean         Std. Dev    Obs      Mean          Std. Dev
Mean Presidential Votes                                            1677     2446.68        1641.87      878      2374.21       2285.44     815     1579.35        1176.97
Mean Congressional Votes                                           1645     2046.15        1342.15      782      1994.38       1780.41     748     1207.69        1033.35
Mean Gubernatorial Votes                                           1677      836.32         512.86      878       730.71        579.16     748      405.95         315.90
Fraction Presidential Democrat                                     1677       0.04           0.05       878        0.05          0.05      815       0.09           0.09
Fraction Congressional Democrat                                    1645       0.05           0.05       782        0.07          0.06      748       0.14           0.13
Fraction Gubernatorial Democrat                                    1677       0.58           0.21       878        0.71          0.61      748       0.90           0.15

Log(Black Teachers/ Black Eligible Children+k)                     1677      -5.55           1.22       878        -5.54         1.35      815      -5.56          1.33
Black Teachers/ Black Eligible Children                            1677      0.006          0.007       878        0.008         0.014     815      0.008          0.023
Black Teachers/ Black Pupils                                       1441      0.019          0.031       830        0.018         0.024     815      0.016          0.018
Black Pupils/ Black Eligible Children                              1672       0.32           0.23       877        0.44          0.22      815      0.53           0.16
Log(White Teachers/ White Eligible Children+k)                     1677      -4.23           0.60       878        -4.05         0.59      815      -4.02          0.76
White Teachers/ White Eligible Children                            1677       0.01           0.02       878        0.01          0.01      815      0.02           0.02
White Teachers/ White Pupils                                       1603       0.03           0.06       867        0.03          0.03      811      0.03           0.02
White Pupils/ White Eligible Children                              1674       0.43           0.20       878        0.59          0.18      815      0.69           0.13

Value of Farm Land and Buildings                                   1677     1990416        1889019      878      3984064       5563643     815     6501714        8050184
Value of Farm Land and Buildings/ Farm Acreage                     1677       8.15           7.85       878       16.61         19.49      815      22.03          25.32
Farm Output / Farm Acreage                                         1677       3.99           3.54       878        8.36          9.39      815      12.31          11.79
Farm Acreage                                                       1677     256696         127294       878      221999         97197      815     296269         143390
Fraction Black                                                     1677       0.35           0.25       878        0.34          0.24      815       0.43           0.25
White Population                                                   1677      11069          7129        878       13696         13033      815      17061          13685
Black Population                                                   1677       7487           8406       878        8197         12096      815      14099          12480
Note: k chosen to make the distribution of log(x+k) have 0 skew.
                                            Table 2: 1860 Differences Among Early and Late Disenfranchising States
                                                                               1860 Agricultural Variables

                                                                           (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                                                   Log(Farm Value/Acre)       Log(Imp Acreage)         Log(Farm Acres)         Log(Equip. Value)

Disenfranchised Before 1896                                               -0.00576                  -0.411                 -0.414*                 -0.522**
                                                                          (0.0836)                 (0.274)                 (0.248)                  (0.250)
Pair FE                                                                       Y                        Y                      Y                        Y
N                                                                            478                     478                     478                      478

                                                                                           1860 Population Variables

                                                                             (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)
                                                                          Log(Pop)               Frac. Slave             Frac. Urban          Frac. Free Colored

Disenfranchised Before 1896                                                -0.299                 0.00527                 0.0843***                0.00820
                                                                           (0.395)                (0.0179)                 (0.0153)               (0.00773)
Pair FE                                                                       Y                       Y                        Y                      Y
N                                                                            478                     478                     478                     478



                                                                                              Geographic Variables

                                                (1)                          (2)                     (3)                     (4)                      (5)                 (6)
                                            Ruggedness                      River             Cotton Suitability          Longitude                Latitude            Log Area

Disenfranchised Before 1896                    6.035                      -0.0135                 -0.0107                2687.0                    7443.3                -0.344
                                              (5.457)                    (0.0430)                (0.0132)               (5860.7)                 (10699.0)              (0.239)
Pair FE                                          Y                           Y                       Y                     Y                          Y                     Y
N                                               478                         478                     478                   478                       478                   478
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors multidimensionally clustered on border segment and state. Independent variable is a binary variable indicating if a county
was disenfranchised prior to 1896.
                           Table 3:Effect of Disenfranchisement on Turnout and Political Competition
                                                  Log(Total Votes Cast)                                      Log(Fraction Democrat)
Panel A: Balanced Sample                   (1)               (2)            (3)                         (4)              (5)          (6)
                                       Presidential       Congress        Governor                  Presidential     Congress       Governor

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                -0.122**          -0.153**        -0.216**                   0.00624**        0.0141**        0.0585*
                                        (0.0296)          (0.0376)        (0.0559)                   (0.00189)        (0.00405)       (0.0280)

Log(Population)                          0.494**           0.405**        0.272**                     -0.0271*         -0.0375*        0.0232
                                         (0.0788)          (0.108)        (0.103)                     (0.0109)         (0.0165)       (0.0169)

Sample Counties                           Border            Border         Border                      Border           Border         Border
Years                                    Census            Census         Census                      Census           Census         Census
1860 Controls                            Baseline          Baseline       Baseline                    Baseline         Baseline       Baseline
Pair-Year FE                                 Y                 Y              Y                           Y                Y              Y
County FE                                    Y                 Y              Y                           Y                Y              Y
N                                          3370              3175           3303                        3370             3175           3303


Panel B: Balanced Sample                   (1)              (2)             (3)                         (4)              (5)            (6)
                                       Presidential       Congress        Governor                  Presidential       Congress       Governor

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                -0.0810**         -0.108**        -0.197**                   0.00586**        0.0130**        0.0751*
                                         (0.0160)         (0.0206)        (0.0556)                   (0.00181)        (0.00288)       (0.0291)

Log(Population)                          0.479**           0.409**        0.256**                    -0.0317**        -0.0450**       0.0472**
                                         (0.0791)          (0.0967)       (0.0916)                   (0.00829)         (0.0120)       (0.0140)
Sample Counties                           Border            Border         Border                      Border           Border         Border
Years                                     Census            Census         Census                      Census           Census         Census
1860 Controls                               All               All            All                         All              All            All
Pair-Year FE                                 Y                 Y              Y                          Y                 Y              Y
County FE                                    Y                 Y              Y                          Y                 Y              Y

N                                            3370              3175          3303                       3370             3175              3303
Notes: + p<0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state. Baseline 1860 controls
are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the
dependent variables in Table 2.
                  Table 4a: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Black Teachers/Pupils
                                                                          Black
Panel A: Balanced Sample                 (1)                     (2)                   (3)               (4)
                                 Log(Teacher/ Child)        Teacher/Child         Teacher/Pupil      Pupil/Child


Poll Tax + Literacy Test              -0.232***              -0.000948*           -0.00381***         -0.0194
                                       (0.0744)              (0.000484)             (0.00136)         (0.0140)

Log(Population)                        -0.168                 -0.00168              0.000523          -0.0350
                                       (0.222)                (0.00199)             (0.00360)         (0.0271)

Sample Counties                         Border                  Border               Border            Border
Years                                   Census                 Census                Census           Census
1860 Controls                          Baseline                Baseline             Baseline          Baseline
Pair-Year FE                              Y                       Y                    Y                 Y
County FE                                 Y                       Y                    Y                 Y

N                                       3370                    3370                  3086              3086

                                                                          Black
Panel B: Balanced Sample                 (1)                     (2)                   (3)               (4)
                                 Log(Teacher/ Child)        Teacher/Child         Teacher/Pupil      Pupil/Child


Poll Tax + Literacy Test               -0.222*               -0.000864             -0.00331**         -0.00295
                                       (0.123)               (0.000538)             (0.00137)         (0.0169)

Log(Population)                        -0.371*                -0.00353             -0.00512*          -0.0240
                                       (0.215)                (0.00248)            (0.00279)          (0.0258)

Sample Counties                        Border                  Border                Border            Border
Years                                  Census                  Census                Census            Census
1860 Controls                            All                     All                   All               All
Pair-Year FE                             Y                       Y                     Y                 Y
County FE                                Y                       Y                     Y                 Y

N                                        3370                   3370                  3086               3086
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year
and state. Log(Teacher/Child) is calculated as Log(Teacher/Child+k), where k is chosen so as to minimize the
skewness in the resulting variable. Baseline 1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log
1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table
2.
                  Table 4b: Effect of Disenfranchisement on White Teachers/Pupils
                                                                        White
Panel A: Balanced Sample                 (1)                     (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                 Log(Teacher/ Child)        Teacher/Child       Teacher/Pupil        Pupil/Child


Poll Tax + Literacy Test               -0.0232               -0.000173           -0.00331**           0.0301*
                                       (0.0342)              (0.000822)           (0.00143)           (0.0171)

Log(Population)                         0.0697                0.000632             0.00466             0.0214
                                       (0.0498)               (0.00142)           (0.00558)           (0.0198)

Sample Counties                         Border                  Border             Border              Border
Years                                   Census                 Census              Census             Census
1860 Controls                          Baseline                Baseline           Baseline            Baseline
Pair-Year FE                              Y                       Y                  Y                   Y
County FE                                 Y                       Y                  Y                   Y

N                                       3370                    3370                3281                3367

                                                                        White
Panel B: Balanced Sample                 (1)                     (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                 Log(Teacher/ Child)        Teacher/Child       Teacher/Pupil        Pupil/Child


Poll Tax + Literacy Test               -0.0430               -0.000466           -0.00438**           0.0373*
                                       (0.0333)              (0.000877)           (0.00187)           (0.0194)

Log(Population)                       -0.0840*               -0.00348**            0.00740            0.0274*
                                      (0.0506)                (0.00141)           (0.00629)           (0.0159)

Sample Counties                        Border                  Border              Border              Border
Years                                  Census                  Census              Census              Census
1860 Controls                            All                     All                 All                 All
Pair-Year FE                             Y                       Y                   Y                   Y
County FE                                Y                       Y                   Y                   Y

N                                        3370                   3370                  3281               3367
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year
and state. Log(Teacher/Child) is calculated as Log(Teacher/Child+k), where k is chosen so as to minimize the
skewness in the resulting variable. Baseline 1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log
1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table
2.
                                                        Table 5: Effect of Disenfranchisement on Land and Labor

Panel A: Balanced Sample                 (1)             (2)                  (3)                                (5)                  (6)                   (7)
                                   Log(Farm Value) Log(Value/Acre)      Log(Output/Acre)                 Log(Fraction Black)     Log(White Pop)       Log(Black Pop)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test              0.0793***          0.0325**             0.0149                        -0.00430***            0.0111***           -0.0418***
                                       (0.0171)          (0.0151)            (0.0124)                        (0.000995)            (0.00409)             (0.0154)

Log(Population)                       1.022***           0.607***            0.562***                          0.00879              0.963***            1.120***
                                      (0.0599)           (0.0423)            (0.0475)                         (0.00755)             (0.0296)            (0.0509)

Sample Counties                         Border            Border              Border                           Border                Border               Border
Years                                  Census            Census              Census                           Census                Census               Census
1860 Controls                          Baseline          Baseline            Baseline                         Baseline              Baseline             Baseline
Pair-Year FE                              Y                 Y                   Y                                Y                     Y                    Y
County FE                                 Y                 Y                   Y                                Y                     Y                    Y

N                                        3370              3370                3370                             3370                  3370                 3370


Panel B: Balanced Sample                 (1)             (2)                  (3)                                (5)                  (6)                   (7)
                                   Log(Farm Value) Log(Value/Acre)      Log(Output/Acre)                 Log(Fraction Black)     Log(White Pop)       Log(Black Pop)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test              0.0802***          0.0358**           0.0189**                          -0.00143*              0.00223           -0.0328***
                                       (0.0207)          (0.0151)           (0.00954)                        (0.000750)             (0.00337)            (0.0125)

Log(Population)                       0.925***           0.564***            0.556***                        -0.000503              0.982***            1.092***
                                      (0.0686)           (0.0340)            (0.0636)                        (0.00745)              (0.0259)            (0.0636)

Sample Counties                         Border            Border              Border                           Border                Border               Border
Years                                   Census            Census              Census                           Census                Census               Census
1860 Controls                             All               All                 All                              All                   All                  All
Pair-Year FE                              Y                 Y                   Y                                Y                     Y                    Y
County FE                                 Y                 Y                   Y                                Y                     Y                    Y

N                                         3370             3370                3370                              3370                  3370                 3370
Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state.Baseline 1860 controls are year specific
effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table 2.
                                                     Table 6: Robustness To Alternative Specifications
                                                  Political Variables                         Log(Teacher Child Ratios)                          Factor Markets
                                              (1)                     (2)                     (3)                  (4)                        (5)               (6)
Panel A: No Controls                   Log(Pres. Turnout)       Log(Frac. Dem)               Black               White                  Log(Value/Acre) Log(Frac. Black)
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                   -0.178***             0.00985***               -0.305***             -0.0263                   0.0424***        -0.00415***
                                            (0.0349)              (0.00345)                (0.0506)             (0.0333)                   (0.0143)          (0.00154)

1860 Controls                                None                       None                 None                 None                       None              None
N                                            3370                       3370                 3370                 3370                       3370              3370

Panel B: Population Only               Log(Pres. Turnout)       Log(Frac. Dem)               Black               White                  Log(Value/Acre)   Log(Frac. Black)
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                   -0.183***             0.0102***                -0.303***             -0.0273                   0.0375***        -0.00424***
                                            (0.0309)             (0.00321)                 (0.0504)             (0.0329)                   (0.0140)          (0.00146)

Log (Population)                           0.639***              -0.0406***                 -0.233              0.122**                    0.593***          0.0114
                                           (0.0614)                (0.0109)                 (0.186)             (0.0532)                   (0.0412)         (0.00926)
1860 Controls                                None                       None                 None                 None                       None              None
N                                            3370                       3370                 3370                 3370                       3370              3370

Panel C: Agricultural Controls         Log(Pres. Turnout)       Log(Frac. Dem)               Black               White                  Log(Value/Acre)   Log(Frac. Black)
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                   -0.103***             0.00546***               -0.245***             -0.0212                    0.0333**        -0.00348***
                                            (0.0262)              (0.00150)                (0.0897)             (0.0362)                   (0.0167)         (0.000913)

Log (Population)                           0.492***              -0.0288***                 -0.154               0.0912                    0.561***          -0.00183
                                           (0.0651)               (0.00895)                 (0.210)             (0.0584)                   (0.0474)         (0.00817)
1860 controls                              Agriculture            Agriculture             Agriculture          Agriculture                 Agriculture      Agriculture
N                                            3370                       3370                 3370                 3370                       3370              3370

Panel D: Demographic Controls          Log(Pres. Turnout)       Log(Frac. Dem)               Black               White                  Log(Value/Acre)   Log(Frac. Black)
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                   -0.106***             0.00775***               -0.259***             -0.0260                    0.0400**        -0.00305***
                                            (0.0214)              (0.00199)                (0.0639)             (0.0221)                   (0.0177)         (0.000596)

Log (Population)                           0.460***              -0.0314***                 -0.402*              0.0577                    0.606***          0.00885
                                           (0.0874)                (0.0104)                 (0.228)             (0.0669)                   (0.0380)         (0.00919)
1860 controls                             Demographic           Demographic              Demographic          Demographic                 Demographic      Demographic
N                                            3370                       3370                 3370                 3370                       3370              3370

Panel E: Geographic Controls           Log(Pres. Turnout)       Log(Frac. Dem)               Black               White                  Log(Value/Acre)   Log(Frac. Black)
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                   -0.128***             0.00889***               -0.328***            -0.0685**                   0.0309**         -0.00246*
                                            (0.0182)              (0.00209)                (0.0876)             (0.0271)                   (0.0137)         (0.00135)

Log (Population)                           0.711***              -0.0419***                 -0.218              0.0792*                    0.581***          0.00932
                                           (0.0664)                (0.0110)                 (0.160)             (0.0459)                   (0.0389)         (0.00774)
1860 Controls                              Geographic            Geographic               Geographic           Geographic                 Geographic        Geographic
N                                            3370                       3370                 3370                 3370                       3370              3370

Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All specifications control for log population. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and
state. All 1860 controls are all the dependent variables in Table 2. Panel A runs the main specification with no controls. Panel B include only log of population as a
control. Panel C includes the log of population and the year-specific effects of the 1860 agricultural variables from Table 2. Panel D includes the log of population and
the year-specific effects of the 1860 population variables from Table 2. Panel E includes the log of population and the year-specific effects of the 1860 geographic
variables from Table 2.
                                                   Table 7: Robustness To Alternative Samples
                                                    Political Variables                  Log Teacher-Child Ratios                      Factor Markets
                                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)           (4)                        (5)                (6)
                                            Log(Pres. Turnout) Log(Frac. Dem)            Black        White                 Log(Land Val/Acre) Log(Frac. Black)
Panel A: Unbalanced
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                       -0.0989***        0.00449**              -0.215*       -0.0350                   0.0304**           -0.00178**
                                                 (0.0186)        (0.00176)              (0.119)       (0.0308)                  (0.0147)           (0.000746)
1860 Controls                                       All              All                   All           All                       All                 All
N                                                  3780             3780                 3672           3787                      3791                3791

Panel B: Balanced on Black Teacher-Child
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                       -0.0888***        0.00671***            -0.214**       -0.0339                   0.0367**           -0.00227**
                                                 (0.0193)         (0.00173)             (0.105)       (0.0405)                  (0.0158)           (0.000951)
1860 Controls                                       All               All                 All            All                       All                 All
N                                                  2724             2724                 2724           2724                      2724                2724

Panel C: 1920 borders
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                        -0.0543**        0.00460**              -0.229*        0.0100                  0.0378***            -0.00155*
                                                 (0.0266)        (0.00211)              (0.137)       (0.0205)                  (0.0145)           (0.000835)
1860 Controls                                       All              All                   All           All                       All                  All
N                                                  3192             3192                 3192           3192                      3192                 3192

Panel D: Full County-Year Panel Sample
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                        -0.152***        0.00812**             -0.347**       -0.0472                     0.0155            0.00348
                                                 (0.0485)        (0.00320)              (0.114)       (0.0467)                   (0.0313)          (0.00452)
1860 Controls                                       All              All                  All            All                        All                All
N                                                  5526             5526                 5526           5526                       5526              5526

Panel E: Within State Placebo
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                         -0.0310           0.00453              -0.0410      -0.00956                     0.0308            0.00187
                                                 (0.0173)         (0.00268)             (0.0668)     (0.0467)                    (0.0267)          (0.00333)
1860 Controls                                       All               All                  All          All                         All                All
N                                                  2764              2764                 2764         2764                        2764               2764



Notes: *p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All specifications control for log population. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X
year and state. All 1860 controls are all the dependent variables in Table 2. Panel A uses all counties in the sample with data. Panel B looks only at those
counties that have non-missing variables in every year. Panel C uses the 1920 county borders to match county-pairs instead of 1870. Panel D uses the
full set of Southern counties, controlling for county and year fixed effects, as well as year specific effects of all the 1860 variables from Table 2. Panel E is
an interior county placebo, which matches border counties to the adjacent counties in the same state and estimates the main specification.
                                                                 Table 8: Robustness To Alternative Disenfranchisement Definitions
                                                                   Political Variables                   Log (Teacher-Child Ratios)                      Factor Markets
                                                                 (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)                      (5)                (6)
                                                          Log(Pres. Turnout) Log(Frac. Dem)               Black            White              Log(Land Val/Acre) Log(Frac. Black)
Panel A: Separate Laws
Poll Tax                                                     -0.156***        0.00572**                   -0.159          0.0239                  0.0452**          -0.00288**
                                                              (0.0379)        (0.00253)                  (0.217)         (0.0716)                 (0.0222)           (0.00145)

Literacy Test                                                 0.00892         0.00611***               -0.299***        -0.125**                    0.0250           0.000262
                                                              (0.0508)         (0.00236)                 (0.114)        (0.0525)                   (0.0355)          (0.00265)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                                     -0.147***        0.0118***                 -0.458**         -0.101                   0.0702**           -0.00262
                                                               0.0343          0.00358                    0.240          0.0616                    0.0326             0.00168

Controls                                                         All              All                      All              All                       All                All

N                                                               3370             3370                     3370            3370                      3370               3370

Panel B: Number of Laws
Either Poll Tax or Literacy Test                              -0.00616          0.00156                   -0.323          0.0259                  -0.00973           -0.00306*
                                                              (0.0673)         (0.00317)                 (0.213)         (0.0843)                 (0.0320)           (0.00176)

Both Poll Tax and Literacy Test                              -0.161***        0.0117***                  -0.446*          -0.0860                 0.0715**          -0.00294**
                                                              (0.0386)        (0.00357)                  (0.240)         (0.0699)                 (0.0308)           (0.00143)

Controls                                                         All              All                      All              All                       All                All

N                                                               3370             3370                     3370            3370                      3370               3370

Panel C: Alternative Laws
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                                     -0.143***         0.00579*                  -0.151           -0.0493                 0.0402**          -0.00479***
                                                              (0.0486)         (0.00325)                (0.0976)         (0.0596)                 (0.0196)           (0.000908)

Secret Ballot                                                  -0.0949          -0.00890               -0.838***         0.00308                    -0.0228          -0.000803
                                                              (0.0674)         (0.00748)                 (0.101)         (0.0666)                  (0.0309)          (0.00207)

Property Requirement                                            0.132          0.00615                   0.0634           0.107                     -0.0213           0.00240
                                                               (0.132)         (0.0102)                  (0.223)         (0.139)                   (0.0481)          (0.00364)

Controls                                                      Baseline         Baseline                 Baseline         Baseline                  Baseline           Baseline

N                                                               3370             3370                     3370            3370                      3370               3370

Panel D: Lagged Black Population Interaction
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                                     -0.112***        0.00591***               -0.237***          -0.0174                  0.0301*          -0.00372***
                                                              (0.0329)         (0.00172)                (0.0747)         (0.0342)                  (0.0157)           (0.00104)

Log Black Population(t-10)                                     0.0419           0.00343                  0.118            0.0624                    -0.0398          0.0168***
                                                              (0.0364)         (0.00335)                (0.0954)         (0.0396)                  (0.0272)          (0.00450)

(Poll Tax + Literacy Test) X Log Black Population(t-10)     -0.0556***         0.000619                 -0.0646           -0.0435                  0.00474          -0.00280***
                                                              (0.0168)         (0.00136)                (0.0478)         (0.0345)                 (0.00753)           (0.00104)

Controls                                                      Baseline         Baseline                 Baseline         Baseline                  Baseline           Baseline

N                                                               3248             3248                       3248            3248                     3248              3248
Notes: *p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All specifications control for log population. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state.Baseline
1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in
Table 2.
                                                                                            Table 9: Spillover/General Equilibrium Effects
                                                                               Political Variables                                         Log (Teacher-Child Ratios)                                      Factor Markets
                                                                     (1)                                   (2)                           (3)                         (4)                     (5)                            (6)
                                                              Log(Pres. Turnout)                     Log(Frac. Dem)                     Black                      White              Log(Land Val/Acre)              Log(Frac. Black)
Panel A: Interior County Control
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                             -0.128***           -0.0965***         0.00678***       0.00621***     -0.237***       -0.257*** -0.0118       -0.0253         0.0300*** 0.0367** -0.00418***             -0.00262***
                                                     (0.0305)            (0.0202)           (0.00207)        (0.00169)      (0.0605)        (0.0908) (0.0387)       (0.0326)        (0.0116) (0.0150) (0.00104)                (0.000779)

Log (Population)                                     0.573***            -0.0371***         0.00423          0.0761*        0.542***        0.0232*** 0.526*** -0.0336***           -0.186     -0.142*** 0.517***              0.0138**
                                                     (0.0589)            (0.00844)          (0.143)          (0.0460)       (0.0349)        (0.00704) (0.0487) (0.00757)            (0.130)    (0.0474) (0.0336)               (0.00576)

Controls                                             Baseline            All                Baseline         All            Baseline        All         Baseline All                Baseline   All           Baseline          All

N                                                    13816               13816              13816            13816          13816           13816       13816       13816           13816      13816         13816             13816

N                                                    3370                3370               3370             3370           3370            3370        3370        3370            3370       3370          3370              3370

Panel B: Distance Interaction
Poll Tax + Literacy Test                             -0.0812***          -0.121***          0.00585***       0.00606***     -0.223*         -0.234*** -0.0434       -0.0225         0.0359** 0.0319** -0.00147**               -0.00430***
                                                     (0.0161)            (0.0300)           (0.00168)        (0.00161)      (0.119)         (0.0732) (0.0327)       (0.0344)        (0.0154) (0.0154) (0.000721)               (0.00100)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test X Centroid Distance (km)    0.0147              -0.960             0.249***         0.355***       5.09            3.96        -0.141      -1.31           .767       1.16*         0.0962*           -0.000857
                                                     (0.00106)           (1.18)             (0.0622)         (0.0972)       (3.24)          (3.53)      (0.885)     (1.13)          (0.593)    (0.700)       (0.0540)          (0.0563)

Log (Population)

Controls                                             Baseline            All                Baseline         All            Baseline        All         Baseline All                Baseline   All           Baseline          All

N                                                    3370                3370               3370             3370           3370            3370        3370        3370            3370       3370          3370              3370

Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All specifications control for log population. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state.Baseline 1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860
fraction urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table 2. Interactions with Centroid Distance are multiplied by 1000 to save space.
                                                               Table A1: Education from Different Samples

                                                                                                              Census Data
                                                                           Black                                                                      White
                                                    Teacher/Child                        Teacher/Pupil                           Teacher/Child                     Teacher/Pupil

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                      -0.00160*        -0.00129*           -0.00340*      -0.00213               0.000975          0.000571           -0.00330      -0.00900
                                             (0.000678)       (0.000533)           (0.00163)      (0.00152)             (0.000644)        (0.000811)          (0.00427)     (0.00675)

Log(Population)                               0.00178         -0.000999             0.0124*        0.00258                  -0.000546     -0.00152             0.00698       -0.00368
                                             (0.00227)        (0.00276)            (0.00578)      (0.00444)                 (0.00211)     (0.00187)           (0.00539)      (0.0101)

Sample Counties                                Border           Border               Border         Border                   Border         Border             Border         Border
Years                                          Census           Census               Census         Census                   Census         Census             Census         Census
1860 Controls                                 Baseline            All               Baseline          All                   Baseline          All             Baseline          All
Pair-Year FE                                     Y                Y                    Y              Y                        Y              Y                  Y              Y
County FE                                        Y                Y                    Y              Y                        Y              Y                  Y              Y

N                                               3348             3348                2995            2995                 3370               3370               3274           3274
                                                                                                         State Report Data
                                                                           Black                                                                      White
                                                    Teacher/Child                        Teacher/Pupil                           Teacher/Child                     Teacher/Pupil

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                      0.00118         -0.000126            -0.00389**     -0.00425**                0.000615        0.00129        -0.00230*        -0.00154
                                             (0.00158)        (0.00156)            (0.000842)      (0.00114)                (0.00150)     (0.000958)      (0.000930)        (0.00169)

Log(Population)                              -0.00267          0.00200             -0.00994**     -0.0128**                 -0.00791      -0.00146             0.00108       0.0238+
                                             (0.00383)        (0.00435)             (0.00192)     (0.00317)                 (0.00546)     (0.00458)           (0.00585)      (0.0122)

Sample Counties                                Border           Border               Border         Border                   Border         Border             Border         Border
Years                                          Census           Census               Census         Census                   Census         Census             Census         Census
1860 Controls                                 Baseline            All               Baseline          All                   Baseline          All             Baseline          All
Pair-Year FE                                     Y                Y                    Y              Y                        Y              Y                  Y              Y
County FE                                        Y                Y                    Y              Y                        Y              Y                  Y              Y

N                                               1410            1410              1662           1662                   1412            1412              1641               1641
Notes: + p<0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state.Baseline 1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban,
log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table 2.
                                                                      Table A2: Other Outcome Variables
                                                                                               Political Variables
                                                 Hirano-Snyder Congress Data                                               Lynchings (1880-on only)
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)                        (5)              (6)                 (7)                (8)
Panel A:                                   Log(Turnout)            Log(Frac. Democrat)                        Black Lynchings                    Black Lynchings >0

Poll Tax + Literacy Test              -0.205**       -0.128**    0.0657**     0.0582**                     0.0751          0.220**            -0.00502           0.00290
                                      (0.0370)       (0.0409)    (0.00675)    (0.00995)                   (0.0784)         (0.0734)           (0.0146)           (0.0197)

Log(Population)                         0.374        0.524**     -0.0379      -0.0839**                   0.0975+           0.0992            0.0539*            0.130**
                                       (0.268)       (0.181)     (0.0269)      (0.0247)                   (0.0580)         (0.0836)           (0.0253)           (0.0429)

1860 Controls                         Baseline         All       Baseline         All                        All           Baseline              All             Baseline
Pair-Year FE                             Y             Y            Y             Y                          Y                Y                  Y                  Y
County FE                                Y             Y            Y             Y                          Y                Y                  Y                  Y

N                                       2436          2436         2436          2436                      1688              1688               1688               1688
                                                                                           Agricultural and Population Variables

                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)               (7)                (8)                (9)          (10)
Panel B:                              Log(Equip. Value/ Acre)        Log(Farm Size)            Frac. Imp. Acreage                   Log(Farmland)                    Log(Urban Pop.)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test               0.0152*       0.0144*     -0.0221      -0.0331**     0.00388      0.00414+          0.0444**           0.0382**           0.0175        -0.0909
                                      (0.00725)     (0.00657)    (0.0156)      (0.0114)    (0.00333)     (0.00240)         (0.0113)           (0.0112)           (0.132)       (0.0808)

Log(Population)                       0.206**        0.210**     -0.306**      -0.280**    0.108**        0.108**          0.345**            0.304**            4.348**        4.666**
                                      (0.0275)       (0.0273)    (0.0637)      (0.0567)    (0.0174)       (0.0160)         (0.0508)           (0.0647)           (0.512)        (0.411)

1860 Controls                         Baseline         All       Baseline         All      Baseline          All           Baseline              All             Baseline         All
Pair-Year FE                             Y             Y            Y             Y           Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y             Y
County FE                                Y             Y            Y             Y           Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y             Y

N                                        3370         3370         3370          3370        3370         3370              3370               3370                3370          3370
Notes: + p<0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-segment X year and state.Baseline 1860 controls are year specific effects of log 1860 fraction
urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and log 1860 farm acreage. All 1860 controls include all the dependent variables in Table 2.
                                     Table A3: Heterogeneity by Institutional Characteristics
Panel A: Elections                                     Log(Total Votes)                                  Log(Fraction Democrat)
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                 -0.125*** -0.136*** -0.128*** -0.120***           0.00648*** 0.00856*** 0.00670*** 0.00592***
                                          (0.0358) (0.0291) (0.0288) (0.0312)               (0.00179) (0.00201) (0.00151) (0.00191)

       X Log( Fraction 1860 Slave)       -0.107***                                         0.00823***
                                          (0.0235)                                          (0.00129)

              X Mississippi                          -0.162***                                            0.0274***
                                                      (0.0196)                                            (0.00391)

          X Cotton Suitability                                   -0.175***                                            0.0142***
                                                                  (0.0561)                                            (0.00463)

              X Plantation                                                   -0.0266                                                 0.00364
                                                                             (0.0322)                                               (0.00300)

N                                           3370       3370        3370       3370             3370         3370         3370         3370


                                                   Log(Black Teacher/Child)                              Log(White Teacher/Child)
Panel B:Public Goods                         (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)                 (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                 -0.232*** -0.195** -0.243*** -0.238***              -0.0238        0.0145     -0.0332      -0.0136
                                          (0.0719) (0.0763) (0.0765) (0.0758)                (0.0350)      (0.0323)    (0.0371)     (0.0307)

       X Log( Fraction 1860 Slave)         0.0228                                            -0.0195
                                          (0.0932)                                           (0.0446)

              X Mississippi                          0.436***                                             0.445***
                                                     (0.0742)                                             (0.0279)

          X Cotton Suitability                                   -0.327***                                             -0.307***
                                                                   (0.120)                                              (0.0540)

              X Plantation                                                   0.0623*                                                -0.109***
                                                                             (0.0366)                                                (0.0375)

N                                           3370       3370        3370       3370             3370         3370         3370         3370




Panel C: Factor Markets                              Log(Land Value/Acre)                                   Log(Fraction Black)
                                             (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)

Poll Tax + Literacy Test                  0.0329** 0.0410*** 0.0342** 0.0289*              -0.00448*** -0.00405*** -0.00463*** -0.00368***
                                          (0.0157) (0.0147) (0.0147) (0.0164)                (0.00147) (0.00103) (0.00112) (0.000841)

       X Log( Fraction 1860 Slave)         0.0119                                          -0.00591***
                                          (0.0113)                                           (0.00179)

           X Log( Mississippi)                       0.0998***                                             0.00299
                                                      (0.0191)                                            (0.00194)

          X Cotton Suitability                                   0.0527**                                              -0.00988
                                                                 (0.0224)                                              (0.00661)

              X Plantation                                                   0.0411**                                               -0.00714*
                                                                             (0.0174)                                               (0.00385)

N                                            3370       3370       3370       3370              3370          3370        3370         3370
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All specifications control for log population. Standard errors multi-dimensionally clustered on border-
segment X year and state. Baseline 1860 controls included: year specific effects of log 1860 fraction urban, log 1860 improved acreage, and
log 1860 farm acreage.
                             Table A4:Linked 1870-1880 Individual Summary Statistics
                                                Panel A: Full Sample
                                                           White                              Black
Variable                                         Obs       Mean         Std.           Obs    Mean      Std.

Migrate Between 1870-1800 Dummy                 21396       0.37        0.48       18095       0.43     0.49
% Change County Agricultural Output             21396      -0.17        0.46       18095      -0.21     0.41
% Change County Black Teachers                  21396       0.74        1.47       18095       1.00     1.64
% Change County Land Values                     21396       0.28        0.58       18095       0.16     0.52
% Change County Population                      21396       0.27        0.22       18095       0.22     0.18

Age                                             21396     16.53        14.17       18095      15.80    14.18
Age-squared                                     21396     474.12       631.50      18095      450.64   626.37
Urban                                           21396      0.10         0.30       18095       0.07     0.26
Literate                                        21396      0.53         0.50       18095       0.12     0.33


                                           Panel B: Border County Sample
                                                           White                              Black
Variable                                         Obs       Mean         Std.           Obs    Mean      Std.

Migrate Between 1870-1800 Dummy                  2415       0.38        0.49           1895    0.44     0.50
% Change County Agricultural Output              2415      -0.15        0.41           1895   -0.16     0.42
% Change County Black Teachers                   2415       0.89        1.40           1895    1.12     1.50
% Change County Land Values                      2415       0.37        0.54           1895   0.24      0.56
% Change County Population                       2415       0.28        0.16           1895    0.26     0.16

Age                                              2415     16.38        14.00           1895   15.76    14.17
Age-squared                                      2415     464.00       620.00          1895   449.07   622.70
Urban                                            2415      0.05         0.22           1895    0.06     0.24
Literate                                         2415      0.50         0.50           1895    0.11     0.31
                                            Table A5: 1870-1880 Migration-Income Results

                                                               Dependent Variable is County 1870-1880 Out-Migration Dummy
                                                                Blacks                                              Whites
                                                  All South            Border Counties                 All South            Border Counties
% Change County Agricultural Output        -0.124** -0.111** -0.184*** -0.224**                   0.0369      0.0337      0.0857      0.0732
                                           (0.0693)     (0.0571)    (0.0817)   (0.0889)          (0.0460)    (0.0406)    (0.0916)    (0.0854)

% Change County Black Teachers            -0.0142**     -0.0129     0.00577      0.00864            0.00406      0.00418      -0.0127     -0.00694
                                          (0.00858)    (0.00802)    (0.0200)     (0.0202)           (0.0104)    (0.00948)     (0.0283)    (0.0251)

% Change County Land Values                 -0.0119     -0.00987     -0.114*      -0.0904            -0.0323      -0.0294      -0.0381      -0.0289
                                           (0.0315)     (0.0307)    (0.0659)     (0.0724)           (0.0419)     (0.0362)     (0.0695)     (0.0703)

% Change County Population                  0.0355      0.0159        0.162        0.226             0.0292      -0.00543    -0.439*** -0.436***
                                            (0.113)     (0.106)      (0.243)      (0.248)            (0.181)      (0.151)      (0.210)   (0.207)

Age                                                   -0.0133***                -0.0137***                      -0.0147***                -0.0160**
                                                       (0.00329)                 (0.00512)                       (0.00373)                (0.00719)

Age-squared                                           0.000238***              0.000269***                     0.000248***               0.000290**
                                                      (0.0000574)              (0.0000956)                     (0.0000646)               (0.000122)

Urban                                                    -0.0313                 0.222**                         -0.0398                   -0.0143
                                                        (0.0483)                 (0.100)                         (0.0589)                  (0.109)

Literate                                                 0.0226                   -0.0422                        0.00372                    -0.0524
                                                        (0.0228)                 (0.0547)                        (0.0180)                  (0.0463)
Sample
N                                           18095       18095         1895        1895                 21396         21396         2415       2415
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Data is individual level data from the linked IPUMS census
schedules from 1870-1880.
