NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DEEP ARE THE ROOTS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT?
Enrico Spolaore
Romain Wacziarg
Working Paper 18130
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18130

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18130.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?
Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 18130
June 2012
JEL No. N10,O1,O33,O4,O5,O57
ABSTRACT
The empirical literature on economic growth and development has moved from the study of proximate
determinants to the analysis of ever deeper, more fundamental factors, rooted in long-term history.
A growing body of new empirical work focuses on the measurement and estimation of the effects
of historical variables on contemporary income by explicitly taking into account the ancestral composition
of current populations. The evidence suggests that economic development is affected by traits that
have been transmitted across generations over the very long run. This article surveys this new literature
and provides a framework to discuss different channels through which intergenerationally transmitted
characteristics may impact economic development, biologically (via genetic or epigenetic transmission)
and culturally (via behavioral or symbolic transmission). An important issue is whether historically
transmitted traits have affected development through their direct impact on productivity, or have operated
indirectly as barriers to the diffusion of productivity-enhancing innovations across populations.

Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall 315
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@ucla.edu

"The further backward you look, the further forward you can see" (attributed to Winston
Churchill).1

1

Introduction

Why is income per capita higher in some societies and much lower in others? Answers to this
perennial question have evolved over time. Decades ago, the emphasis was on the accumulation of
factors of production and exogenous technological progress. Later, the focus switched to policies and
incentives endogenously a¤ecting factor accumulation and innovation. More recently, the attention
has moved to the institutional framework underlying these policies and incentives. Pushing back
the debate one more degree, a key question remains as to why the proximate determinants of the
wealth of nations vary across countries. A burgeoning literature seeks to better understand the
deep causes of development, rooted in geography and history.
As the empirical literature has moved from studying the proximate determinants of growth and
development to analyzing ever deeper, more fundamental factors, important questions have arisen:
How much time persistence is there in development outcomes? How far back in time should we go
in order to understand contemporary economic development? Through what speci…c mechanisms
do long-term geographic and historical factors a¤ect outcomes today? If economic development
has deep historical roots, what is the scope for policy to a¤ect the wealth of nations? This article discusses the current state of knowledge on these issues, focusing on recent empirical work
shedding light on the complex interactions among geography, history, and comparative development. Throughout, we illustrate the major milestones of the recent literature in a uni…ed empirical
framework for understanding variation in economic development.
Our starting point is the long-standing debate on geography and development. There is no
doubt that geographic factors, such as latitude and climate, are highly correlated with development,
but the interpretation of this correlation remains hotly debated. While some of the e¤ects of
geography may operate directly on current productivity, there is mounting evidence that much of
the correlation operates through indirect mechanisms, i.e. through the historical e¤ects of initial
geographic conditions on the spatial distribution of human characteristics, such as institutions,
1

This is the usual form of the quote attributed to Winston Churchill - for instance, by Queen Elizabeth II in her

1999 Christmas Message. According to Richard Langworth (2008, p. 577), Churchill’s words were "the longer you
can look back, the farther you can look forward."

1

human capital, social capital and cultural traits, a¤ecting income and productivity over the long
run.2 We review the literature on the legacy of geographic conditions in Section 2.
A major theme emerging from the recent literature is that key human characteristics a¤ecting
development are transmitted from one generation to the next within populations over the long
run, explaining why deep historical factors still a¤ect outcomes today. A growing body of new
empirical work has focused on the measurement and estimation of long-term e¤ects of historical
variables on contemporary income by explicitly taking into account the ancestral composition of
current populations (Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg, 2009; Louis Putterman and David
Weil, 2010; Diego Comin, William Easterly and Erick Gong, 2010). We survey contributions to
this new literature in Section 3.
In Section 4 we provide a general taxonomy to discuss di¤erent channels through which inherited human characteristics may impact economic development. Our discussion builds on an
extensive evolutionary literature on the complex interactions among genetic, epigenetic, and cultural transmission mechanisms, and on the coevolution of biological and cultural traits (Luigi Luca
Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus W. Feldman, 1981; Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson, 1985; Richerson
and Boyd, 2005; Eva Jablonka and Marion J. Lamb, 2005), as well as on a growing literature on
cultural transmission and economic outcomes (e.g., Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier, 2000, 2001;
Alberto F. Alesina, Paola Giuliano and Nathan Nunn, 2011; Guido Tabellini, 2008). An important
issue is whether historically transmitted characteristics a¤ect economic development through their
direct impact on productivity, or operate indirectly as barriers to the di¤usion of technological and
institutional innovations across populations.

2

Geography and Development

2.1

Long-Term E¤ects of Geography

The hypothesis that geographic factors a¤ect productivity and economic development has a long
pedigree, going back to Niccolò Machiavelli (1531), Charles-Louis de Montesquieu (1748) and Alfred
Marshall (1890). A vast empirical literature has documented high correlations between current
levels of income per capita and a series of geographic and biological variables, such as climate and
2

For recent discussions of these issues from di¤erent perspectives see Oded Galor (2005, 2011) and Acemoglu,

Jonhson and Robinson (2005).

2

temperature (Gunnar Myrdal, 1968; Andrew M. Kamarck, 1976; William Masters and Margaret
McMillan, 2001; Je¤rey D. Sachs 2001), the disease environment (David E. Bloom and Sachs, 1998;
Sachs, Andrew D. Mellinger, and John L. Gallup, 2001; Sachs and Pia Malaney, 2002), natural
resources (Sachs and Andrew M. Warner, 2001), and transportation conditions (Jordan Rappaport
and Sachs, 2003).
In order to illustrate the main empirical …ndings of the contributions discussed herein, we punctuate this paper with our own empirical results based on a uni…ed dataset, regression methodology
and sample. This analysis is not meant to be an exhaustive recapitulation of existing results, but
simply to illustrate some important milestones in the recent literature. We use, alternately, log
per capita income in 2005 (from the Penn World Tables version 6.3) as a measure of contemporary
economic performance, and population density in 1500 (from Colin McEvedy and Richard Jones,
1978) as a measure of economic performance in 1500, and regress these on a variety of proposed
determinants of development, starting here with geographic factors.3
Table 1, column 1 shows that a small set of geographic variables (absolute latitude, the percentage of a country’s land area located in tropical climates, a landlocked country dummy, an island
country dummy) can jointly account for 44% of contemporary variation in log per capita income,
with quantitatively the largest e¤ect coming from absolute latitude (excluding latitude causes the
R2 to fall to 0:29). This result captures the ‡avor of the above-cited literature documenting a
strong correlation between geography and income per capita.
While the correlation between geography and development is well-established, the debate has
centered around causal mechanisms. A number of prominent economists, including Myrdal (1968),
Kamarck (1976), and Sachs and co-authors, argued that geographic factors have a direct, contemporaneous e¤ect on productivity and development. In particular, Sachs (2001) claims that economic
underdevelopment in tropical countries can be partly explained by the current negative e¤ects of
their location, which include two main ecological handicaps: low agricultural productivity and a
high burden of diseases. Tropical soils are depleted by heavy rainfall, and crops are attacked by
pests and parasites that thrive in hot climates without winter frosts (Master and McMillan, 2001).
3

As is well-known, in the pre-Industrial, Mathusian era population density is the appropriate measure of a society’s

economic performance since any technological improvement leads to increases in population rather than to increases
in per capita income. For a theoretical and empirical analysis of the relationship between population size, population
density and long-term growth in Malthusian times see Michael Kremer (1993). For in-depth discussions of this topic
see Galor (2005) and the recent contribution by Ashraf and Galor (2011).

3

Warm climates also favor the transmission of tropical diseases borne by insects and bacteria, with
major e¤ects on health and human capital. In sum, according to this line of research, geography
has direct current e¤ects on productivity and income per capita.
Other scholars, in contrast, claimed that geography a¤ects development indirectly through
historical channels, such as the e¤ects of prehistoric geographic and biological conditions on the
onset and spread of agriculture and domestication (Jared Diamond, 1997; Ola Olsson and Douglas
Hibbs, 2005), and the e¤ects of crops and germs on the settlement of European colonizers after
1500 (Stanley Engerman and Kenneth Sokolo¤, 1997 and 2002; Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson
and James Robinson, 2001, 2002; William Easterly and Ross Levine, 2003).
Jared Diamond (1997) famously argued that the roots of comparative development lie in a
series of environmental advantages enjoyed by the inhabitants of Eurasia at the transition from a
hunter-gather economy to agricultural and pastoral production, starting roughly in 10,000 BC (the
Neolithic Revolution). These advantages included the larger size of Eurasia, its initial biological
conditions (the diversity of animals and plants available for domestication in prehistoric times), and
its East-West orientation, which facilitated the spread of agricultural innovations. Building on these
geographic advantages, Eurasia experienced a population explosion and an earlier acceleration of
technological innovation, with long-term consequences for comparative development. According to
Diamond, the proximate determinants of European economic and political success ("guns, germs,
and steel") were therefore the outcomes of deeper geographic advantages that operated in prehistoric
times. The descendants of some Eurasian populations (Europeans), building on their Neolithic
advantage, were able to use their technological lead (guns and steel) and their immunity to oldworld diseases (germs) to dominate other regions in modern times - including regions that did not
enjoy the original geographic advantages of Eurasia.
In order to test Diamond’s hypotheses, Olsson and Hibbs (2005) provide an empirical analysis
of the relation between initial biogeographic endowments and contemporary levels of development.4
They use several geographic and biological variables: the size of continents, their major directional
axis (extent of East-West orientation), climatic factors, and initial biological conditions (the number
of animals and plants suitable to domestication and cultivation at each location 12,000 years ago).
We revisit their empirical results in columns 2 through 5 of Table 1. In order to reduce the e¤ect
of post-1500 population movements, the Olsson-Hibbs sample excludes the neo-European countries
4

See also Hibbs and Olsson (2004).

4

(Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States), as well as countries whose current income
is based primarily on extractive wealth. Column 2 replicates the estimates of column 1 using this
restricted sample - the joint explanatory power of geographic variables rises to 55%, since the new
sample excludes regions that are rich today as a result of the guns, germs and steel of colonizing
Europeans rather than purely geographic factors.
Columns 3-5 add the two main Olsson-Hibbs geographic variables, …rst separately and then
jointly: a summary measure of biological conditions and a summary measure of geographic conditions.5 Both geographic and biological conditions variables are highly signi…cant when entered
separately. When entered jointly, the geographic conditions variable remains highly signi…cant
and the overall explanatory power of the regressors remains large (52%). These empirical results
provide strong evidence in favor of Diamond’s hypotheses, while suggesting that the geographic
component of the story is empirically more relevant than the biological component. Column 6 goes
further in the attempt to control for the e¤ect of post-1500 population movements, by restricting
the sample to the Old World (de…ned as all countries minus the Americas and Oceania). The e¤ect
of geography now rises to 64% - again highly consistent with Diamond’s idea that biogeographic
conditions matter mostly in the Old World.6

2.2

The Legacy of the Neolithic Transition

The long-term e¤ects of geographic and biogeographic endowments also play a central role in the
analysis of Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor (2011). While their main goal is to test a central
5

These are the …rst principal components of the above-listed factors. Since latitude is a component of the geo-

graphic conditions index, we exclude our measure of latitude as a separate regressor in the regressions that include
geographic conditions.
6

Olsson and Hibbs also …nd that geographic variables continue to be positively and signi…cantly correlated with

income per capita when they control for measures of the political and institutional environment. They show that
such political and institutional measures are positively correlated with geographic and biogeographic conditions,
consistent with the idea that institutions could mediate the link between geography and development. As they
notice (p. 934), controlling for political-institutional variables raises well-known issues of endogeneity and reverse
causality (for instance, richer countries can have the resources and ability to build better institutions). They write:
"Researchers have struggled with the joint endogeneity issue, proposing various instrumental variables to obtain
consistent estimates of the proximate e¤ects of politics and institutions on economic performance, along with the
related question of how much in‡uence, if any, natural endowments exert on economic development independent of
institutional development. None of these attempts is entirely persuasive in our view." We return to these important
issues below.

5

tenet of Malthusian theory (that per capita income gains from technological improvements in the
pre-industrial era were largely dissipated through population growth), their approach leads them to
provide further evidence relating to Diamond’s hypotheses and the legacy of geography. Ashraf and
Galor demonstrate that the spread of agriculture (the Neolithic transition) was driven by geographic
conditions (climate, continental size and orientation) and biogeographic conditions (the availability
of domesticable plant and big mammal species). They empirically document how geographic factors
in‡uenced the timing of the agricultural transition. They also show that biogeographic variables,
consistent with Olsson and Hibbs (2005), are strongly correlated with population density in 1500,
but argue that the only way these variables matter for economic performance in pre-industrial times
is through their e¤ect on the timing of the adoption of agriculture. This paves the way to using
biogeographic factors as instruments for the timing of the Neolithic transition in a speci…cation
explaining population density in 1500.
Table 2 illustrates these …ndings in our uni…ed empirical setup. In column 1, we regressed the
number of years since the Neolithic transition (obtained from Chanda and Putterman, 2007) on
a set of geographic variables - i.e. this is the …rst stage regression.7 These geographic conditions
account for 70% of the variation in the date of adoption of agriculture, and most enter with a highly
signi…cant coe¢ cient. Column 2 shows the reduced form - again, geographic factors account for
44% of the variation in population density in 1500, consistent with the results of Table 1 for the
contemporary period.8
Ashraf and Galor (2011) argue that, while geographic factors may have continued to a¤ect economic development after the introduction of agriculture, the availability of prehistoric domesticable
wild plant and animal species did not in‡uence population density in the past two millenia other
than through the timing of the Neolithic transition. Therefore, they use these variables, obtained
from the Olsson and Hibbs (2005) dataset, as instruments to estimate the e¤ect of the timing of
7

For comparability we use the same set of variables as above, except instead of the Olsson-Hibbs summary indices

of geographic and biological conditions, we directly include the number of annual or perennial wild grasses and the
number of domesticable big mammals, so as to maintain consistency with Ashraf and Galor (2011).
8

Interestingly, the e¤ect of latitude is negative. Ashraf and Galor (2011) indeed observe that: "in contrast to

the positive relationship between absolute latitude and contemporary income per capita, population density in preindustrial times was on average higher at latitudinal bands closer to the equator". Thus, the e¤ects of geographic
factors have varied over di¤erent periods of technological development, in line with the idea that the e¤ects of
geography on development are indirect.

6

the Neolithic transition on population density. The results of column 3 (OLS) and column 4 (IV)
of Table 2 illustrate their …ndings: years since the agricultural transition has a strong, statistically
signi…cant positive e¤ect on population density in 1500. Interestingly, the IV e¤ect is quantitatively
larger than the OLS estimate.9 The magnitude of the e¤ect is large, as a one standard deviation
change in years of agriculture is associated with 63% of a standard deviation change in log population density in 1500 (OLS). The corresponding standardized beta coe¢ cient using IV is 88%. All
the other regressors feature much smaller standardized e¤ects.
In addition to providing strong support in favor of the Malthusian view that technological
improvements impact population density but not per capita income in pre-industrial societies,
the results in Ashraf and Galor (2011), as summarized in Table 2, add an important quali…er to
the Olsson and Hibbs (2005) results. They show, not only that an earlier onset of the Neolithic
transition contributed to the level of technological sophistication in the pre-industrial world, but
also that the e¤ect of Diamond’s biogeographic factors may well operate through the legacy of an
early exposure to agriculture.

2.3

Reversal of Fortune and the Role of Institutions

Diamond’s book as well as the empirical work by Olsson and Hibbs and Ashraf and Galor suggest an
important role for geography and biogeography in the onset and di¤usion of economic development
over the past millennia. However, these analyses leave open the question of whether the e¤ects
of geography operate only through their historical legacy, or also a¤ect contemporaneous income
and productivity directly. Nunn (2009) makes a closely related point when discussing Nunn and
Puga (2007), an attempt to estimate the magnitude of direct and indirect (historical) e¤ects of a
speci…c geographic characteristic: terrain ruggedness, measured by the average absolute slope of a
region’s surface area. Nunn and Puga (2007) argue that ruggedness has a negative direct e¤ect on
agriculture, construction and trade, but a positive historical e¤ect within Africa because it allowed
protection from slave traders. They …nd that the historical (indirect) positive e¤ect is twice as
9

Ashraf and Galor (2011, p. 2016) argue that, in regressions of this type: "reverse causality is not a source

of concern, (...) [but] the OLS estimates of the e¤ect of the time elapsed since the transition to agriculture may
su¤er from omitted variable bias (....)". The sign of the expected OLS bias therefore depends on the pattern of
correlations between the omitted factors, the dependent variables and the included regressors. Finding an IV e¤ect
that is larger than the OLS e¤ect is also broadly consistent with IV partly addressing measurement error in years
since the agricultural transition, although care must be exercised with this inference in the multivariate context.

7

large as the negative (direct) contemporary e¤ect.
A broader issue with Diamond’s geographic explanation is that it denies a role for speci…c
di¤erences between populations, especially within Eurasia itself. For example, Joyce Appleby
(2010, p. 11) writes: "How deep are the roots of capitalism? [. . . ] Jared Diamond wrote a
best-selling study that emphasized the geographic and biological advantages the West enjoyed.
Two central problems vex this interpretation: The advantages of the West were enjoyed by all
of Europe, but only England experienced the breakthrough that others had to imitate to become
capitalistic. Diamond’s emphasis on physical factors also implies that they can account for the
speci…c historical events that brought on Western modernity without reference to the individuals,
ideas, and institutions that played so central a part in this historic development." We return to
these important questions below.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) address the issue of whether geography may have had
a direct e¤ect on development by documenting a "reversal of fortune" among former European
colonies. This reversal of fortune suggests that the e¤ect of geography was indirect. The simplest
geography story states that some geographic features are conducive to development, but this story is
inconsistent with the reversal of fortune since the same geographic features that made a society rich
in 1500 should presumably make it rich today.10 More sophisticated geography-centered arguments
rely on the idea that geographic features conducive to development vary depending on the time
period. A reversal of fortune would be consistent with non-persistent direct e¤ects of geography on
productivity: features of geography that had positive e¤ects on productivity in the past could have
become a handicap in more recent times. However, such shifts would then have to be explained by
speci…c changes in non-geographic factors (e.g., a technological revolution).
To proxy for levels of economic productivity and prosperity in a Malthusian world, Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2002) use data on urbanization patterns and population density. Contemporary income per capita is regressed on these measures of economic performance in 1500 to assess
whether a reversal of fortune has occurred. The bottom panel of Table 3 mirrors their main results:
in various samples that all exclude European countries, the relationship between population density
10

Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) state that: "The simplest version of the geography hypothesis empha-

sizes the time-invariant e¤ects of geographic variables, such as climate and disease, on work e¤ort and productivity,
and therefore predicts that nations and areas that were relatively rich in 1500 should also be relatively prosperous
today." (p. 1233)

8

in 1500 and log per capita income in 2005 is negative. In the regression that corresponds to their
baseline (column 3), looking only at former European colonies, the e¤ect is large in magnitude and
highly signi…cant statistically: the standardized beta on 1500 density is 48% and the t-statistic is
7. Similar results hold for the whole World minus Europe (column 1), and also when restricting
attention only to countries not currently populated by more than 50% of their indigenous population (columns 5 and 7).11 These important …ndings suggest that the observed correlation between
geographic variables and income per capita are unlikely to stem from direct e¤ects of geography on
productivity. In contrast, they point to indirect e¤ects of geography operating through long-term
changes in non-geographic variables.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) argue that the reversal re‡ects changes in the institutions resulting from European colonialism: Europeans were more likely to introduce institutions
encouraging investment in regions with low population density and low urbanization, while they
introduced extractive, investment-depressing institutions in richer regions. This interpretation is
consistent with Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), where the focus is on an indirect biogeographic channel: European settlers introduced good (productivity-enhancing) institutions in regions
where they faced favorable biogeographic conditions (low mortality rates), and bad institutions in
regions where they faced unfavorable biogeographic conditions (high mortality rates).12
This line of research is part of a body of historical and empirical work emphasizing institutional
di¤erences across societies, including seminal contributions by Douglass North and Robert Thomas
(1973), North (1981, 1990) and Eric L. Jones (1988), and more recently Stanley L. Engerman
and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (1997, 2002), Sokolo¤ and Engerman (2000), and Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001, 2002, 2005). In particular, Engerman and Sokolo¤ (1997) provided a path-breaking
investigation of the interplay between geographic and historical factors in explaining di¤erential
growth performance in the Americas (United States and Canada versus Latin America). They
pointed out that Latin American societies also began with vast supplies of land and natural resources
per capita, and “were among the most prosperous and coveted of the colonies in the seventeenth
and eighteenth century. Indeed, so promising were these other regions, that Europeans of the time
11

To de…ne whether a country’s population today is composed of more than 50% of descendents of its 1500 popula-

tion we rely on the World Migration Matrix of Putterman and Weil (2010), which we discuss in much greater detail
in Section 3.
12

For a critical reassessment of the empirical strategy in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), see David Albouy

(2011).

9

generally regarded the thirteen British colonies of the North American mainland and Canada as of
relatively marginal economic interest –an opinion evidently shared by Native Americans who had
concentrated disproportionally in the areas the Spanish eventually developed. Yet, despite their
similar, if not less favorable, factor endowment, the U.S. and Canada ultimately proved to be far
more successful than the other colonies in realizing sustained economic growth over time. This
stark contrast in performance suggests that factor endowment alone cannot explain the diversity of
outcomes.”(Engerman and Sokolo¤, 1997, p. 260). Their central hypothesis was that di¤erences in
factor endowments across New World colonies played a key role in explain di¤erent growth patterns
after 1800, but that those e¤ects were indirect. Di¤erent factor endowments created “substantial
di¤erences in the degree of inequality in wealth, human capital, and political power,” which, in
turn, were embodied in persistent societal traits and institutions. Societies that were endowed with
climate and soil conditions well-suited for growing sugar, co¤ee, rice, tobacco and other crops with
high market value and economies of scale ended up with unequal slave economies in the hands
of a small elite, implementing policies and institutions that perpetuated such inequality, lowering
incentives for investment and innovation. In contrast, a more equal distribution of wealth and power
emerged in societies with small-scale crops (grain and livestock), with bene…cial consequences for
long-term economic performance.
An alternative to the institutional explanation for the reversal of fortune is rooted in the composition of world populations. For while Europeans may have left good institutions in former
colonies that are rich today, they also brought themselves there. This point is stressed by Edward
L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer (2004, p. 274), who
write: “[Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson’s] results do not establish a role for institutions. Specifically, the Europeans who settled in the New World may have brought with them not so much their
institutions, but themselves, that is, their human capital. This theoretical ambiguity is consistent
with the empirical evidence as well.”
The top panel of Table 3 shows that when Europe is included in the sample, any evidence for
reversals of fortune disappears: the coe¢ cient on 1500 population density is essentially zero for the
broadest sample that includes the whole World (column 1). For countries that were not former
European colonies, there is strong evidence of persistence, with a positive signi…cant coe¢ cient
on 1500 density. The evidence of persistence is even stronger when looking at countries that
are populated mostly by their indigenous populations (the evidence is yet stronger when de…ning

10

"indigenous" countries more strictly, for instance requiring that more than 90% of the population
be descended from those who inhabited the country in 1500).13 In other words, the reversal of
fortune is a feature of samples that exclude Europe and is driven largely by countries inhabited
by populations that moved there after the discovery of the New World, and now constitute large
portions of these countries’ populations - either European colonizers (e.g. in North America and
Oceania) or African slaves (e.g. in the Caribbean).
These regularities suggest that the broader features of a population, rather than institutions
only, might account for the pattern of persistence and change in the relative economic performance
of countries through history. Of course, the quality of institutions might be one of the features
of a population (perhaps not the only feature) that makes it more or less susceptible to economic
success, but the basic lesson from Table 3 is that one cannot abstract from the ancestral structure of
populations when trying to understand comparative development. This central idea is the subject
of Sections 3 and 4, so we will say little more for now.
Recent work casts additional doubt on the view that national institutions are paramount. In
a paper on African development, Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou (2010) …nd that
national institutions have little e¤ect when one looks at the economic performance of homogeneous
ethnic groups divided by national borders. They examine the e¤ects on comparative development
of national contemporary institutions structures and ethnicity-speci…c pre-colonial societal traits,
using a methodological approach that combines anthropological data on the spatial distribution of
ethnicities before colonization, historical information on ethnic cultural and institutional traits, and
contemporary light density image data from satellites as a proxy of regional development. Overall,
their …ndings suggest that long-term features of populations, rather than institutions in isolation,
play a central role in explaining comparative economic success.14
13

The R2 we obtain in the regressions of Table 3 are commensurate in magnitude to those obtained from compa-

rable speci…cations in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002). As expected, as the sample exands beyond former
European colonies, the explanatory power of past development for current development falls, and correspondingly the
R2 falls. In general, R2 s are quite low because we are regressing two di¤erent measures of development on each other
(per capita income and population density in 1500), and both variables (particularly historical population density)
are measured with signi…cant amounts of error.
14

The e¤ects of ethnic/cultural di¤erences on economic outcomes within a common national setting are also docu-

mented by Beatrix Brügger, Rafael Lalive and Josef Zweimüller (2009), who compare di¤erent unemployment patterns
across the language barrier in Switzerland, and …nd that job seekers living in Latin-speaking border communities
take about 18% longer to leave unemployment than their neighbors in German- speaking communities.

11

In sum, the evidence on reversal of fortune documented by Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2002) is consistent with an indirect rather than direct e¤ect of geography on development, but is
open to alternative interpretations about the mechanisms of transmission. A key issue is whether
the di¤erential settlement of Europeans across colonies after 1500 a¤ect current income in former
colonies exclusively through institutions, as argued by Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001,
2002, 2005), or through other relevant factors and traits brought by Europeans, such as human
capital (Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2004) or culture (Landes, 1998).
Disentangling the e¤ects of speci…c societal characteristics, such as di¤erent aspects of institutions, values, norms, beliefs, other human traits, etc., is intrinsically di¢ cult, because these
variables are conceptually elusive to measure, deeply interlinked, and endogenous with respect to
economic development. In spite of these intrinsic di¢ culties, a growing body of historical and
empirical research, focusing on natural experiments, has attempted to provide insights on the complex relationships between geography and human history and their implications for comparative
development (for example, see the contributions in Diamond and Robinson, 2010).
As we discuss in the next two sections, recent contributions stress the importance of persistent
characteristics transmitted intergenerationally over the long run. This literature is consistent with
anthropological work, such as by Carmela Rosalba Guglielmino, Carla Viganotti, Barry Hewlett,
and Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza (1995), showing in the case of Africa that cultural traits are transmitted intergenerationally and bear only a weak correlation with environmental characteristics:
"Most traits examined, in particular those a¤ecting family structure and kinship, showed great
conservation over generations. They are most probably transmitted by family members."

3

Development and the Long-Term History of Populations

3.1

Adjusting for Ancestry

Historical population movements play a central role in the debate regarding the mechanism linking
geography and economic development, as well as the interpretation of reversals of fortune. Recent
research has focused on the measurement and estimation of the long-term e¤ects of historical
factors on contemporary income by explicitly taking into account the ancestral composition of
current populations. We review some of these contributions in this section.
An important contribution within this line of research is Louis Putterman and David Weil

12

(2010). They examine explicitly whether it is the historical legacy of geographic locations or
the historical legacy of the populations currently inhabiting these locations that matters more for
contemporary outcomes. To do so, they assemble a matrix showing the share of the contemporary
population of each country descended from people in di¤erent source countries in the year 1500.
The de…nition of ancestry is bound to have some degree of arbitrariness, since it refers to ancestral
populations at a speci…c point in time. However, choosing 1500 is sensible since this date occurs
prior to the massive population movements that followed the discovery of the New World, and data
on population movements prior to that date are largely unavailable.
Building on previous work by Valerie Bockstette, Areendam Chanda and Louis Putterman
(2002) and Chanda and Putterman (2007), they consider two indicators of early development: early
state history and the number of years since the adoption of agriculture. They then construct two
sets of historical variables, one set representing the history of the location, the other set weighted
using the migration matrix, representing the same variables as they pertain not to the location but
the contemporaneous population inhabiting this location. Inevitably, measuring these concepts is
fraught with methodological issues. For instance, when it comes to state antiquity, experience with
centralization that occurred in the distant past is discounted exponentially, while no discounting
is applied to the measure of the years of agriculture. While these measurement choices will surely
lead to future re…nements, it is the comparison between the estimates obtained when looking at
the history of locations rather than populations that leads to interesting inferences.
According to this approach, the United States has had a relatively short exposure to state
centralization in terms of location, but once ancestry-adjusted it features a longer familiarity with
state centralization, since the current inhabitants of the United States are mostly descended from
Eurasian populations that have had a long history of centralized state institutions.15 Clearly, in
15

Germany and Italy, two countries from which many ancestors of current Americans originate, have ‡uctuated

over their histories between fractured and uni…ed states. For instance, Italy was a uni…ed country under the Roman Empire, but a collection of city-states and local polities, partly under foreign control, prior to its uni…cation in 1861. The index of state antiquity for such cases discounts periods that occurred in the distant past (see
http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/louis_putterman/Antiquity%20data%20page.htm for details on the computuation
of the index). Due to lengthy periods of uni…cation or control of substantial parts of their territories by domestic
regional states (such as the Republic of Venice and Prussia), however, Italy and Germany do not display state antiquity indices that are that di¤erent from other European countries. The United States overall has a state antiquity
index roughly commensurate with that of European countries, despite the addition of populations, for instance descended from Native Americans or African slaves, that may have had limited exposure to centralized states. While the

13

this work the New World plays a big role in identifying the di¤erence in the coe¢ cients between
historical factors and their ancestry-adjusted counterparts, because outside the New World, everyone’s ancestry is largely from their own location. Putterman and Weil explore how their two
historical variables - each either ancestry adjusted or not - a¤ect the level of income per capita and
within-country income inequality in the world today.
Their key …nding is that it is not as much the past history of locations that matters as it is the
history of the ancestor populations. Tables 4 and 5 illustrate their approach in our uni…ed empirical
framework. Table 4 starts with simple correlations. The correlations between state history and
years of agriculture, on the one hand, and per capita income in 2005, on the other hand, are
of the expected positive signs, but are much larger when ancestry-adjusting - almost doubling in
magnitude. These results are con…rmed in the regressions of Table 5. In these regressions, we
start from the speci…cation that controls for the baseline set of four geographic variables, and
add the Putterman and Weil variables one by one, either ancestry-adjusted or not. The variables
representing the history of the locations enter with an insigni…cant coe¢ cient (columns 1 and
3), while the ancestry-adjusted variables enter with positive, statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients
(columns 2 and 4). A one standard deviation change in ancestry-adjusted years of agriculture can
account for 17% of a standard deviation of log per capita income, while the corresponding …gure is
almost 22% for state history.
To summarize, a long history of centralized states as well as an early adoption of agriculture are
positively associated with per capita income today, after ancestry adjustment.16 Putterman and
Weil also …nd that the variance of early development history across ancestor populations predicts
within-country income inequality better than simple measures of ethnic and linguistic heterogeneity.
For example, in Latin America, countries that are made up of a lot of Europeans along with a lot
of native Americans tend to display higher income inequality than countries which are made up
mostly of European descendants. Finally, to further elucidate why correcting for ancestry matters,
measurement of state antiquity can be questioned on several grounds, there is little doubt that ancestry adjustment
implies that the United States had a longer experience with centralized states than the history of Native Americans
would suggest.
16

Interestingly, Paik (2010) documents that within Europe, an earlier onset of agriculture is negatively correlated

with subsequent economic performance after the Industrial Revolution, contrary to the worldwide results of Putterman
and Weil. Paik argues that the mechanism is cultural: a late adoption of agriculture is associated with individualist
values that were conducive to economic success in the Industrial era.

14

they also show that a variable capturing the extent of European ancestry accounts for 41% of the
variation in per capita income, a topic to which we turn in the next subsection.
Putterman and Weil’s results strongly suggest that the ultimate drivers of development cannot be fully disembodied from characteristics of human populations. When migrating to the New
World, populations brought with them traits that carried the seeds of their economic performance.
This stands in contrast to views emphasizing the direct e¤ects of geography or the direct e¤ects of
institutions, for both of these characteristics could, in principle, operate irrespective of the population to which they apply. A population’s long familiarity with certain types of institutions, human
capital, norms of behavior or more broadly culture seems important to account for comparative
development.

3.2

The Role of Europeans

William Easterly and Ross Levine (2009) con…rm and expand upon Putterman and Weil’s …nding,
showing that a large population of European ancestry confers a strong advantage in development,
using new data on European settlement during colonization and its historical determinants. They
…nd that the share of the European population in colonial times has a large and signi…cant impact
on income per capita today, even when eliminating Neo-European countries and restricting the
sample to countries where the European share is less than 15% - that is, in non-settler colonies,
with crops and germs associated with bad institutions. The e¤ect remains high and signi…cant
when controlling for the quality of institutions, while it weakens when controlling for measures of
education.
Table 6 captures the essence of these results. Still controlling for our four baseline geographic
variables, we introduce the share of Europeans (computed from the Putterman and Weil ancestry
matrix) in a regression explaining log per capita income in 2005. The e¤ect is large and statistically
signi…cant (column 1), and remains signi…cant when con…ning attention to a sample of countries
with fewer than 30% of Europeans. Introducing the Putterman and Weil ancestry-adjusted historical variables (columns 3 and 4), we …nd that years of agriculture and state history remain
signi…cant after controlling for the share of Europeans, suggesting that historical factors have an
e¤ect on contemporary development over and beyond the e¤ect of European ancestry. In other
words, while the traits characterizing European populations are correlated with development, the
historical legacy of state centralization and early agricultural adoption matters independently.

15

Easterly and Levine (2009) interpret these …ndings as consistent with the human-capital argument by Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2004) that Europeans brought their
human capital, and the Galor and Weil (2000) and Galor, Moav and Vollrath (2009) emphasis on
the role of human capital in long-run development. However, Easterly and Levine (2009, p. 27)
also write: "Of course, there are many other things that Europeans carried with them besides
general education, scienti…c and technological knowledge, access to international markets, and human capital creating institutions. They also brought ideologies, values, social norms, and so on.
It is di¢ cult for us to evaluate which of these were crucial either alone or in combination." This
exempli…es the di¢ cult issue of disentangling, with the imperfect data that must be used to study
comparative development, the e¤ects of di¤erent human characteristics. The bottom line, however,
is that human traits are important to account for comparative development patterns, quite apart
from the e¤ects of geographic and institutional factors.

3.3

The Persistence of Technological Advantages

The deep historical roots of development are at the center of Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010).
They consider the adoption rates of various basic technologies in 1000 BC, 1 AD, and 1500 AD. in a
cross-section of countries de…ned by their current boundaries. They …nd that technology adoption in
1500, but also as far back as 1000 BC, is a signi…cant predictor of income per capita and technology
adoption today. The e¤ects of past technology continue to hold when including continental dummies
and other geographic controls. At the level of technologies, then, when examining a worldwide
sample of countries (including European countries), there is no evidence of a reversal of fortune.
Interestingly, Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010) also …nd that the e¤ects of past technological adoption on current technological sophistication are much stronger when considering the past
history of technology adoption of the ancestors of current populations, rather than technology
adoption in current locations, using the migration matrix provided in Putterman and Weil (2010).
Hence, Comin, Easterly and Gong’s results provide a message analogous to Putterman and Weil’s:
earlier historical development matters, and the mechanism is not through locations, but through
ancestors - that is, intergenerational transmission.
The basic lesson from Putterman and Weil (2010), Easterly and Levine (2009), and Comin,
Easterly and Gong (2010) is that historical factors - experience with settled agriculture and with
former political institutions, and past exposure to frontier technologies - predict current income

16

per capita and income distribution within countries, and that these factors become more important
when considering the history of populations rather than locations. These contributions point to
a key role for persistent traits transmitted across generations within populations in explaining
development outcomes over the very long run.

3.4

Genetic Distance and Development

Genealogical links among populations over time and space are at the center of Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009), where we emphasized intergenerationally transmitted human traits as important
determinants of development. The main goal of this paper was to explore the pattern of di¤usion
of economic development since the onset of the Industrial Revolution in Northwestern Europe in
the late 18th century and early 19th century. The idea is to identify barriers to the adoption of
these new modes of production, with a speci…c focus on human barriers (while controlling for geographic barriers). The bottom line is, again, that human traits matter, but the paper emphasizes
barrier e¤ects stemming from di¤erences in characteristics, rather than the direct e¤ect of human
characteristics on economic performance.
We compiled a data set, based on work by L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza, Paolo Menozzi and Alberto
Piazza (1994), providing measures of genetic distance between pairs of countries, using information about each population’s ancestral composition.17 Genetic distance is a summary measure of
di¤erences in allele frequencies between populations across a range of neutral genes (chromosomal
loci). The measure we used, FST genetic distance, captures the length of time since two populations
became separated from each other. When two populations split apart, random genetic mutations
result in genetic di¤erentiation over time. The longer the separation time, the greater the genetic
distance computed from a set of neutral genes. Therefore, genetic distance captures the time since
two populations have shared common ancestors (the time since they were parts of the same population), and can be viewed as a summary measure of relatedness between populations. An intuitive
17

To accommodate the fact that some countries are composed of di¤erent genetic groups (e.g. the USA), we

computed a measure of "weighted genetic distance," representing the expected genetic distance between two randomly
chosen individuals, one from each country, using the genetic distances associated with their respective ancestor
populations. That is, we do not consider the inhabitants of countries composed of di¤erent genetic groups as a new
homogeneous "population" in the biological sense, but treat each of those countries as formed by distinct populations,
to accurately capture the di¤erences in ancestor-transmitted traits within and across countries. This is the measure
used in the empirical work discussed below.

17

analogue is the concept of relatedness between individuals: two siblings are more closely related
than two cousins because they share more recent common ancestors - their parents rather than
their grandparents.
Figure 1 (from Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and Piazza, 1994, p. 78) is a phylogenetic tree illustrating
how di¤erent human populations have split apart over time. Such phylogenetic trees, constructed
from genetic distance data, are the population analogs of family trees for individuals. In this tree,
the greatest genetic distance observed is between Mbuti Pygmies and Papua New Guineans, where
the FST distance is 0:4573, and the smallest is between the Danish and the English, where the
genetic distance is 0:0021.18
To properly interpret the e¤ect of genetic distance on di¤erences in economic outcomes, two
important clari…cations are in order. First, since genetic distance is based on neutral change, it
is not meant to capture di¤erences in speci…c genetic traits that can directly matter for survival
and …tness. Hence, we emphasize that empirical work using genetic distance provides no evidence
for an e¤ect of speci…c genes on income or productivity. Evidence of an "e¤ect of genetic distance" is not evidence of a "genetic e¤ect." Rather, it can serve as evidence for the importance
of intergenerationally-transmitted traits, including traits that are transmitted culturally from one
generation to the next.
Second, the mechanism need not be a direct e¤ect of those traits (whether culturally or genetically transmitted) on income and productivity. Rather, divergence in human traits, habits, norms,
etc. have created barriers to communication and imitation across societies. While it is possible that
intergenerationally transmitted traits have direct e¤ects on productivity and economic performance
(for example, if some parents transmit a stronger work ethic to their children), another possibility
is that human traits also act to hinder development through a barrier e¤ect: more closely related
societies are more likely to learn from each other and adopt each other’s innovations. It is easier
for someone to learn from a sibling than from a cousin, and easier to learn from a cousin than from
a stranger. Populations that share more recent common ancestors have had less time to diverge
in a wide range of traits and characteristics - many of them cultural rather than biological - that
18

Among the more disaggregated data for Europe, also used in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), the smallest genetic

distance (equal to 0.0009) is between the Dutch and the Danish, and the largest (equal to 0.0667) is between the
Lapps and the Sardinians. The mean genetic distance across European populations is 0.013. Genetic distances are
roughly ten times smaller on average across populations of Europe than in the world data set.

18

are transmitted from a generation to the next with variation. Similarity in such traits facilitates
communication and learning, and hence the di¤usion and adaptation of complex technological and
institutional innovations.
Under this barriers interpretation, di¤erences in traits across populations hinder the ‡ow of
technologies, goods and people, and in turn these barriers hurt development. For instance, historically rooted di¤erences may generate mistrust, miscommunication, and even racial or ethnic bias
and discrimination, hindering interactions between populations that could result in a quicker di¤usion of productivity-enhancing innovations from the technological frontier to the rest of the world.
The barriers framework in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) predicts that, ultimately, genetic distance
should have no residual e¤ect on income di¤erences (unless another major innovation occurs), as
more and more societies, farther from the frontier, come to imitate the frontier technology. This is
consistent with the di¤usion of economic development as emerging from the formation of a human
web, gradually joined by di¤erent cultures and societies in function of their relative distance from
the technological frontier (McNeill and McNeill, 2003).
We test the idea that genealogical relatedness facilitates the di¤usion of development in our
uni…ed empirical framework. Table 7, columns 1 and 2 introduce genetic distance to the USA in our
basic income level regression, controlling for the baseline geographic variables.19 Genetic distance
as of 1500, re‡ecting the distance between indigenous populations, is negatively and signi…cantly
related to log income per capita in 2005. The e¤ect rises in magnitude when considering genetic
distance to the USA using the current genetic composition of countries. In other words, ancestryadjusted genetic distance once more is a better predictor of current income than a variable based on
indigenous characteristics, consistent with the results in Table 5. Column 3 of Table 7 introduces
genetic distance alongside the share of Europeans, showing that genetic distance to the USA bears
a signi…cant partial correlation with current income that is not entirely attributable to the presence
of Europeans.
19

Since several countries in our sample, especially the technological frontier (the United States) are composed

of several distinct genetic groups, we used a weighted measure of genetic distance, capturing the expected genetic
distance between two individuals, randomly selected from each of the two countries in a pair. Formally, the weighted
FST genetic distance between countries 1 and 2 is de…ned as:
W
F ST12
=

I X
J
X

(s1i

s2j

dij )

i=1 j=1

where ski is the share of group i in country k, dij is the FST genetic distance between groups i and j.

19

While these simple regressions are informative, a better test of the hypothesis that genetic
distance captures human barriers to the di¤usion of development relies on a bilateral approach,
whereby absolute log income di¤erences are regressed on bilateral genetic distance, analogous to
a gravity approach in international trade. This was the main approach in Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009), and is re‡ected in Tables 8 and 9. The bilateral approach o¤ers a test of the barriers story:
if genetic distance acts as a barrier, it should not be the simple distance between countries that
matters, but their genetic distance relative to the world technological frontier. In other words if
genetic distance acts as a barrier, it should not be the genetic distance between, say, Ecuador and
Brazil that should better explain their income di¤erence, but their relative genetic distance to the
United States, de…ned as the absolute di¤erence between the Ecuador-USA genetic distance and
the Brazil-USA genetic distance.
The speci…cations we use are as follows:
First, we estimate the e¤ect of simple weighted genetic distance, denoted F STijW , between
country i and country j, on the absolute di¤erence in log per capita income between the two
countries, controlling for a vector Xij of additional bilateral variables of a geographic nature:
jlog Yi

log Yj j =

0

+

W
1 F STij

+

0
2 Xij

+ "ij

(1)

Second, we estimate the same speci…cation, but using as a regressor relative genetic distance rather
than simple genetic distance. Genetic distance relative to the frontier (the United States) between
W
countries i and j is de…ned as: F STijR = jF STi;U
S

jlog Yi

log Yj j =

0

+

W j:
F STj;U
S
R
1 F STij

+

0
3 Xij

+

(2)

ij

Third, we conduct a horserace between F STijW and F STijR :
jlog Yi

log Yj j =

0

+

R
1 F STij

+

W
2 F STij

+

0
3 Xij

+

(3)

ij

The prediction of the barrier model is that the e¤ect of F STijR should be larger in magnitude than
the e¤ect of F STijW (

1

>

1 ),

and that F STijR should "win out" in a horserace (

1

>

2 ).

Consistent with this prediction, in Table 8, columns 1 and 2 show that relative genetic distance
enters with a larger magnitude than simple genetic distance, and column 3 demonstrates that, when
both measures are entered together, relative genetic distance trumps simple genetic distance. The
magnitude of the e¤ect is substantial, with a one standard deviation increase in genetic distance
20

increasing economic distance by between 25% and 30% of a standard deviation in the absolute
di¤erence in log per capita income, depending on the speci…cation. Column 4 shows once again
that the e¤ect of genetic distance is robust to including the absolute di¤erence in the share of
Europeans. In other words, genetic distance accounts for comparative development over and above
the role played by the historical advantage of European populations. Finally, column 5 attempts
to control for the possible endogeneity of post-1500 migrations (as well as possible measurement
error in contemporary genetic distance) by using genetic distance in 1500 as an instrument for
contemporary genetic distance. The magnitude of the beta coe¢ cient increases to 45%.
Table 9 examines the relationship between genetic and economic distances through history,
providing further evidence for the barriers interpretation. Here, we consider the relative genetic
distance to the English population in a sample going back to 1820, using Maddison’s data on per
capita income. We continue to control for a large number of measures of geographic distance,
climatic di¤erences and transportation costs. Since the availability of data changes through time,
we report both standardized betas for the full samples and for the sample common to all dates.
Focusing on the latter for comparability across time, we see that the magnitude of the e¤ect of genetic distance is maximal in 1870, in the wake of the Industrial Revolution. The e¤ect then declines
steadily from the peak of 16% in 1870 to 7:8% in 2005. This pattern provides a further suggestive
test of the barriers model: in the wake of a big innovation occurring in Northwestern Europe,
relative genetic distance to the frontier strongly predicts income di¤erences, but as more and more
countries join the ranks of industrialized countries, the e¤ect declines. As already mentioned, this
is consistent with a barrier model, which predicts that, ultimately, unless another major innovation
occurs, relative genetic distance should have no residual e¤ect on income di¤erences, as more and
more societies, increasingly distant from the frontier society, imitate the frontier technology. Thus,
these …ndings are consistent with our interpretation of genetic distance as capturing barriers to the
long-term di¤usion of development.
What traits are captured by genetic distance? By its very de…nition, genetic distance is a measure of genealogical relatedness between human populations. It is important to stress again that
while e¤ects of genetic distance point to the importance of intergenerational links, they are not evidence of direct e¤ects of speci…c genes or genetically transmitted traits on income or productivity.
Rather, genetic distance captures genealogical relations between populations, and hence di¤erences
in traits that are transmitted vertically from one generation to the next through a variety of mech-

21

anisms, biologically but also culturally, as well as through the interactions of the two inheritance
systems (gene-culture co-evolution). We detail these di¤erent mechanisms in the next section.

4

The Intergenerational Transmission of Development

4.1

Mechanisms of Intergenerational Transmission

The empirical literature on geography and the reversal of fortune and the more recent contributions
on the role of ancestor populations suggest that, while there is signi…cant persistence in development, this persistence is a characteristic of human populations and not of geographic locations. The
work discussed so far points to a key role for traits transmitted from one generation to the next
within populations over the long run. In this section we provide a general taxonomy of the di¤erent
channels and mechanisms through which these traits can be transmitted across generations and
a¤ect economic development. We then use this framework to discuss recent contributions to the
economics literature.
The starting point for our discussion is a classi…cation of di¤erent mechanisms of intergenerational transmission. The more recent literature on heredity and evolution stresses that inheritance
mechanisms are diverse and cannot be reduced to the old nature vs. nurture dichotomy. On the
contrary, people and societies inherit traits from their ancestors through a complex interaction of
biological and cultural mechanisms, with an essential role played by environmental factors. Following Eva Jablonka and Marion J. Lamb (2005), we consider four inheritance dimensions: genetic,
epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic. For convenience and to keep the taxonomy relatively simple,
we refer to the …rst two dimensions (genetic and epigenetic) as "biological" and the remaining two
dimensions (behavioral and symbolic) as "cultural."
The genetic dimension has its molecular basis in DNA and its replication. Modern genetics
stresses that the genome is a complex and dynamic system, and that genes alone do not determine
individual characteristics. For example, Jablonka and Lamb (2005, p. 7) write: "The stretch of
DNA that is a ‘gene’has meaning only within the system as a whole. And because the e¤ect of a
gene depends on its context, very often a change in a single gene does not have a consistent e¤ect
on the trait that it in‡uences." In general, it is useful to view genetic transmission as part of a
broader system, interacting with other factors, including our second dimension: epigenetics.
The epigenetic dimension, even though important in biology and medicine, is not as well-

22

known among non-specialists. Epigenetic inheritance systems refer to the ways cells with identical
genetic information can acquire di¤erent phenotypes and transmit them to their daughter cells
through the inheritance of epigenetic markers (for example, methylation patterns). The epigenetic
dimension is vital for the biological development of individual organisms. In addition, some scholars
argue that it may play an important role in evolution over time. An insightful and entertaining
discussion of this view is provided in Jablonka and Lamb (2005, chapter 4). As they explain (p.
113), "A person’s liver cells, skin cells, and kidney cells, look di¤erent, behave di¤erently, and
function di¤erently, yet they all contain the same genetic information. With very few exceptions,
the di¤erences between specialized cells are epigenetic, not genetic. They are the consequences of
events that occurred during the developmental history of each type of cell and determined which
genes are turned on, and how their products act and interact (...) Although their DNA sequences
remain unchanged during development, cells nevertheless acquire information that they can pass to
their progeny. This information is transmitted through what are known as epigenetic inheritance
systems." Even though the extent and relevance of heritable epigenetic e¤ects is debated in the
biological literature, there is increasing evidence that changes in the epigenome can be inherited
across generations ("paramutation"). Reviews of the evidence are provided, for instance, in Vicki
Chandler and Mary Alleman (2008) and, for humans, in Daniel K. Morgan and Emma Whitelaw
(2008).20 This mechanism could provide an explanation for rapid changes in populations that could
not be brought about by genetic selection. In general, it is conceptually appropriate to consider both
genetic and epigenetic transmission, and their interactions, when discussing biological inheritance
systems.21
Clearly, humans do not inherit traits only biologically from their ancestors. Typically, people acquire all sorts of traits through cultural transmission (for example their mother tongue and all kinds
of views and beliefs about the world). We can distinguish between behavioral transmission, which is
20

Morgan and Whitelaw (2008) mention the well-known Dutch Famine Birth Cohort Study (Lambert H. Lumey,

1992), which reported that children born during famine in World War II were smaller than average and that the
e¤ects could last two generations. However, they also point out that a subsequent report by Aryeh D. Stein and
Lambert H. Lumey (2002) failed to reproduce some of the …ndings.
21

In a di¤erent context, the relevance of epigenetics for the study of economic outcomes has been emphasized in

the microeconomic literature on human capital formation. For instance, Flavio Cunha and James Heckman (2007, p.
32), write: "the nature versus nurture distinction is obsolete. The modern literature on epigenetic expression teaches
us that the sharp distinction between acquired skills and ability featured in the early human capital literature is not
tenable."

23

also common among some animals (for instance, monkeys), and symbolic transmission, which some
scholars view as uniquely human - the philosopher Ernst Cassirer (1944) famously de…ned man as
"the symbolic animal." Both mechanisms involve social learning. Behavioral transmission refers to
learning by direct observation and imitation: I learned how to cook spaghetti by watching my dad
in the kitchen. In contrast, symbolic transmission allows learning via systems of symbols: I learned
how to cook goulash from a cook book. Human norms, habits, values, etc. tend to be passed across
generations both behaviorally (by example) and symbolically (using language, art, writing and so
on). In general, culture can be de…ned as "information capable of a¤ecting individuals’ behavior
that they acquire from other members of their species through teaching, imitation, and other forms
of social transmission." (Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd, 2005, p. 5).22 In their insightful
discussion of the "evolution of cultural evolution," Joseph Henrich and Richard McElreath (2003,
p. 123) write: "While a variety of local genetic adaptations exist within our species, it seems
certain that the same basic genetic endowment produces arctic foraging, tropical horticulture, and
desert pastoralism [...]. The behavioral adaptations that explain the immense success of our species
are cultural in the sense that they are transmitted among individuals by social learning and have
accumulated over generations. Understanding how and when such culturally evolved adaptations
arise requires understanding of both the evolution of the psychological mechanisms that underlie
human social learning and the evolutionary (population) dynamics of cultural systems."23
While it is conceptually useful to distinguish between biological and cultural transmission,
we must keep in mind that in reality those dimensions are interconnected in complex ways. An
increasingly in‡uential literature within population genetics has emphasized that human outcomes
often stem from the interaction of biological and cultural factors. Both genes and culture are
informational entities that are transmitted at di¤erent rates across generations with variations,
and can be studied within a uni…ed framework that focuses on the interaction between biological
and cultural inheritance systems. This approach is known as dual inheritance theory or geneculture coevolution (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1976, 1981; Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Richerson
and Boyd, 2005). In such a framework, individual outcomes (phenotypes) are a mix of genetically
22

Of course, this is one among many possible de…nitions of culture. It is well known that the word "culture" has

multiple meanings. In a widely cited study, Alfred L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn (1952) provided 164 de…nitions
of culture.
23

An interesting example of analysis of cultural evolution with long-term implications for economic development is

Shari¤, Norenzayan and Henrich (2009).

24

and culturally transmitted traits, a¤ecting the transmission rates of di¤erent genetic and cultural
information. As Richerson and Boyd (2005, p. 194) point out, genes and culture can be seen as
"obligate mutualists, like two species that synergistically combine their specialized capacities to
do things that neither can do alone. [. . . ] Genes, by themselves can’t readily adapt to rapidly
changing environments. Cultural variants, by themselves, can’t do anything without brains and
bodies. Genes and culture are tightly coupled but subject to evolutionary forces that tug behavior
in di¤erent directions."
Proponents of dual inheritance theory believe that gene-culture evolution has played an important role in the evolution of human social psychology, including the evolution of social norms and
institutions (e.g., Richerson and Boyd, chapter 6). This view informs a broad literature on the coevolution of preferences, institutions and behavior, such as the analyses of the evolution of altruistic
behavior by Boyd, Herbert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, and Richerson (2003) and Gintis, Bowles, Boyd
and Ernst Fehr (2003). General discussions of the emergence of prosperity-generating behavior
from an evolutionary perspective are provided by Paul Seabright (2010) and Matt Ridley (2010).
A famous example of gene-culture coevolution is the evolution of adult tolerance for milk in
some, but not all, human populations (Fredrick J. Simoons, 1969, 1970).24 Most people, like most
other mammals, can digest milk as infant but not as adults, because they lack the enzyme to digest
lactose. However, there are several populations where most adults can indeed digest milk. The
largest concentration of lactose absorbers can be found in Northwestern Europe, where less than
10

15% of the population is lactose intolerant. Low levels of lactose intolerance are also found

among Indians and some African populations (Tutsi and Fulani). In contrast, few Far Easterners,
Bantu Africans, Paci…c Islanders and Native American can digest milk as adults.
It is now well-understood that the adult ability to digest milk evolved in response to a cultural
innovation: dairying. The (dominant) gene controlling lactose absorption spread rapidly among
populations that kept cows, sheep or goats, making those practices even more valuable from an
evolutionary perspective. It also spread, but to a lesser extent, among Mediterranean people
who consume milk in the form of cheese and yogurt, from which the lactose has been removed,
but it did not spread among populations without a dairying tradition. To predict whether a
current population would have a high or low tolerance for milk, one must look at the history of
dairying among the population’s ancestors, no matter where they lived, rather than to the history of
24

See also William H. Durham (1991, chapter 5) and Richerson and Boyd (2005, chapter 6).

25

dairying in that population’s current territory. For instance, within the United States, it has been
observed that the percentage of lactose intolerant adults is almost 100% among Native Americans,
90% among Asian Americans, 75% among African Americans, and only 12% among European
Americans (Norman Kretchmer, 1972; Nabil Sabri Enattah et al., 2002). This is consistent with
the intergenerational transmission of the lactose absorption trait over an extended historical span,
through genetic and cultural interaction.25
In general, the economic e¤ects of human characteristics are likely to result from interactions
of biological and cultural factors, with the e¤ects of genetic or epigenetic characteristics on economic outcomes changing over space and time depending on cultural characteristics, and vice versa.
Consider, for example, di¤erences across individuals within a given population (say, the US) with
respect to a clearly genetic feature, such as having two X chromosomes, the purely genetic characteristic associated with the female gender. This characteristic is likely to have had very di¤erent
e¤ects on a person’s income, life expectancy and other outcomes in the year 1900 and in the year
2000, because of changes in culturally transmitted characteristics over the century. This is a case
where the impact of genes on outcomes varies with a change in cultural characteristics.26 Conversely, we can think of the di¤erential impact of a given cultural characteristic –for example, the
habit of drinking alcohol –on individuals with di¤erent genetic traits, such as variation in alcohol
dehydrogenase, the alcohol-metabolizing enzyme.
In sum, we can aggregate inheritance dimensions and their complex interactions in three broad
sets: (a) biological transmission (genetic and epigenetic, and their interaction), (b) cultural transmission (behavioral and symbolic, and their interaction), and (c) dual, capturing the interactions
between biological and cultural transmission.

4.2

Direct and Barrier E¤ects

When considering how traits transmitted along these di¤erent channels may have a¤ected development, we must introduce an additional distinction, orthogonal to the categories discussed up to this
point. No matter how traits are transmitted, their e¤ects on economic performance might operate
25

More examples of gene-culture interaction, and a taxonomy, are provided by William H. Durham (1991).

26

This is a variation on an example by Alison Gopnik in her comment to debate between Steven Pinker and Eliza-

beth Spelke at http://www.edge.org/discourse/science-gender.html#ag. Steven Pinker’s response is also available at
http://www.edge.org/discourse/sciencegender.html.

26

either directly or as barriers to the di¤usion of development.
One possibility is that intergenerationally transmitted traits have direct e¤ects on productivity and economic performance. A slow-changing cultural trait developed in early history could
be conducive directly to high incomes in modern times if it is transmitted from parents to kids
within populations, either behaviorally or through complex symbolic systems (e.g., by religious
teaching). For example, a direct e¤ect stemming from cultural transmission would be Max Weber’s
(1905) argument that the Protestant ethic was a causal factor in industrialization (a recent critical reassessment of this hypothesis has been provided by Sascha Becker and Ludwig Woessmann,
2009).
As we discussed in the previous section, another possibility is that human traits act to hinder
development through a barrier e¤ect. In this case, it is not the trait itself that directly a¤ects
economic performance. Rather, it is di¤erences in inherited characteristics across populations that
create barriers to the ‡ow of technological and institutional innovations, ideas, etc., and, consequently, hurt development. Historically rooted di¤erences may generate barriers - e.g., via cultural,
racial and ethnic bias, discrimination, mistrust, and miscommunication - hindering interactions
between populations that could result in a quicker di¤usion of productivity-enhancing innovations
across populations, as in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009). A focus on barriers can explain why differences in inherited traits may matter, even though many new ideas and innovations are learned
"horizontally," from individuals and populations that are not directly related, rather than "vertically," from one’s close relatives and ancestors. The fact is that, when barrier e¤ects exist, vertically
transmitted traits also a¤ect horizontal learning and di¤usion. People are more likely to learn new
ideas and adopt new technologies from other people who, while not directly related to them, share
more recent common ancestors and, consequently, on average, a larger set of inherited traits and
characteristics.
The microeconomic literature on the di¤usion of innovations (Everett M. Rogers, 2003) is consistent with a major role for subjective barriers between groups and populations. As Rogers points
out, summarizing the lessons from decades of research, most people depend upon a subjective evaluation of an innovation that is conveyed to them from other individuals like themselves, who have
previously adopted the innovation. This dependence on the experience of near peers suggests that,
at the heart of the di¤usion process, we can often …nd potential adopters’imitation of their network
partners.

27

4.3

A General Taxonomy

The distinction between barrier e¤ects and direct e¤ects on the one hand, and the di¤erent forms
of intergenerational transmission on the other hand, can be conveniently captured in the following
matrix:
Biological Transmission

Direct E¤ect

Barrier E¤ect

Quadrant I

Quadrant IV

Quadrant II

Quadrant V

(genetic and/or epigenetic)
Cultural Transmission
(behavioral and/or symbolic)
Dual Transmission

Quadrant III Quadrant VI
(biological-cultural interaction)
In what follows we provide examples of each of these quadrants from contributions to the social
sciences, with a particular focus on research that stresses the role of intergenerationally transmitted
traits on economic development. As we will see, mechanisms from all six of the quadrants in the
…gure above have been studied in the economic literature. However, so far there have been no
systematic attempt to quantify the respective power of each of the major explanations, nor has
there been enough work on the precise traits that can account for either direct or barrier e¤ects on
development. These are the major avenues for promising future research in this emerging …eld.
In light of the advances in the scienti…c literature that we have mentioned above, which have
emphasized the interconnection and coevolution of biological and cultural traits, it may be very
hard, or even meaningless, to separate biological and cultural e¤ects in the long run. Therefore,
while the rows in our taxonomy matrix provide useful ideal benchmarks from a theoretical perspective, a more productive empirical approach might be to focus on whether such intergenerational
mechanisms - whether biological or cultural (or dual) - operate directly or as barriers to the diffusion of technological and institutional innovations - i.e. to identify the respective roles of each
column rather than each row in the matrix that summarizes our proposed taxonomy. We return to
these points below, as we discuss speci…c contributions to the economic literature.
4.3.1

Quadrants I, II and III

A theory of development centered on a direct e¤ect of biologically transmitted characteristics (Quadrant I) is provided in Oded Galor and Omer Moav (2002). These authors suggest that there may
exist an inter-geenrationally transmitted trait a¤ecting humans’fertility strategies, with some indi28

viduals inheriting traits that induce them to follow a quantity-biased strategy (having a high number
of children), while others would lean towards a quality-biased strategies (high parental investment
in a smaller number of children).27 Galor and Moav (2002) then argue that the evolutionary dynamics of these traits had important implications for the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the
following demographic transition. Their starting point is the pre-industrial world, where everybody
was caught in a Malthusian trap: technological improvements just led to larger populations but
not an increase in income per capita and standards of living.28 In such a world, a positive shock to
productivity is associated with an expansion of the population, and hence selective pressure in favor
of productivity-enhancing traits, such as a focus on parental investment. As the genetic predilection to having fewer children spread as a result of these selective pressures, a transition out of the
Malthusian regime endogenously occurred. In sum, Galor and Moav (2002) provide a theoretical
argument for a direct e¤ect of intergenerationally transmitted traits on the onset of the Industrial
Revolution. While the focus of their paper is on genetic transmission, Galor (2005, p. 250) also
points out that "the theory is applicable for either social or genetic intergenerational transmission
of traits. A cultural transmission is likely to be more rapid and may govern some of the observed
di¤erences in fertility rates across regions." With this broader interpretation, the theory in Galor
and Moav (2002) spans Quadrants I, II and III.
Another contribution that allows for a direct e¤ect of inherited characteristics on development is
Gregory Clark’s (2007) book on the advent of the Industrial Revolution in England. As in Galor and
Moav (2002), Clark’s starting point is the pre-industrial world caught in a Malthusian trap. In such
a world, unlike in modern industrialized societies, economic success translated into reproductive
success: the richer individuals had more surviving children, while the poorer individuals had so
few surviving children that their families were often dying out. Therefore, over time the children
of the richest individuals tended to replace the children of the poorest. Through this form of
selection, traits that would "ensure later economic dynamism," such as patience, hard work, and
innovativeness, spread "biologically throughout the population" (Clark, 2007, p.8). In Clark’s view,
this long-term process worked through all pre-industrial agrarian societies caught in a Malthusian
trap, but was especially powerful in England because of "accidents of institutional stability and
27

The authors are careful to notice that such di¤erences do not imply that one strategy is "better" than the other,

in the same way as we cannot say that giant sequoias (which follow an extreme quality-biased strategy) are "better"
than humans.
28

Empirical evidence on these e¤ects is provided by Ashraf and Galor (2011) - see our discussion in Section 2 above.

29

demography: in particular the extraordinary stability of England back to at least 1200, the low
growth of English population between 1300 and 1760, and the extraordinary fecundity of the rich
and economically successful" (Clark, 2007, p. 11). According to Clark, this process played an
essential role in allowing England to break out of the Malthusian trap after 1800. Clark’s argument,
which is based on a detailed analysis of the historical record, is related to Galor and Moav’s
theoretical contribution, insofar as selection of traits in the Malthusian era sets the stage for future
intensive economic growth. However, the speci…c inherited traits stressed by Clark are di¤erent
from those at the center of Galor and Moav’s story - Clark’s focus is mainly on attitudes towards
work.29 Clark tends to emphasize biological mechanisms, but he does not take a de…nitive stance as
to whether the human traits that caused the English to experience the Industrial Revolution were
primarily biological or cultural. Hence, in a more general sense, Clark’s suggested mechanisms also
belong to Quadrants I, II and III.
A di¤erent set of channels through which genetic forces may a¤ect economic development is
explored by Ashraf and Galor (2010). In that study the authors focus on genetic diversity within
populations. Genetic diversity is a di¤erent concept from genetic distance, as it was used in Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2009). Genetic distance refers to genetic di¤erences between populations, while
genetic diversity is de…ned in terms of heterogeneity within populations. Because of the serialfounder e¤ect, genetic diversity tended to decline as human populations moved from the ancestral
lands where Homo Sapiens originally emerged (East Africa) to the rest of the World (Eurasia,
Oceania and the Americas).30 Hence, genetic diversity is highest among African populations and
lowest among Amerindian populations. Ashraf and Galor (2010) show that genetic diversity bears a
non-monotonic relationship with development outcomes between years 1 and 1500 AD. They argue
29

It is also worth noting that Clark, like Galor and Moav, is not making any claim that inherited traits made some

populations generally "superior" to others: "This is not in any sense to say that people in settled agrarian economies
on the eve of the Industrial Revolution had become “smarter” than their counterparts in hunter-gatherer societies....
For the average person the division of labor ... made work simpler and more repetitive. The argument is instead that
it rewarded with economic and hence reproductive success a certain repertoire of skills and dispositions that were
very di¤erent from those of the pre-agrarian world, such as the ability to perform simple repetitive tasks hour after
hour, day after day. There is nothing natural or harmonic, for example, in having a disposition to work even when
all basic needs of survival have been achieved" (Clark, 2007, pp. 187-188).
30

As explained in Ashraf and Galor (2010), subsets of populations left to establish new settlements, they carried

with them only part of the overall genetic diversity of their parental populations, therefore reducing the heterogeneity
of populations that settled farther from the original cradle of humankind.

30

that this relation is causal, because of a trade-o¤ between the bene…cial and the detrimental e¤ects
of diversity of traits on productivity. In their view, a high level of genetic heterogeneity within
populations comes with both costs and bene…ts for economic development. Heterogeneity can be
costly because it may reduce trust and coordination among individuals that are less similar and
less closely related. However, genetic diversity also comes with advantages: "in an economy where
the labor force is characterized by genetic heterogeneity in a wide array of traits, to the extent that
some of these traits lead to specialization in task-oriented activities, higher diversity will increase
productivity for society as a whole, given complementarities across di¤erent tasks" (Ashraf and
Galor, 2010, p. 2 ft. 1). Given such con‡icting e¤ects of heterogeneity, Ashraf and Galor argue
that intermediate levels of genetic diversity are most conducive to the accumulation of wealth.
These can be interpreted as direct e¤ects of inherited traits working through the biological channel
(Quadrant I), and possibly its interaction with the cultural channel (Quadrant III). While the focus
of Ashraf and Galor (2010) is on genetic diversity and biological mechanisms, a similar trade-o¤
between costs and bene…ts could emerge with respect to diversity in culturally transmitted traits.
Ashraf and Galor (2011b) explicitly focus on the costs and bene…ts of cultural diversity (Quadrant
II) when providing a framework to understand the e¤ects of prehistoric measures of geographic
isolation on economic development.31
While there are relatively few contributions in the social sciences that focus on biological transmission, there is a much larger literature on culturally-transmitted traits and development (Quadrant II). Among recent contributions, Guido Tabellini (2008, 2010) argues that speci…c cultural
traits, such as generalized trust and individualism, can account causally for variation in institutional development across regions of Europe, and hence indirectly for variation in the level of
economic development there. An extensive comparative and historical analysis of the role of cul31

Regarding the mechanisms in Quadrant I, there is also a literature in political science, discussed by James

H. Fowler and Darren Schreiber (2008), arguing that direct biological e¤ects are relevant in the study of political
attitudes and behavior. Fowler and Schreiber (2008, p. 914) write: "The new science of human nature demands
that we recognize that genes are the institutions of the human body. [...] we cannot fully appreciate their function
in humans without understanding their role in the very complex political and social interactions that characterize
our species." Among the biological evidence cited in their survey is the involvement of neuroreceptors in speci…c
political behavior, such as the link between the DRD2 gene, which codes for a dopamine receptor, and voter turnout
(Christopher T. Dawes and J. H. Fowler, 2009). These claims are controversial among political scientists, and
have been criticized, for example, by Evan Charney and William English (2012). For a recent contribution on the
molecular-genetic-based heritability of economic and political preferences, see Daniel J. Benjamin et. al. (2012).

31

ture, institutions and development is provided in Avner Greif (1994, 2006), who o¤ers a uni…ed
conceptual framework for analyzing the persistence of institutions, their endogenous change, and
the impact of past institutions on subsequent development. As Greif (2006, chapter 1) points out,
culturally transmitted traits, such as beliefs and norms, play a key role in determining which formal
rules are followed and what is the actual economic impact of an institutional organization. Luigi
Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2008) explain the persistence of di¤erences in culturallytransmitted beliefs regarding collective action and cooperation across Italian cities by successfully
testing Robert D. Putnam’s (1993) hypothesis that those di¤erences re‡ect the impact of historical
variables on local civic values.32
Cultural transmission plays a key role in the analysis of divergent paths by China and Europe in
Greif and Tabellini (2010), who argue that China’s and Europe’s distinct cultural and institutional
trajectories during the last millennium re‡ect the impact of di¤erent initial moral systems and
kinship organizations. According to Greif and Tabellini (2010): “The Chinese clan is a kinshipbased hierarchical organization in which strong moral ties and reputation among clan’s members
are particularly important in sustaining cooperation. In Medieval Europe, by contrast, the main
example of a cooperative organization is the city. Here cooperation is across kinship lines and
external enforcement plays a bigger role. But morality and reputation, although weaker, also matter
and extend beyond one’s kin.”This analysis sheds light on why China and other advanced societies
in East Asia have taken so long to catch up with the Industrial Revolution, in spite of positive
historical preconditions and a signi…cant technological lead in early periods, as documented in the
aforementioned studies by Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010) and Putterman and Weil, (2010).33
Direct cultural mechanisms are also at the heart of the already cited study by Ashraf and Galor
(2011b), who argue that the interplay between the forces of cultural assimilation and cultural di¤usion contributed to the long-term patterns of relative development in Europe and Asia. According
to these authors, cultural rigidity was an advantage in earlier phases of development but a hindrance
32

Evidence on the long-term persistence of pernicious cultural traits is provided by Nico Voigtländer and Hans-

Joachim Voth (2011), who use data on anti-Semitism in Germany and …nd continuity at the local level over six
centuries: anti-Semitic pogroms during the Black Death in 1348-50 are a strong and robust predictor of violence
against Jews in the 1920s and of the vote share of the Nazi Party.
33

This is an issue that Jared Diamond also had to face in his book (1997, chapter 16). Classic references on this

topic are Rosenberg and Birdzell (1987) and Mokyr (1990).

32

at later stages.34 Along similar lines, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Gérard Roland (2011) study the
interplay between culture, institutions and economic development. In their analysis, individualism
leads to more innovation while collectivism is associated with static e¢ ciency gains. Consistent
with the view that cultural traits are intergenerationally transmitted, Gorodnichenko and Roland
use genetic variables as instruments to study the e¤ects of culture on productivity. An issue for
this empirical strategy is whether one can exclude additional channels (other intergenerationally
transmitted traits, in addition to individualism vs. collectivism), which may also a¤ect productivity
and development.
Cultural transmission is also at the center of the contribution by Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio
Zilibotti (2008), who provide a theory of preference formation to explain the emergence of industrial
capitalists as the economically dominant group following the British Industrial Revolution. In
this paper, altruistic parents shape their children’s preferences in response to economic incentives,
resulting in the transmission of values across generations. In their framework, middle-class families
worked in occupations that required e¤ort, skill, and experience, and developed patience and work
ethic, whereas landowning aristocratic families relied on rents, and cultivated a taste for leisure.
Those class-speci…c attitudes, rooted in preindustrial professions, became determinants of economic
success after the British Industrial Revolution transformed the economic environment.
The long-term e¤ects of culturally transmitted traits and attitudes have been studied in several
important studies at a more micro-economic level. For instance, Raquel Fernandez and Alessandra
Fogli (2009) study the economic impact of culture by examining the work and fertility behavior of
second-generation American women (women born and raised in the United States from immigrant
families), and …nd a signi…cant e¤ect of intergenerationally transmitted traits, proxied by outcomes
in a woman’s country of ancestry. Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano (2010) study the relation between family ties and a series of economic outcomes in production and labor markets. They de…ne
a measure of family ties using individual responses from the World Value Survey regarding family
role and children’s love and respect for their parents, looking at the behavior of second-generation
immigrants to assess causality and isolate the e¤ect of culture. Identi…cation is obtained by regressing individual-level economic outcomes on the average extent of family ties in the country of
34

While Ashraf and Galor’s (2011b) model is speci…ed in terms of direct e¤ects of inherited cultural traits on

development (Quadrant II), some of their mechanisms could be interpreted in terms of barrier e¤ects (Quadrant VI)
- e.g., the gains from what they call "cultural di¤usion" could include the bene…ts from openness to innovations from
other cultures. We discuss barrier e¤ects below.

33

origin of second-generation immigrants. Reverse causality is not an issue in this context because
the socioeconomic behavior of second-generation immigrants cannot a¤ect the extent of family ties
in their country of origin. They …nd that the strength of family ties signi…cantly increases home
production, reduces female and youth labor force participation and reduces geographic mobility.
These results are consistent with a direct e¤ect on economic outcomes of traits transmitted across
generations. Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2011) study the evolution and persistence of cultural
norms about gender roles and division of labor. They …nd that the contemporary rates of female
participation in labor, entrepreneurial and political activities are signi…cantly lower for the descendants of societies that traditionally practiced plough agriculture. Traditional plough agriculture is
also associated with cultural attitudes disfavoring gender equality. A key role of cultural transmission as the relevant mechanism is con…rmed by their analysis of female labor force participation of
second-generation immigrants living in the United States.
These contributions are part of a growing economic literature that studies the determination and
dynamics of intergenerationally transmitted preferences, beliefs, habits, norms, and attitudes. In
pioneering work, Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier (2000, 2001) provided an economic framework
for the study of the intergenerational transmission of cultural traits. Building on the population
genetics approach of Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981), Bisin and Verdier go beyond mechanical
models of transmission. They explicitly introduce parents’ decisions regarding their children’s
cultural socialization, assuming that parents are altruistic towards their children, but can evaluate
the e¤ects of di¤erent cultural norms only through the …lter of their own culturally determined
evaluation of their children’s utility. In these economic models, cultural transmission is the outcome
of purposeful socialization decisions inside the family (vertical socialization) as well as of indirect
socialization processes, such as social imitation and learning (horizontal and oblique socialization).
The persistence of cultural traits of minorities or cultural assimilation are the outcomes of di¤erent
costs and bene…ts associated with the socialization of children in various environments, which
a¤ect the children’s opportunities for social imitation (what we call "behavioral transmission"
in our taxonomy) and learning. An important assumption in Bisin and Verdier’s approach is
"imperfect empathy" by parents towards their children. In Bisin and Verdier’s framework, parents
know the di¤erent traits that children can adopt, and anticipate the choices that a child with a
given trait will make, but, as already mentioned, they evaluate those choices only through their
own subjective evaluations, not their children’s own evaluations. Hence, parents, while altruistic,
cannot "perfectly empathize" with their children, and tend to prefer children with their own cultural
34

traits. As Bisin and Verdier (2001, p.298) write, such "cultural transmission mechanisms have very
di¤erent implications than evolutionary selection mechanisms with respect to the dynamics of the
distribution of the traits in the population." For instance, unlike more mechanical non-economic
models of cultural transmission, Bisin and Verdier’s approach does not predict complete assimilation
of minorities and faster assimilation for smaller minorities. On the contrary, their model can shed
light on the persistence of "ethnic capital" in immigrants’ descendants, documented by George
Borjas (1992). The cultural transmission model of Bisin and Verdier has been applied to several
cultural traits and norms (for a review of this literature, see Bisin and Verdier, 2010). For instance,
Bisin, Verdier and Giorgio Topa (2004) estimate the structural parameters of the model of marriage
and child socialization in Bisin and Verdier (2000) for religious traits in the United States. They
…nd that observed intermarriage and socialization rates are consistent with Protestants, Catholics
and Jews having a strong preference for children who identify with their own religious beliefs, and
taking costly decisions to in‡uence their children’s beliefs. The framework can therefore explain
long-term persistence of traits and lack of cultural assimilation.
The Bisin-Verdier approach has been used by Patrick François (2002) and François and Jan
Zabojnik (2005) to study social capital and comparative economic development. François and
Zabojnik (2005) use the framework to study the cultural transmission of social capital, de…ned in
terms of "trustworthiness." Their results point to long-term persistence, and "provide an explanation for why late developing countries may not easily be able to transplant the modes of production
that have proved useful in the West." (François and Zabojnik, 2005, p. 51). Such contributions are
part of a much larger literature on the evolution of cooperation and trust, which has a distinguished
pedigree in economics. As Zak and Knack (2001, p. 295) point out, cross-country di¤erences in
trust were observed by Adam Smith (1766) and John Stuart Mill (1848), who wrote "There are
countries in Europe ... where the most serious impediment to conducting business concerns on a
large scale, is the rarity of persons who are supposed …t to be trusted with the receipt and expenditure of large sums of money" (Mill, 1848, p. 132). A recent example of the fast-expanding literature
on trust and development is the empirical contribution by Yann Algan and Pierre Cahuc (2010),
who explicitly exploit transmission across generations. Algan and Cahuc estimate the e¤ect of trust
on economic growth by using the inherited component of trust and its time variation. They show
that inherited trust of descendants of immigrants in the United States is in‡uenced by the country
of origin and the timing of arrival of their ancestors, and use inherited trust of those descendants
as a time-varying measure of inherited trust in their country of origin. They …nd a sizeable causal
35

impact of inherited trust on worldwide growth during the twentieth century, controlling for country
…xed e¤ects.
While most economic contributions on cooperation and trust tend to focus on purely cultural
transmission (Quadrant II), an interdisciplinary literature on the evolution of altruistic behavior
has also stressed gene-culture interactions (Quadrant III), which includes Boyd, Gintis, Bowles, and
Richerson (2003), and Gintis, Bowles, Boyd and Fehr (2003). A recent book on this important topic
is Bowles and Gintis (2011). Building on extensive empirical research, Bowles and Gintis calibrate
models of the coevolution of genes and culture using genetic, archaeological, ethnographic and
experimental data. According to these authors, cooperation with fellow group members has been
essential to human survival for thousands of generations, and groups that created social institutions
to protect the altruistic from exploitation by the sel…sh have been able to ‡ourish and prevail in
con‡icts with less cooperative groups. In particular, this research suggests that the emergence of
social emotions, such as shame and guilt, and the internalization of social norms have been essential
to the process of genetic and cultural co-evolution (Quadrant III).
4.3.2

Quadrants IV, V and VI

Other accounts of the development process over the long run rely on barrier e¤ects. The basic
hypothesis is that the intergenerational transmission of human traits –biologically and/or culturally
– generates long-term persistence in income levels because, over time, genetic and cultural drift
leads to greater distance between populations, and thus higher barriers to the adoption of major
innovations when a given population is distant from the innovator population.
One example of how genetically transmitted traits can create barriers between populations
(Quadrant IV) is the argument in Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2009) that somatic distance
between European populations is a negative correlate of bilateral trust, and in turn of bilateral trade.
Cultural barriers to trade exemplify the e¤ects in Quadrant V. For instance, Gabriel Felbermayr
and Farid Toubal (2010) provide a creative empirical analysis of the relation between cultural
proximity and international trade, using bilateral score data from the Eurovision Song Contest, a
popular pan-European television show. Viewers in Cyprus award Greek singers 7:41 more points on
average than the Greek receive from viewers in other countries, and Greek viewers award Cypriot
singers extra 6:26 points on average. The scores also reveal lack of a¢ nity between some countries for example, Cyprus and Turkey viewers award each other below-average grades. The relation need

36

not be reciprocal. French viewers grade British singers 0:86 points below average, while British
viewers are neutral about French singers. Felbermayr and Toubal exploit the variation of these
scores across time and within-pair to study the e¤ects of cultural proximity on bilateral trade,
separating a preference channel from a trade-cost channel.35 They …nd that one-third of the total
e¤ect of cultural proximity on bilateral trade is due to the preference e¤ect.
A theoretical study of the interactions between trade and long-term cultural and institutional
diversity across societies is provided by Marianna Belloc and Samuel Bowles (2010). Their paper is
motivated by the persistence of cultural and institutional di¤erences in a globally integrated world
economy In their framework, the decentralized updating of both preferences and contractual choices
support durable cultural and institutional di¤erences, which provide a basis for specialization,
comparative advantage, and trade. In Belloc and Bowles (2010), international economic integration,
by making experimentation more costly, paradoxically increases the barriers to cultural-institutional
transitions.
As already described in Section 3, in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) we emphasized the types of
long-run e¤ects captured by Quadrants IV, V and VI. In that paper, we placed the genealogical history of populations at the center of our analysis. The central hypothesis was that distance in human
traits (rather than distance in geographic space) created barriers to the di¤usion of fundamental
innovations –most importantly, in recent centuries, to the spread of the Industrial Revolution. We
used relative genetic distance from the frontier to capture those long-term barriers. As already
discussed in the previous section, genetic distance is a measure of general genealogical relatedness,
i.e., of similarity of slow-moving traits, genetic, epigenetic, and cultural. Hence, the "e¤ects of
genetic distance" studied by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) are not synomynous with "e¤ects of genetic transmission," but capture the e¤ects of all kinds of intergenerationally transmitted traits. In
particular, the barrier e¤ects emphasized in that contribution can operate through any combination
of inheritance mechanisms (Quadrants IV, V and VI).
As discussed above, the most recent scienti…c literature suggests that it may be conceptually very
di¢ cult, or even meaningless, to separate biological and cultural mechanisms, given the coevolution
35

Felbermayr and Toubal (2010) use two empirical strategies. The …rst strategy assumes that trade costs are not

a¤ected by swings in bilateral attitudes but depend on the deep time-invariant components of cultural proximity,
while the preference channel depends on more short-lived fads. The second strategy assumes that trade costs depend
only on the symmetric component of cultural proximity. The two strategies provide similar results.

37

of biological and cultural traits. Consequently, a more productive approach, from an empirical
perspective, is to focus on whether intergenerationally-transmitted traits - whether biological or
cultural - operate directly or as barriers to the di¤usion of innovations. In other words, while
the rows in our taxonomy matrix may be useful to sketch ideal types of inheritance mechanisms,
empirically it may be more fruitful to focus on the columns. Consistent with this view, Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009) use genetic distance relative to the technological frontier to provide evidence on
barrier e¤ects associated with long-term historical relatedness between populations, while remaining
agnostic about whether the inheritance mechanisms behind those barriers are biological, cultural,
or a combination of both. However, indirect evidence about the timing of the e¤ects and the fact
that they operate even among populations that are genetically very close (e.g. within Europe)
suggest that a signi…cant part of these barrier e¤ects, while measured by genetic distance, are likely
to have been transmitted culturally rather than biologically across generations.
In Spolaore and Wacziarg (2011), we pursued these ideas by studying the e¤ects of human
relatedness on the adoption of speci…c technologies across countries. To do so, we used the Comin,
Easterly and Gong (2010) historical dataset and the dataset for post-1800 technologies from Comin
and Hobijn (2009). We compared the empirical e¤ects of the simple genetic distance between
populations to that of genetic distance relative to the technological frontier, …nding that the latter
trumps the former as a determinant of bilateral di¤erences in technological adoption rates. This
empirical test is consistent with a barrier e¤ect of long-term historical distance, whereby societies
that are more distant from the technological frontier tend to face higher imitation costs - for
example, because people may respond to di¤erences with distrust and unwillingness to interact
and learn from each other. We found large and statistically signi…cant e¤ects of genetic distance
relative to the frontier on technology use di¤erences. These large e¤ects at the level of individual
technologies can help explain current di¤erences in total factor productivity and income per capita
across countries.36
Desmet, Le Breton, Ortuño-Ortín and Weber (2011) document the close relationship between
genetic distance and cultural di¤erences. They show a strong and robust correlation between
answers to the World Values Survey (WVS) and genetic distance, …nding that European populations
that are genetically closer give more similar answers to a set of 430 questions about norms, values
36

While long-term historical barriers captured by genetic distance tend to prevent productivity-enhancing inter-

actions, such as the spread of new technologies, they may also reduce destructive interactions between populations,
such as international con‡ict, as we show in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2010).

38

and cultural characteristics, included in the 2005 WVS sections on perceptions of life, family, religion
and morals. They also …nd that the correlation between genetic distance and cultural values remains
positive and signi…cant after controlling for linguistic and geographic distances. Their empirical
analysis supports Spolaore and Wacziarg’s (2009, 2011) interpretation of genetic distance, not
as a purely genetic measure capturing exclusively biological e¤ects and mechanisms, but as a
broad genealogical measure of historical links between populations, capturing the intergenerational
transmission of traits along the three dimensions, including the cultural channel and the geneculture interaction channel (Quadrant IV, V, VI).
A focus on barrier e¤ects is especially promising when the goal is to study the di¤usion of
development and innovations from the technological frontier. In contrast, it is much harder to assess
the e¤ects of intergenerationally transmitted traits on the onset of major technological changes.
For instance, while barrier e¤ects can explain how the Industrial Revolution spread across di¤erent
societies over time and space, it is much harder to identify which intergenerationally transmitted
traits, if any, are responsible for the original onset of such a major technological and institutional
change. This di¢ culty is due to at least two reasons. Firstly, phenomena such the Industrial
Revolution are, almost by de…nition, unique and exceptional, and therefore one cannot build a
dataset of di¤erent and independent Industrial Revolutions to test alternative theories of onset.
Secondly, such a complex phenomenon is likely to be the outcome of a vast set of forces and
causes, including historical accidents and contingencies. For example, it has been argued that the
Industrial Revolution may not have occurred where and when it did, were it not for a series of
historical contingencies, such as the events leading to the signing of the Magna Carta, the failure
of the Spanish armies to subjugate Protestant societies, the Glorious Revolution, and, at a deeper
level, the emergence of a transnational market for ideas during the Enlightenment. An extensive
discussion of these important issues appears in Joel Mokyr (2005, 2010). As Mokyr (2005, p.
1171) points out: "underneath its surface the European soil in 1500 already contained the seeds
of future divergence in 1750. There was, however, nothing inexorable about what happened after:
the seeds need not have sprouted, they could have been washed away by the ‡ood of wars. or the
young sprouts of future growth might have been pulled out by rapacious tax collectors or burned
by intolerant religious authorities. There could have been a Great Convergence after 1800 instead
of what actually took place, in which Europe would have reverted back to the kind of economic
performance prevalent in 1500. In the end, the economic history of technology, - like all evolutionary
sequences - contains a deep and irreducible element of contingency. Not all that was had to be."
39

In general, a fuller understanding of the process of economic development will emerge from the
study of the interactions between persistent traits, transmitted from one generation to the next over
the long run, and contingent shocks and changes, whose e¤ects across societies may partly depend
on persistent traits - for example, when the di¤usion of brand-new technological and institutional
innovations in modern times depends on long-term genealogical relatedness.

5

Conclusion

The recent literature on economic growth and development has increasingly focused on very longrun e¤ects of geographic, historical, and cultural factors on productivity and income per capita. In
this article we have reviewed this line of research, and presented empirical evidence documenting
such e¤ects. In conclusion, what have we learned from this new literature?
A …rst message from this research is that technology and productivity tend to be highly persistent even at very long horizons. A major …nding is the indirect and persistent e¤ect of prehistorical
biogeographic conditions. According to Olsson and Hibbs (2005), Neolithic advantages continue
to have e¤ects on contemporary income per capita, consistently with Jared Diamond’s hypothesis.
The e¤ects of favorable Neolithic conditions on productivity in more recent times is also documented by Ashraf and Galor (2011a). Long-term persistence is at the heart of Comin, Easterly
and Gong’s (2010) …ndings that countries using the most advanced technologies in the year 1000
B.C. tend to remain the users of the most advanced technologies in 1500 and today, particularly if
we correct for their populations’changing ancestry.
The importance of controlling for populations’ancestry highlights the second message from this
literature: long-term persistence holds at the level of populations rather than locations. A focus on
populations rather than locations helps us understand both persistence and reversal of fortune, and
sheds light on the spread of economic development. The need to adjust for population ancestry is at
the core of Putterman and Weil’s (2010) contribution, showing that current economic development
is correlated with historical characteristics of a population’s ancestors, including ancestors’ years
of experience with agriculture, going back, again, to the Neolithic transition. The overall message
from Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010), Putterman and Weil (2010) and several other contributions
covered in this article is that long-term historical factors predict current income per capita, and
that these factors become much more important when considering the history of populations rather
than locations.
40

Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009, 2011) take this insight a step further, studying the di¤usion of development and innovations with an explicit focus on measures of long-term genealogical relatedness
between populations (genetic distance). The third message from this literature, then, is that longterm genealogical links across populations play an important role in explaining the transmission of
technological and institutional knowledge and the di¤usion of economic development.
Much research remains to be done on the speci…c mechanisms at work, and the speci…c intergenerationallytransmitted traits that hinder development either directly or by creating barriers. Conceptually,
one can distinguish among di¤erent transmission mechanisms (biological and cultural). However,
current scienti…c advances have increasingly blurred and made obsolete the old distinction between
nature and nurture, and emphasized the complex interactions among di¤erent inheritance systems
(genetic, epigenetic, behavioral and symbolic: Jablonka and Lamb, 2005) and the coevolution of
genes and culture (Richerson and Boyd, 2004). In this article we argued that, when studying the
economic impact of intergenerational transmission, a more promising approach can proceed from
the distinction between direct and barrier e¤ects. The hypothesis behind barriers e¤ects of genealogical relatedness is that populations which happen to be historically and culturally farther
from the innovators tend to face higher costs to imitate and adopt new technologies, because of
di¤erences in values and norms, mistrust, miscommunication, discrimination, etc. Our …ndings
(Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009, 2011) on the e¤ects of genetic distance relative to the technological
frontier are consistent with an important role for barrier e¤ects, but the respective quantitative
contribution of direct versus barrier e¤ects remains a subject for future research.
Taking the recent literature seriously implies acknowledging the limits faced by policy-makers
in signi…cantly altering the wealth of nations when history casts a very long shadow. A realistic
understanding of the role of historical factors is essential for policy assessment. One could obtain
misleading conclusions about the e¤ects of speci…c policies and institutions when not taking into
account the role of long-term variables. For example, one may erroneously infer a major role for
speci…c national institutions in Africa, even though, as shown by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2010), national institutions have little e¤ect when looking at the economic performance of homogeneous ethnic groups divided by national borders. In general, a richer understanding of the
mechanisms through which long-term variables a¤ect current outcomes will improve our ability to
assess the impact of current and future policies.
If current development is a function of very long-term historical factors, are development policies

41

hopeless? Not necessarily. The evidence is consistent with cautious optimism about our ability to
overcome long-term constraints, for three major reasons:
Firstly, long-term history, while very important, is not a deterministic straightjacket. Historical
variables do not explain all of the variation in income per capita. In Putterman and Weil (2010),
the R-squared on state history, agriculture adoption and the fraction of European descent jointly
does not exceed 60%. In Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010), the R-squared in regressions of current
income or technological sophistication on lagged technologies is never greater than 40%, depending
on the exact time frame (see their Table 8B). In Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), a standard deviation
change in genetic distance relative to the world technological frontier accounts for about 35% of
the variation in income di¤erences. That leaves a large fraction of variation to be explained by
other factors and forces, suggesting that many societies can escape the straightjacket of history.
Persistence does not mean perfect, deterministic persistence. While there is signi…cant persistence
in the use of advanced technologies over time and space, there have also been signi…cant shifts in the
technological frontier, with populations at the periphery becoming major innovators, and former
frontier societies falling behind. In a nutshell, while long-term history matters, there is much scope
for variations, exceptions and contingencies.
Secondly, such variations, exceptions and contingencies are unlikely to take place in a purely
random fashion, but are a¤ected by human actions. The intergenerational transmission of traits and
characteristics happens with variation, and the di¤usion of knowledge takes place not only vertically
(from one generation to the next within populations) but also horizontally (across populations).
Major changes can sometime take place relatively quickly, sidestepping historical constraints. Still,
they are more likely to be successful and persistent if rooted in a fuller understanding of longterm forces and traditions. To paraphrase the Churchill quote with which we opened this article,
the further backward you look, the further forward you may be able to produce positive change.
Cultures and societies are persistent but dynamic, and can change over time, as stressed in a famous
quote attributed to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan: "The central conservative truth is that it
is culture, not politics, that determines the success of a society. The central liberal truth is that
politics can change a culture and save it from itself."37 .
Thirdly, a cautiously optimistic outlook can emerge if we interpret the e¤ects of history and
relatedness in terms of barriers to the di¤usion of development and innovations. Barriers do matter
37

This quote inspired a book by Lawrence Harrison (2006).

42

and can explain long delays in the di¤usion of prosperity across societies. Barriers can also be
overcome and have indeed been overcome historically. In our work, the estimated e¤ect of relative
genetic distance on income di¤erences peaked in the second half of the 19th century, and has been
declining in the second half of the 20th century. This suggests that the degree to which di¤erences
in intergenerationally transmitted traits constitute barriers has changed in the era of globalization,
through greater exchanges of human capital, ideas, blueprints, and greater convergence of norms
and values, facilitating the horizontal di¤usion of technological and institutional innovations.38
The di¤usion of modern development to East Asia, which started in Japan and spread to nearby
societies, is an example of successfully overcoming long-term barriers. Japan is geographically, historically and genetically distant from the European innovators, but it got the Industrial Revolution
relatively early. This is not inconsistent with the existence of historical and cultural barriers across
populations, because such barriers operate on average, and it is always possible for some society
to develop traits and characteristics that make it closer to the innovator, or to sidestep cultural
and historical barriers altogether through historical contingencies. When Japan got the Industrial
Revolution, it became a cultural beachhead. South Korea followed, and then industrialization and
modernization spread across several societies in East Asia. North Korea, in contrast, is a sad
example that very bad policies and institutions can kill growth and development in a society irrespectively of any long-term historical and cultural variables. One can hope that North Koreans will
be able to bene…t from their historical, cultural and geographic proximity to South Koreans when
those arti…cial constraints to development are …nally removed. An example of how more recent
institutional shocks may interact with longer-term variables is provided by Ying Bai and James
Kai-sing Kung (2010), who use the ending of the severance of ties between the Chinese mainland
and Taiwan as a natural experiment. They …nd that relative but not absolute genetic distance from
Taiwan has increased the income di¤erence between pairs of Chinese provinces. While one must be
cautious about the interpretation of this speci…c case study, these barrier e¤ects are consistent with
the mechanisms suggested in our own research (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009 and 2011). In general, these examples illustrate the complex interplay between more recent political and institutional
shocks and long-term historical forces.
Another interesting example is the role of Hong Kong in China’s development, recently stressed
38

Fruitful links may exist between this important area for future research and the growing literature on education

and human-capital externalities in neighborhoods and cities (e.g., see Enrico Moretti, 2004) and on the economics of
social interactions (e.g., see Steven N. Durlauf and Yannis Ioannides, 2010; Ioannides, 2012).

43

by Paul Romer (2009). Romer argues that the fast rate of economic growth in China has a lot to
do with the demonstration e¤ect of Hong Kong - that is, Hong Kong was a beachhead in China
from which modernity was able to spread. Under this view, when Britain gave back Hong Kong
to China in 1997, it was not so much the reintegration of Hong Kong into China but rather the
reintegration of China into Hong Kong. According to Romer, Southern Chinese cities or special
economic zones developed largely as the result of having generalized what had worked in Hong
Kong. This progressively led to the spread of more free-market oriented rules, as Romer calls them,
to the rest of China. Romer advocates generalizing this example by ways of charter cities that
could act as beachheads in order to accelerate the di¤usion of development. While we do not know
whether this speci…c idea may actually work in practice, we present it as an interesting example
of the kind of policies re‡ecting an understanding of long-term historical forces and barriers to
the di¤usion of development. In a way, this can be interpreted as an example of a more general
approach to development policies: if you want to develop, build on historical precedent but try to
generalize exceptions to the persistence of economic fortunes.
In conclusion, there is still room for development policies to reduce barrier e¤ects and to accelerate the spread of ideas and innovations across populations, especially in the context of an
increasingly globalized world where barriers to the di¤usion of development can be brought down
more rapidly. The research surveyed in this article can help us assess both the potential and limits
of these policies.

44

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91 (5): 13691401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. "Reversal of Fortune: Geography
and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4): 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. 2005. "Institutions as A Fundamental
Cause of Long-Run Growth." Chapter 6 in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook
of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Albouy, David Y. 2011. "The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation: Comment." forthcoming American Economic Review (previous version: "The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Investigation of the Settler Mortality Data." NBER
Working Paper #14130, June 2008).
Alesina, Alberto F. and Paola Giuliano. 2010. "The Power of the Family." Journal of Economic
Growth 15 (2): 93-125.
Alesina, Alberto F., Paola Giuliano and Nathan Nunn. 2011. "On The Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough." NBER Working Paper #17098.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc. 2010. "Inherited Trust and Growth." American Economic Review
100 (5): 2060-2092
Appleby, Joyce. 2010. The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism, New York: Norton &
Co.
Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2010. "The ‘Out-of-Africa’Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development." working paper, Brown University, forthcoming in
the American Economic Review.
Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2011a. "Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch."
American Economic Review 101 (5): 2003-2041.
Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2011b. "Cultural Diversity, Geographical Isolation, and the
Origin of the Wealth of Nations." NBER Working Paper #17640.

45

Bai, Ying Bai and James Kai-sing Kung. 2011. "Genetic Distance and Income Di¤erence: Evidence
from Changes in China’s Cross-strait Relations." Economics Letters 110 (3): 255–258.
Becker, Sascha and Ludger Woessmann. 2009. "Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
Protestant Economic History." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 531-596.
Belloc, Marianna and Samuel Bowles. 2010. "International Trade, Factor Mobility, and the Persistence of Cultural-Institutional Diversity." working paper, Sapienza University of Rome, Santa Fe
Institute and University of Siena.
Benjamin, Daniel J., David Cesarini, Matthijs J. H. M. van der Loos, Christopher T. Dawes, Philipp
D. Koellinger, Patrik K. E. Magnusson, Christopher F. Chabris, Dalton Conley, David Laibson,
Magnus Johannesson and Peter M. Vissche. 2012. "The Genetic Architecture of Economic and
Political Preferences." Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences of the United States, May 7.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2000. "Beyond The Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic And Religious Traits." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:
955-988.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2001. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
Evolution of Preferences." Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): pp. 298-319.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2010. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization." NBER Working Paper #16512.
Bisin, Alberto, Thierry Verdier and Giorgio Topa. 2004. "Religious Intermarriage and Socialization
in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 112 (3): 615-664.
Bloom, David .E. and Je¤rey D. Sachs. 1998. "Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in
Africa." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 207-295.
Bockstette, Valerie, Areendam Chanda, and Louis Putterman. 2002. "States and Markets: the
Advantage of an Early Start." Journal of Economic Growth 7 (4): 347-369.
Borjas, George J. 1992. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107 (1): 123-50.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 2011. A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its
Evolution, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

46

Boyd, Robert, Hebert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, and Peter J. Richerson. 2003. "The Evolution of
Altruistic Punishment." Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 100 (6): 3531-3535.
Brügger, Beatrix, Rafael Lalive and Josef Zweimüller. 2009. "Does Culture A¤ect Unemployment?
Evidence from the Röstigraben." IZA Discussion Papers #4283.
Cassirer, Ernst. 1944. An Essay on Man: An Introduction to a Philosophy of Human Culture.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca and Marcus W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution:
A Quantitative Approach. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca, Paolo Menozzi and Alberto Piazza. 1994. The History and Geography
of Human Genes. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chanda, Areendam and Louis Putterman. 2007. "Early Starts, Reversals and Catch-up in the
Process of Economic Development." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109 (2): 387-413.
Chandler, Vicki and Mary Alleman. 2008. "Paramutation: Epigenetic Instructions Passed Across
Generations." Genetics 178: 1839-1844.
Charney, Evan and William English. 2012. "Candidate Genes and Political Behavior." American
Political Science Review 106: 1-34.
Clark, Gregory. 2007. A Farewell to Alms. A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Comin, Diego and Bart Hobijn. 2009. "The CHAT Dataset." Harvard Business School Working
Paper #10-035.
Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong. 2010. "Was the Wealth of Nations Determined
in 1000 BC?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (3): 65-97.
Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman. 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation." American Economic Review 97 (2): 31-47.
Dawes, Christopher T. and James H. Fowler. 2009. "Partisanship, Voting, and the Dopamine D2
Receptor Gene." Journal of Politics 71 (3): 1157-1171.
Desmet, Klaus, Michel Le Breton, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín, and Shlomo Weber. 2011. "The Stability
and Breakup of Nations: a Quantitative Analysis." Journal of Economic Growth 16: 183-213.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies. New York: Norton
& Co.
47

Diamond, Jared and James A. Robinson, eds. 2010. Natural Experiments of History. Cambridge
(MA): Harvard University Press.
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008. "Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2): 747-793
Durlauf, Steven N. and Yannis Ioannides. 2010. "Social Interactions." Annual Review of Economics
2: 451-478.
Durham, William H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. "Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments In‡uence
Economic Development." Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 3-39.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2009. "The European Origins of Economic Development."
Working Paper, NYU and Brown University.
Enattah, Nabil Sabri, Timo Sahi, Erkki Savilahti, Joseph D. Terwilliger, Leena Peltonen, Irma
Järvelä. 2002. "Identi…cation of a Variant Associated with Adult-type Hypolactasia." Nature
Genetics 30 (2): 233-7.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤. 1997. "Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Di¤erential Growth Paths Among New World Economies." In S. Haber (ed.), How Latin America
Fell Behind, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤. 2002. "Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths
of Development Among New World Economies." Economia 3 (1): 41-88.
Felbermayr, Gabriel J. and Farid Toubal. 2010. "Cultural Proximity and Trade." European Economic Review 54 (2): 279-293.
Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 146-77.
Fowler, James H. and Darren Schreiber. 2008. "Biology, Politics, and the Emerging Science of
Human Nature." Science 322 (5903): 912-914.
François, Patrick. 2002. Social Capital and Economic Development. New York: Routledge.
François, Patrick and Jan Zabojnik. 2005. "Trust, Social Capital and Economic Development."
Journal of the European Economics Association 3 (1): 51-94.

48

Galor, Oded. 2005. "From Stagnation to Growth: Uni…ed Growth Theory." Chapter 4 in Philippe
Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Galor, Oded. 2011. Uni…ed Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2002. "Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1133-1191.
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav and Dietrich Vollrath. 2009. "Inequality in Landownership, the Emergence of Human-Capital Promoting Institutions, and the Great Divergence." Review of Economic
Studies 76 (1): 143-179.
Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 2000. "Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond." American Economic Review 90 (4): 806828.
Gintis, H., S. Bowles, R. Boyd and E. Fehr. 2003. "Explaining Altruistic Behavior in Humans."
Evolution and Human Behavior 24 (3): 153-172.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. "Do
Institutions Cause Growth?" Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 271-303.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Gérard Roland. 2011. "Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations." Working Paper, UC Berkeley.
Greif, Avner. 1994. "Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
Re‡ection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies." Journal of Political Economy 102 (5): 91250.
Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval
Trade. Cambridge (MA): Cambridge University Press.
Greif, Avner and Guido Tabellini. 2010. "Cultural and Institutional Bifurcation: China and Europe
Compared." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100 (2): 135-140.
Guglielmino, Carmela Rosalba, Carla Viganotti, Barry Hewlett, and Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza.
1995. "Cultural Variation in Africa: Role of Mechanisms of Transmission and Adaptation," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 92 (16): 7585-7589.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2008. "Long Term Persistence." NBER Working
Paper #14278.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2009. "Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1095-1131.
49

Harrison, Lawrence E. 2006. The Central Liberal Truth: How Politics Can Change a Culture and
Save It from Itself. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Henrich, Joseph and Richard McElreath. 2003. "The Evolution of Cultural Evolution." Evolutionary Anthropology 12: 123-135.
Hibbs, Douglas A. Jr. and Ola Olsson. 2004. "Geography, Biogeography, and Why Some Countries
Are Rich and Others Are Poor." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States 101 (10): 3715-3720.
Ioannides, Yannis. 2012. From Neighborhoods to Nations: The Economics of Social Interactions.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Jablonka, Eva and Marion J. Lamb. 2005. Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic,
Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Jones, Eric L. 1988. Growth Recurring. Economic Change in World History. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kamarck, Andrew M. 1976. The Tropics and Economic Development. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. "Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to
1990." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 681-716.
Kretchmer Norman. 1972. "Lactose and Lactase." Scienti…c American 227 (4): 71-78.
Kroeber, Alfred L. and Clyde Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture. A Critical Review of Concepts and
De…nitions. Cambridge (MA): Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard
University.
Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So
Poor. New York: Norton & Co.
Langworth, Richard. 2008. Churchill by Himself: The De…nitive Collection of Quotations. New
York: Public A¤airs.
Lumey, Lambert H. 1992. "Decreased Birthweights in Infants after Maternal in Utero Exposure to
the Dutch Famine of 1944-1945." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 6: 240–253.
Machiavelli, Niccolò. 1531. Discourses on Livy. Oxford: Oxford University Press (2009).
Marshall, A. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: McMillan.

50

Masters, William A. and Margaret S. McMillan. 2001. "Climate and Scale in Economic Growth."
Journal of Economic Growth 6 (3): 167-86.
McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. Middlesex (England): Penguin Books.
McNeill, John Robert and William H. McNeill. 2003. The Human Web; A Bird’s-Eye View of
World History, New York: Norton & Co.
Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou. 2010. "Divide and Rule or the Rule of the Divided?
Evidence from Africa." CEPR Discussion Paper #8088.
Mill, John Stuart. 1848. Principles of Political Economy. London: John W. Parker.
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2005. "Long-term Economic Growth and the History of Technology." Chapter 17 in
Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, 1, part II, Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Mokyr, Joel. 2010. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-1850. New
Haven (CT): Yale University Press.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat. 1748. The Spirit of the Laws. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. "Human Capital Externalities in Cities." Chapter 51 in Vernon Henderson
and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 4: 2243-2291.
Amsterdam: North Holland-Elsevier.
Morgan, Daniel K. and Emma Whitelaw. 2008. "The Case for Transgenerational Epigenetic
Inheritance in Humans." Mammalian Genome, 19: 394-397.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1968. Asian Drama: An Inquiry Into the Poverty of Nations. New York:
Twentieth Century Fund.
North, Douglass. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York (NY): Norton.
North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge
(UK): Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass and Robert Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
History. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press.
51

Nunn, Nathan. 2009. "The Importance of History for Economic Development." Annual Review of
Economics 1: 65-92.
Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga. 2007. "Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa."
CEPR Discussion Paper #6253.
Olsson, Ola and Douglas A. Hibbs Jr. 2005. "Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development." European Economic Review 49 (4): 909-938.
Paik, Christopher. 2010. "A Neolithic Study of the Divergence of Groups and Cultural Persistence."
Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Putnam, Robert D. with Robert Leonardi and Ra¤aella Y. Nanetti. 1993. Making Democracy
Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Putterman, Louis and David N. Weil. 2010. "Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run
Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4): 16271682.
Rappaport, Jordan and Sachs, Je¤rey D. 2003. "The United States as a Coastal Nation." Journal
of Economic Growth 8 (1): 5-46.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed
Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ridley, Matt. 2010. The Rational Optimist. How Prosperity Evolves. New York: HarperCollins
Publishers.
Rogers, Everett M. 2003. The Di¤ usion of Innovations, …fth edition […rst edition: 1962]. New
York: Free Press.
Romer, Paul. 2009. "A Theory of History, with an Application." Long Now Foundation, lecture
available online at http://fora.tv/2009/05/18/Paul_Romer_A_Theory_of_History_with_an_Application.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Luther E. Birdzell Jr. 1987. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic
Transformation of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Books.
Sachs, Je¤rey D. 2001. "Tropical Underdevelopment." NBER Working Paper #8119.
Sachs, Je¤rey D. and Pia Malaney. 2002. "The Economic and Social Burden of Malaria." Nature
415: 680–685.
Sachs, Je¤rey D., Andrew D. Mellinger, and John L. Gallup. 2001. "The Geography of Poverty
and Wealth." Scienti…c American March: 71-74.
52

Sachs, Je¤rey D. and Andrew M. Warner. 2001. "The Curse of Natural Resources." European
Economic Review, 45 (4-6): 827-838.
Seabright, Paul. 2010. The Company of Strangers: A Natural History of Economic Life, Revised
Edition [First edition: 2004]. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Settle, Jaime E., Christopher T. Dawes and James H. Fowler. 2009. "The Heritability of Partisan
Attachment." Political Research Quarterly, 62 (3): 601-613.
Shari¤, Asim, Ara Norenzayan and Joseph Henrich. 2009. "The Birth of High Gods: How the Cultural Evolution of Supernatural Policing Agents In‡uenced the Emergence of Complex, Cooperative
Human Societies, Paving the Way for Civilization": pp. 117-136 in M. Schaller, A. Norenzayan, S.
Heine, T. Yamagishi and T. Kameda (eds.), Evolution, Culture and the Human Mind. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Simoons, Frederick J. 1969. "Primary Adult Lactose Intolerance and the Milking Habit: A Problem
in Biological and Cultural Interrelations: I. Review of the Medical Research." The American Journal
of Digestive Diseases 14: 819-836.
Simoons, Frederick J. 1970. "Primary Adult Lactose Intolerance and the Milking habit: A Problem
in Biological and Cultural Interrelations: II. A Culture Historical Hypothesis." The American
Journal of Digestive Diseases 15: 695-710.
Smith, Adam. 1766. "Lecture on the In‡uence of Commerce on Manners." Reprinted in D. B. Klein,
ed. Reputation: Studies in the Voluntary Elicitation of Good Conduct. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1997.
Sokolo¤, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. "Institutions, Factor Endowments and Paths
of Development in the New World." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (3): 217-232.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2009. "The Di¤usion of Development." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 124 (2): 469-529.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2010. "War and Relatedness." working paper, Tufts
University and UCLA. A previous version was issued as NBER Working Paper #15095, June
2009.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2011. "Long-Term Barriers to the International Di¤usion
of Innovations." NBER Working Paper #17271. Chapter 1 in NBER International Seminar On
Macroeconomics 2011, edited by Je¤rey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, Cambridge (MA):
NBER.
53

Stein, Aryeh D. and Lambert H. Lumey. 2002. "The Relationship between Maternal and O¤spring
Birth Weights after Maternal Prenatal Famine Exposure: the Dutch Famine Birth Cohort Study."
Human Biology 72: 641-654.
Tabellini, Guido. 2008. "Institutions and Culture." Journal of the European Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings 6 (2-3).
Tabellini, Guido. 2010. "Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe." Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4): 677-716.
Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2011. "Persecution Perpetuated: Medieval Origins
of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany." NBER Working Paper #17113, forthcoming in the
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Weber, Max. 1905. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Zak, Paul J. and Stephen Knack. 2001. "Trust and Growth." Economic Journal 111 (470): 295-321.

54

0.044
(6.645)***
-0.049
(0.154)
-0.742
(4.375)***
0.643
(2.496)**

(2)
Olsson-Hibbs
samplea
0.052
(7.524)***
0.209
(0.660)
-0.518
(2.687)***
0.306
(1.033)
-0.410
(1.595)
-0.499
(2.487)**
0.920
(3.479)***
0.706
(6.931)***

(3)
Olsson-Hibbs
samplea

-0.650
(2.252)**
-0.572
(2.622)**
0.560
(1.996)**

(4)
Olsson-Hibbs
samplea

-0.421
(1.641)
-0.505
(2.523)**
0.952
(3.425)***
0.768
(4.739)***
-0.074
(0.483)
8.741
(61.352)***
102
0.516

(5)
Olsson-Hibbs
samplea

-0.448
(1.646)
-0.226
(1.160)
1.306
(4.504)***
0.780
(5.167)***
0.086
(0.581)
8.438
(60.049)***
83
0.641

(6)
Old World
only

55

0.585
(4.759)***
7.703
7.354
8.745
8.958
(25.377)***
(25.360)***
(61.561)***
(58.200)***
Observations
155
102
102
102
Adjusted R-squared
0.440
0.546
0.521
0.449
Robust t statistics in parentheses ; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
a: The Olsson and Hibbs sample excludes the neo-European countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the USA) and countries whose current
income is based primarily on extractive wealth (Olsson and Hibbs, 2005).
b: First principal component of number of annual or perennial wild grasses and number of domesticable big mammals (all variables from Olsson
and Hibbs, 2005)
c: First principal component of absolute latitude; climate suitability to agriculture; rate of East-West orientation; size of landmass in millions of sq
km (all variables from Olsson and Hibbs, 2005).

Geographic conditions
(Olsson-Hibbs)b
Biological conditions
(Olsson-Hibbs)c
Constant

Island dummy

Landlocked dummy

% land area in the tropics

Absolute latitude

Sample:

(1)
Whole World

Table 1 – Geography and Contemporary Development
(Dependent variable: Log per capita income, 2005; estimator: OLS)

(1)
Years since
agricultural
transition
OLS
-0.074
(3.637)***
-1.052
(2.356)**
-0.585
(2.306)**
-1.085
(3.699)***
0.017
(0.642)
0.554
(8.349)***
OLS
0.027
(2.373)**
1.464
(3.312)***
0.532
(1.616)
0.391
(0.993)

-0.022
(1.411)
0.997
(2.291)**
0.384
(1.332)
0.072
(0.188)
0.030
(1.105)
0.258
(3.129)***

(3)
Population
density in 1500

OLS

(2)
Population
density in 1500

0.020
(1.872)*
1.636
(3.789)***
0.702
(2.158)**
0.508
(1.254)

IV

(4)
Population
density in 1500

56

0.426
0.584
(6.694)***
(6.887)***
4.657
-0.164
-2.159
-2.814
(9.069)***
(0.379)
(4.421)***
(5.463)***
Observations
100
100
98
98
Adjusted R-squared
0.707
0.439
0.393
Robust t statistics in parentheses ; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Number of annual or
perennial wild grasses
Number of domesticcable big mammals
Years since agricultural
transition
Constant

% land area in the
tropics
Landlocked
dummy
Island dummy

Estimator:
Absolute latitude

Dependent Variable:

Table 2 – Geography and Development in 1500 AD

0.117
(1.276)
22.76%
35
0.052

171
0.001

(2)
Europe
Only

0.027
(0.389)
3.26%

(1)
Whole
World

(4)
(5)
Non
Not
Indigenous
Former
European
Colony
With European Countries
0.170
b
(2.045)**
22.34%

73
0.050
Without European Countries
-0.393
-0.030
-0.232
(7.093)***
(0.184)
(2.045)**
-47.88%
-3.08%
-32.81%

b

(3)
Former
European
Colony

57

Log of population density,
-0.246
a
year 1500
(3.304)***
Beta coefficient on 1500
-27.77%
density
Observations
136
98
38
33
R-squared
0.077
0.229
0.001
0.108
Robust t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
All regressions include a constant term (estimates not reported).
a: Empty sample.
b: No European countries in sample, regression results identical to those in the bottom panel.

Log of population density,
year 1500
Beta coefficient on 1500
density
Observations
R-squared

Sample:

-0.371
(4.027)***
-51.69%
28
0.267

103
0.014

b

(7)
Former
European
colony, Non
Indigenous

-0.117
(1.112)
-11.72%

138
0.040

0.193
(2.385)**
20.00%

(6)
Indigenous

Table 3 – Reversal of Fortune
(Dependent variable: Log per capita income, 2005; estimator: OLS)

70
0.069

-0.232
(2.740)**
-26.19%

b

(8)
Former
European
Colony,
Indigenous

(# observations: 139)

Ancestry-adjusted state history

Ancestry-adjusted years of
agriculture
State history

Years of agriculture

0.424

0.618

0.257
0.481

0.817

1.000

Years of
Agriculture

0.457

0.228

Log per
capita
income 2005

58

0.613

0.457

1.000

Ancestry
adjusted
years of
agriculture

0.783

1.000

State history

1.000

Ancestry
adjusted
state history

Table 4 – Historical correlates of development, with and without ancestry adjustment

0.019
(0.535)

(1)
Years of
agriculture

0.099
(2.347)**

(2)
Ancestryadjusted
years of
agriculture

0.074
(0.245)

(3)
State history

(4)
Ancestryadjusted
state history

59

1.217
(3.306)***
0.042
0.040
0.047
0.046
(6.120)***
(6.168)***
(7.483)***
(7.313)***
-0.188
-0.148
0.061
0.269
(0.592)
(0.502)
(0.200)
(0.914)
-0.753
-0.671
-0.697
-0.555
(4.354)***
(3.847)***
(4.122)***
(3.201)***
0.681
0.562
0.531
0.503
(2.550)**
(2.555)**
(2.216)**
(2.338)**
7.699
7.270
7.458
6.773
(22.429)***
(21.455)***
(22.338)***
(19.539)***
Beta coefficients on the bold variable
3.75%
17.23%
1.50%
21.59%
Observations
150
148
136
135
R-squared
0.475
0.523
0.558
0.588
Robust t statistics in parentheses ; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Ancestry-adjusted state
history
Absolute
latitude
% land area
in the tropics
Landlocked
dummy
Island
dummy
Constant

Ancestry-adjusted years
of agriculture
State history

Years of agriculture

Main regressor:

Table 5 – The History of Populations and Economic Development
(Dependent variable: Log per capita income, 2005; estimator: OLS)

1.058
(4.743)***

(1)
Share of
Europeans

(2)
Sample
with less
than 30%
of
Europeans
2.892
(3.506)***
1.079
(4.782)***
0.105
(2.696)***

(3)
Control of
years of
agriculture

1.089
(3.108)***

1.108
(5.519)***

(4)
Control of
state
history

-4.576
(2.341)**
8.637
(20.941)***
149
0.545

0.863
(3.601)***

(5)
Control for
genetic
distance

60

8.064
7.853
7.676
7.195
(24.338)*** (17.030)*** (21.984)*** (21.594)***
Observations
150
92
147
134
R-squared
0.526
0.340
0.580
0.656
Robust t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
All regressions include controls for the following geographic variables: Absolute latitude; % land area in the
tropics; landlocked dummy; island dummy

Fst genetic distance to the USA,
weighted
Constant

Share of descendants of Europeans,
per Putterman and Weil
Ancestry-adjusted years of
agriculture, in thousands
Ancestry-adjusted state history

Main regressor:

Table 6 – Europeans and Development
(Dependent variable: Log per capita income, 2005; estimator: OLS)

0.034
(5.068)***
-0.182
(0.582)
-0.637
(3.686)***
0.584
(2.389)**

-4.038
(3.846)***
-6.440
(3.392)***
0.030
(4.216)***
-0.041
(0.135)
-0.537
(2.971)***
0.607
(2.392)**

(2)
Ancestryadjusted
genetic
distance

0.557
(2.262)**

-4.576
(2.341)**
0.015
(1.838)*
-0.384
(1.189)
-0.521
(3.051)***

(3)
Control for
the share of
Europeans

61

0.863
(3.601)***
8.451
8.618
8.637
(23.577)***
(21.563)***
(20.941)***
Beta coefficients on the bold variable
-23.85%
-27.11%
-20.30%
Observations
155
154
149
R-squared
0.499
0.496
0.545
Robust t statistics in parentheses ; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Fst genetic distance to the USA,
1500 match
Fst genetic distance to the USA,
weighted, current match
Absolute
latitude
% land area
in the tropics
Landlocked
dummy
Island
dummy
Share of descendants of Europeans,
per Putterman and Weil
Constant

Main regressor:

(1)
Indigenous
genetic
distance

Table 7 – Genetic Distance and Economic Development, Cross-Sectional Regressions
(Dependent variable: Log per capita income, 2005)

Table 8 – Income Difference Regressions with Genetic Distance
(Dependent variable: absolute value of difference in log per capita income, 2005)

Specification includes:

(1)
Simple GD

Estimator:

OLS

Fst genetic distance,
weighted
Fst gen. dist. relative to the
USA, weighted
Absolute difference in the shares
of people of European descent
Absolute difference in
Latitudes
Absolute difference in
Longitudes
Geodesic distance
=1 for contiguity
=1 if either country is
an island
=1 if either country is
Landlocked
Difference in % land area in KG
tropical climates
=1 if pair shares at least
one sea or ocean
Freight rate (surface transport)
Constant

(2)
Relative
GD
OLS

2.735
(0.687)**
5.971
(1.085)**

0.562
(0.277)**
-0.117
(0.230)
-0.017
(0.030)
-0.536
(0.057)**
0.123
(0.097)
0.047
(0.089)
0.156
(0.095)*
-0.000
(0.076)
-0.506
(0.748)
1.211
(0.161)**
19.47

0.217
(0.242)
-0.016
(0.214)
-0.018
(0.029)
-0.475
(0.059)**
0.143
(0.093)
0.040
(0.085)
0.124
(0.096)
-0.027
(0.067)
-0.127
(0.835)
1.083
(0.169)**

Standardized Beta, absolute GD
(%)
Standardized Beta, relative GD
28.57
(%)
Standardized Beta, Difference in
Europeans (%)
R-Squared
0.08
0.11
Two-way clustered standard errors in parentheses;
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
All regressions are based on 10,878 observations from 148 countries.

62

(3)
Horserace
OLS
0.607
(0.683)
5.465
(1.174)**

0.268
(0.250)
0.024
(0.205)
-0.025
(0.028)
-0.469
(0.060)**
0.147
(0.094)
0.034
(0.087)
0.113
(0.093)
-0.027
(0.068)
-0.162
(0.835)
1.078
(0.171)**
4.32
26.16

(4)
Control for
Europeans
OLS

(5)
Relative
GD
2SLS with
1500 GD

5.104
(1.038)**
0.620
(0.124)**
-0.369
(0.200)*
-0.308
(0.198)
0.025
(0.027)
-0.351
(0.064)**
0.181
(0.095)*
0.076
(0.085)
0.182
(0.092)**
-0.008
(0.066)
-0.550
(0.783)
0.984
(0.170)**

9.406
(1.887)**

0.112
(0.294)
0.245
(0.240)
-0.049
(0.031)
-0.395
(0.066)**
0.180
(0.093)*
0.011
(0.085)
0.050
(0.100)
-0.050
(0.079)
0.078
(0.674)
0.941
(0.169)**

24.43

45.01

24.95
0.11

0.16

0.10

63

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Income measured as of:
Income 1820
Income 1870
Income 1913
Income 1960
Income 2005
Relative Fst genetic distance to the
0.793
1.885
1.918
4.197
4.842
English population, weighted
(0.291)**
(0.933)**
(0.955)**
(0.822)**
(0.877)**
Observations
990
1,431
1,596
4,005
10,878
Standardized Beta (%)
14.31
23.06
20.93
31.56
28.50
Standardized Beta (%), common samplea
10.98
16.37
15.53
9.00
7.77
R-Squared
0.36
0.30
0.29
0.22
0.23
Two-way clustered standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
All regressions include an intercept term as well as the following geographic control variables: Absolute difference in latitudes, absolute difference
in longitudes, geodesic distance (1000s of km), dummy for contiguity, dummy if either country is an island, difference in % land area in KG
tropical climates, dummy if either country is landlocked, dummy if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, freight rate.
a
: Common sample of 780 observations based on 40 countries for which data is available across all periods.

Table 9 – Historical Regressions
(Dependent variable: Absolute difference in log per capita income, 1820 to 2005; estimator: OLS)

Figure 1 - Genetic distance among 42 populations.
Source: Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994.

64

