                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE VARY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE?

                                          André de Souza
                                         Anthony W. Lynch

                                        Working Paper 18137
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18137


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




This paper supersedes an earlier paper with the same title, coauthored by Anthony Lynch and Jessica
Wachter, that used the same methodology, but a different mutual fund data set. The earlier paper used
the Elton-Gruber-Blake mutual fund database, while this paper uses the CRSP mutual fund database.
The authors would like to thank Wayne Ferson, Jeff Busse, participants at the 2005 AFA Meeting,
seminar participants at NYU, University of Queensland, Queensland University of Technology, Australian
Graduate School of Business, Melbourne Business School, University of Piraeus, and University of
Toronto for their comments and suggestions on the earlier paper. All remaining errors in this paper
are of course the authors' responsibility. Anthony Lynch wrote parts of the earlier paper while visiting
the University of Queensland, and so he would like to thank the people there for their hospitality. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by André de Souza and Anthony W. Lynch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does Mutual Fund Performance Vary over the Business Cycle?
André de Souza and Anthony W. Lynch
NBER Working Paper No. 18137
June 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. G11,G23

                                                ABSTRACT

We develop a new methodology that allows conditional performance to be a function of information
available at the start of the performance period but does not make assumptions about the behavior
of the conditional betas. We use econometric techniques developed by Lynch and Wachter (2011)
that use all available factor return, instrument, and mutual fund data, and so allow us to produce more
precise parameter estimates than those obtained from the usual GMM estimation. We use our SDF-based
method to assess the conditional performance of fund styles in the CRSP mutual fund data set, and
are careful to condition only on information available to investors, and to control for any cyclical performance
by the underlying stocks held by the various fund styles. Moskowitz (2000) suggests that mutual funds
may add value by performing well during economic downturns, but we find that not all funds styles
produce counter-cyclical performance when using dividend yield or term spread as the instrument:
instead, many fund styles exhibit pro-cyclical or non-cyclical performance, especially after controlling
for any cyclicality in the performance of the underlying stocks. For many fund styles, conditional performance
switches from counter-cyclical to pro- or non- cyclical depending on the instrument or pricing model
used. Moreover, we find very little evidence of any business cycle variation in conditional performance
for the 4 oldest fund styles (growth and income, growth, maximum capital gains and income) using
dividend yield or term spread as the instrument, despite estimating the cyclicality parameter using
the GMM method of Lynch and Wachter (2011) that produces more precise parameter estimates than
the usual GMM estimation. Our results are important because they call into question the accepted
wisdom and Moskowitz's conjecture that the typical mutual fund improves investor utility by producing
counter-cyclical abnormal performance.


André de Souza
School of Business
Fordham University
1790 Broadway, Suite 1327
New York, NY 10023
adesouza1@fordham.edu

Anthony W. Lynch
New York University
44 W. 4th Street, #9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alynch@stern.nyu.edu
1        Introduction

Mutual fund performance has long been of interest to financial economists, both because of its
implications for market efficiency, and because of its implications for investors. A key issue in
evaluating performance is the choice of the benchmark model. Recently, the asset pricing literature
has emphasized the distinction between unconditional and conditional asset pricing models.1 The
relative success of conditional models at explaining the cross-section of expected stock returns
raises important questions for the mutual fund researcher. How does one evaluate performance
when the underlying model is conditional? Might performance itself be conditional? In principle,
a conditional model allows both risk loadings and performance over a period to be a function of
information available at the start of the period. Several recent papers allow risk loadings to be time-
varying, but they either assume that conditional performance is a constant (Farnsworth, Ferson,
Jackson, Todd, 2002, for mutual funds), conditional betas are linear in the information variables
(Avramov and Wermers, 2006 for mutual funds in a Baysian setting, Christopherson, Ferson and
Glassman, 1998, for pension funds, Ferson and Harvey, 1999, and Avramov and Chordia, 2006 for
stocks) or both (Ferson and Schadt, 1996, for mutual funds,an important early contribution to the
conditional performance literature).2 Moskowitz (2000) suggests that mutual funds may add value
by performing well during economic downturns.
        We develop a new methodology that allows conditional performance to be a function of infor-
mation variables available at the start of the period, but without assumptions on the behavior of
the conditional betas.3 This methodology uses the Euler equation restriction that comes out of
a factor model rather than the beta pricing formula itself. It only assumes that the stochastic
discount factor (SDF) parameters are linear in the information variables. While the Euler equa-
tion does not provide direct information about the nature of time variation in the risk loadings, it
can provide direct information about time variation in conditional performance. In contrast, the
classic time-series regression methodology can only provide direct information about time-varying
performance if strong assumptions are made about time-varying betas.
        We are careful to condition only on information available to investors at the start of the period,
and to control for any cyclical performance by the underlying stocks held by the various fund styles.
    1
     See, for example, Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b).
    2
     Lynch and Wachter (2007), which is an earlier version of this paper, allows conditional performance to be time-
varying, but uses the Elton, Gruber, Blake (1996) mutual fund database rather than the much more comprehensive
CRSP mutual fund database that we use.
   3
     Independently, Ferson, Henry and Kisgen (2006) developed a similar methodology, but used it to evaluate the
performance of bond funds rather than equity funds which is our focus.


                                                         1
One of our main results is that not all funds styles produce counter-cyclical performance when div-
idend yield or term spread is used as the instrument: instead, many fund styles exhibit pro-cyclical
or non-cyclical performance, especially after controlling for any cyclicality in the performance of the
underlying stocks. For many fund styles, conditional performance switches from counter-cyclical
to pro- or non-cyclical depending on the instrument or pricing model used. Moreover, we find very
little evidence of any business cycle variation in conditional performance for the 4 oldest fund styles
(growth and income, growth, maximum capital gains, and income) using dividend yield or term
spread as the instrument, despite using the GMM method of Lynch and Wachter (2011) that uses
all available factor, instrument, and fund return data to estimate the cyclicality parameter. Our
results are important because they call into question the accepted wisdom and Moskowitz’s conjec-
ture that the typical mutual fund improves investor utility by producing counter-cyclical abnormal
performance.
      This important conclusion, that the empirical evidence for countercyclical variation in mutual
fund performance is very weak, is well illustrated by the conditional performance results for the
equal-weighted portfolio of all mutual funds in our sample each month.4 We measure the per-
formance of this portfolio’s excess-of-riskfree return conditional on either dividend yield or term
spread, and relative to either the Fama-French or the Cahart pricing model. The portfolio’s condi-
tional performance is only significantly counter-cyclical for one of the four specifications: the one
for which performance conditions on dividend yield and is measured relative to the Fama-French
model. When we use, for each fund, its return in excess of the return on a matched portfolio (one
of the 25 Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolios) to construct a return on the portfolio
in excess of a matched portfolio of underlying stocks, we again find that the only specification with
significant business-cycle variation in performance is the one that uses dividend yield as the instru-
ment and Fama-French as the pricing model. However, the performance is significantly pro-cyclical,
not countercyclical, which is in stark contrast to the case that uses the portfolio’s excess-of-riskfree
return. This result shows that any evidence of countercyclical variation in mutual fund performance
is typically not robust to controlling for business-cycle variation in the conditional alphas of the
underlying stocks held by the funds based on their styles.
      A set of factors constitutes a conditional beta-pricing model if the conditional expected return on
any asset is linear in the return’s conditional betas with respect to the factors. It is well known (see
Cochrane, 2001) that a set of factors constitutes a conditional beta-pricing model if and only if there
  4
      These results are unreported, but available from the authors on request.



                                                           2
exists a linear function of the factors (where the coefficients are in the conditional information set)
that can be used as a stochastic discount factor in the conditional Euler equation. Our methodology
determines the parameters of this stochastic discount factor by correctly pricing the factor returns.
This estimated stochastic discount factor is then used to calculate the conditional performance of
a fund by replacing the fund’s return in the Euler equation with the fund return in excess of its
conditional performance. We allow the parameters of the stochastic discount factor to be linear
in the information variables, as in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), and we use the same linear
specification for conditional fund performance. However, the methodology is sufficiently flexible to
allow arbitrary functional forms for both.
      We use our Euler equation restrictions to assess the conditional performance of equity funds in
the CRSP mutual fund data set. CRSP reports four different fund classification schemes over its
data period, so we use cross-tabulations, showing how funds move from an old scheme to a new
scheme whenever there is a scheme change, to obtain a single equity fund style classification that
is valid at all points in time. We obtain 12 useable equity fund styles with varying start dates
that range from 1/62 to 1/95. Conditional performance is estimated for equal-weighted portfolios
grouped by fund style. We also consider the effect of total net assets under management (TNA) on
fund performance: each year we bifurcate each equity fund category on the basis of TNA.5 We use
two information variables. The first is the 12-month dividend yield on the value-weighted NYSE
and the data used to construct this series come from CRSP. The second is the yield spread between
20-year and one-month Treasury securities, obtained from the Ibbotson data service. Both have
been found to predict stock returns and move countercyclically with the business cycle, with the
term spread capturing higher frequency variation than the dividend yield (see Fama and French,
1989). We have factor return and instrument data back to 1/27, and all data series end 12/07.
      We divide the 12 equity fund styles into three groups, reporting results for each group separately.
The first group consists of styles for which we have relatively longer data series: growth-income,
growth, maximum capital gains, and income. The second group consists of the sector funds:
energy/natural resources, financial services, health, technology, and utilities. The third consists of
non-sector styles for which we have relatively short series: small cap growth, flexible, and midcap
growth.
      We estimate the performance parameters using the Euler equation restrictions discussed above.
One estimation technique that we employ is regular GMM, which only uses data for the sample
  5
    An advantage of using equal-weighted style-TNA portfolios to evaluate mutual fund performance is that the
performance estimates are not contaminated by the reverse survivorship bias described by Linnainmaa (2011).


                                                     3
period for which data is available for all moments. For each group of fund styles, the sample period
is determined by the latest start date for the fund styles in that group: the start dates for the
samples used to estimate regular GMM for the three groups are 1/72 for the first group, 1/91 for
the group of sector funds, and 1/95 for the third group. It is also possible to improve the estimation
by using available data from other periods for variables that can be used to construct a subset of the
moments. Stambaugh (1997) describes an estimation approach that allows the factor returns and
information variables to have longer data series than the mutual fund series. A number of recent
Bayesian mutual fund papers have taken advantage of the availability of longer data series for the
factor returns than the mutual fund returns (see Pastor and Stambaugh, 2002a and 2002b). Lynch
and Wachter (2011) have extended these methods to non-linear estimation in a frequentist setting.
We use one of their estimation methodologies, the adjusted-moment estimator, to estimate the
Euler equation restrictions taking account of factor return and information variable data back to
1927, and all available data for the 12 mutual fund style portfolios. We call this the Full estimation.
   For comparison purposes, we also implement the regression-based approach of Ferson and Schadt
(1996) which assumes that the conditional betas of the fund style portfolios are linear in the
instruments. The regression-based approach is estimated for each group of fund styles using the
same sample period for all styles as we use to estimate regular GMM.
   We estimate two different factor models using the three estimation techniques: the Fama and
French (1993) model whose three factors are the market excess return, the return on a portfolio
long high and short low book-to-market stocks, and the return on a portfolio long small stocks and
short big stocks; and the four factor model of Carhart (1997) whose factors are the three Fama-
French factors plus the return on a portfolio long stocks that performed well the previous year and
short stocks that performed poorly. Three versions of each model are estimated. The first is the
usual unconditional model. The second is the conditional model with performance not allowed to
depend on the information variable, as in Ferson and Schadt (1996). The third is the conditional
model with performance that is allowed to vary with the information variable. Implementing this
last version for mutual funds is one of the innovations of the paper.
   Fund portfolios are constructed by bifurcating each fund style on the basis of net asset value
(TNA). When we consider returns in excess of the riskfree rate and use the Full estimation, we find
strong evidence of conditional fund performance that varies with the business-cycle instrument:
for the first group of fund styles, we can reject the hypotheses that all the bifurcated fund styles
have zero business-cycle variation in conditional performance for 3 of the 4 possible combinations



                                                  4
of pricing model and instrument; for the second and third groups of fund styles, both of these
hypotheses can be rejected for all four possible combinations. In particular, there is evidence that
the business cycle variation in performance differs across large-TNA and small-TNA funds within at
least one equity fund category for each of the three groups. However, the evidence of counter-cyclical
variation in conditional fund performance is quite weak. For the first group, there is some evidence
of counter-cyclical variation in performance, but only relative to the Fama-French pricing model and
not the Carhart model. For the second and third groups, the conditional performance of several
fund styles varies from significantly counter-cyclical to significantly pro-cyclical or insignificant
depending on the instrument.
   While abnormal conditional performance by the fund manager is one explanation for any busi-
ness cycle variation in condition performance we report, another explanation is that our pricing
model is misspecified in such a way that the underlying stocks exhibit business-cycle variation in
their performance that drives the business-cycle variation in fund performance that we report. To
control for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks held by a fund style, we match each
style-TNA portfolio on the basis of Fama-French (FF) loadings to one of the 25 FF size and book-
to-market sorted portfolios, and examine the performance of each style-TNA portfolio’s return in
excess of the matched portfolio’s return. When we examine performance in excess of matched FF
portfolio return, we find even weaker evidence of cyclical variation in performance, with the direc-
tion of the business cycle variation often changing going from performance in excess of the riskfree
rate to performance in excess of matched FF portfolio return. For the first group of fund styles
(growth and income, growth, maximum capital gains and income), which have the most data, the
hypothesis of zero cyclical variation in conditional performance when using fund return in excess of
matched FF portfolio return can only be rejected when measuring conditional performance relative
to the FF model. Moreover, conditional performance relative to the FF model is either pro-cyclical
or does not move with the business cycle, irrespective of the style-TNA portfolio or the instrument;
the only exceptions are the two maximum capital gains portfolios, whose conditional performances
are counter-cyclical when using dividend yield as the instrument. Our results strongly suggest that
these 4 fund styles, with the possible but unlikely exception of the maximum capital gains style,
are unable to produce counter-cyclical performance once the conditional abnormal performance of
the underlying stocks is accounted for. Turning to the second and third groups of fund styles, the
hypothesis of zero cyclical variation for all portfolios can still be rejected using the Full estimation
for all four specifications after adjusting for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks:



                                                   5
depending on the instrument and pricing model, the energy-sector and utilities-sector portfolios
exhibit counter-cyclical or non-cyclical performance, while the financial-sector, small-cap growth
and flexible portfolios exhibit pro-cyclical or non-cyclical performance. Our results suggest that
some of the sector funds can exhibit counter-cyclical performance depending on the pricing model
and the instrument, but also suggest that at least one sector fund and some of the newer funds
styles can exhibit pro-cyclical performance depending on the pricing model and the instrument.
   By enabling us to include factor return and dividend yield data back to 1/27, the Full estima-
tion methodology of Lynch and Wachter (2011) allows us to produce substantially more precise
parameter estimates than standard GMM. For the first group of fund styles, the reduction in the
asymptotic standard errors for the estimates of performance sensitivity to the information variable
is typically around 22%, but never less than 17%, going from the standard GMM estimation to the
Full estimation, for returns in excess of the riskless rate. For the coefficients of a given portfolio,
this improvement is largely coming from the additional information provided by the factor and in-
strument data (and the portfolio’s own return data if available) from prior to the start of the data
period used for the standard GMM estimation. For the second group of fund styles, this reduction
in the asymptotic standard errors is typically around 43%, but never less than 25%, while for the
third group of fund styles, it’s typically around 55%, but never less than 49%. However, for the
third, and especially the second, groups of funds, which are the fund styles with the later start
dates, a sizeable component of this improvement in precision is coming from information provided
by the returns of the other fund-style portfolios prior to the start of the data period used for the
standard GMM estimation. The reductions in the standard errors for the estimates of performance
sensitivity to the information variable are typically lower when returns are in excess of the matched
FF portfolio return rather than the riskfree rate. This result is to be expected since subtracting
out the matched FF portfolio return would be expected to reduce the correlations across the fund
portfolio moments, and between the factor moments and the the fund portfolio moments.
   The performance results for the regression-based approach of Ferson and Schadt (1996) some-
times differ materially from those for the Euler equation-based approach, even when using standard
GMM, which uses exactly the same data as the regression-based approach. This is not surprising
given that the Euler equation-based approach does not make any of the assumptions about the con-
ditional betas that are made by the regression-based approach. At the same time, the coefficient
point estimates are often similar for the regression-based method and the standard GMM Euler-
equation estimation. However, the regression-based approach, like the standard GMM approach,



                                                  6
provides even weaker evidence than the Full method of counter-cyclical variation in mutual fund
performance for the fund styles in the 3 groups.
   A number of recent papers have examined how mutual fund performance varies over the business
cycle. Kosowski (2006) examines mutual fund performance conditional on the NBER business-
cycle variable, or on a two-state latent variable whose probability of being in the ”expansion” state
moves with the NBER business cycle variable. For each specification, he also allows risk loadings
to depend on the state. While he finds that unconditional mutual fund performance relative to
the Carhart model is negative, he finds that conditional mutual fund performance is significantly
positive when the NBER business cycle variable indicates a recession, and when the latent variable
is in its “recession” state. He finds this result holds for all funds, all growth funds, and for four fund
styles that closely resemble the four fund styles in our first group of fund styles. Kacperczyk, van
Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2010) develop a model of how fund managers allocate attention over
the business cycle which predicts cyclical changes in attention allocation. Consistent with their
model, they find that in recessions, mutual funds portfolios covary more with aggregate payoff-
relevant information, exhibit more cross-sectional dispersion, and generate higher risk-adjusted
returns. Like Kosowski, recession states are identified using the NBER business cycle variable,
though they check the robustness of these results to using other proxies for recession: an indicator
for negative real consumption growth; the Chicago Fed National Activity Index; and an indicator
for the bottom 25% of stock market returns. Finally, Staal (2006) finds that over the 1962 to 2002
period, the average fund’s risk-adjusted performance was negatively correlated with the Chicago
Fed National Activity Index.
   On the surface, our results appear to be inconsistent with these findings. However, all these
papers are conditioning on variables each month that are not known to investors at the start of
the month, while we are careful to condition only on instruments that are. Notice that the average
excess-of-riskfree return on the market is reported to be about -13% per annum during NBER
recessions by Kosowski, which is an improbably low number for the expected excess return on the
market conditioning only on information available to investors. This distinction is important since
performance relative to a pricing model that conditions on information not available to investors
cannot be exploited by those investors. Our goal is to determine if there is conditional performance
that investors can take advantage of, which is a different goal to that of Kacperczyk, van Nieuwer-
burgh, and Veldkamp. In addition, these papers do not appear to rule out the possibility that
the reported pattern is being driven by counter-cyclical performance by the underlying stock styles



                                                    7
held by the funds. In an effort to obtain results that are more directly comparable to Kosowski, we
use the NBER recession dummy as the instrument to estimate the cyclicality of conditional fund
performance of the 4 fund styles in the first group using our methodology. Somewhat surprisingly,
we find little evidence of counter-cyclical performance, irrespective of whether the excess-of-riskless
or excess-of-matched returns are used. While the hypothesis that the cyclicality coefficients for
the 8 portfolios are all zero is rejected for all but one specification when using the Full estimation,
the tests for significance of the individual cyclicality coefficients are always insignificant for all 8
portfolios, irrespective of the estimation method or specification, with only one exception: the large
TNA portfolio for one style when using one combination of instrument and pricing model. So while
we find evidence that some linear combinations of the cyclicality coefficients are non-zero using the
NBER recession dummy as the instrument, our analysis does not produce any evidence that the
conditional performance of these 8 fund portfolios is higher during NBER recessions than NBER
expansions.
   Our paper is also related to Avramov and Wermers (2006), who show that some mutual fund
managers are able to produce conditional alphas that vary with information variables and that
individuals are able to use a Bayesian framework to identify these fund managers with sufficient
accuracy to be able to construct portfolios that earn large positive alphas. However, the question
we address is quite different from the one addressed in this paper. We are interested in whether
the typical fund manager generates counter-cyclical performance, while this paper is interested in
whether particular fund managers are able to produce cyclical performance, either pro- or counter-
cyclical, and how accurately investors are able to identify these funds.
   So to summarize, Moskowitz (2000) conjectures that mutual funds may add value by performing
well during recessions. However, contrary to accepted wisdom and Moskowitz’s conjecture, our
results indicate that, once care is taken to condition only on information available to investors
and to control for cyclical performance by the underlying stocks, the real picture may be more
complicated than this, with some fund styles exhibiting counter-cyclical performance and others
exhibiting pro- or non-cyclical performance. Moreover, we find very little evidence of any business
cycle variation in conditional performance for the 4 oldest fund styles, even though we estimate
the cyclicality parameter using Lynch and Wachter’s GMM method, which uses all available factor,
instrument and fund return data. Finally, since we also can’t find any evidence of countercyclical
variation in mutual fund performance even when we condition on the NBER business-cycle variable
itself, it seems unlikely that mutual fund performnace moves in a countercyclical manner with any



                                                   8
predictor of the NBER business-cycle variable that is in the investor’s information set at the start
of each month.
    Our results are related to several recent papers. Glode (2010) shows how a misspecified pricing
kernel can generate negative performance for funds that investors are willing to hold, when those
funds are able to generate high returns in end-of-period states in which the correct pricing kernel
is high. Chen, Hong, Huang and Kubik (2004) investigate the effect of scale on performance in
the active money management industry and find that fund returns, both before and after fees and
expenses, decline with lagged fund size, even after accounting for various performance benchmarks.
Their results indicate that this association is most pronounced among funds that have to invest in
small and illiquid stocks, suggesting that these adverse scale effects are related to liquidity. Finally,
Glode, Hollifield, Kacperczyk, and Kogan (2011) examine relative performance across funds, and
report that subsequent performance is higher after periods of high market returns, but similar after
periods of low market returns, for mutual funds with high rather than low past performance, and
for mutual funds with high rather than low past flows.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the theory behind our conditional perfor-
mance measure. Section 3 discusses the data and Section 4 describes the empirical methodology.
Section 5 presents the results and Section 6 concludes.


2     Theory

This section discusses the theory behind our conditional performance measure. Section 2.1 de-
scribes the benchmark models for asset returns. Performance is always measured relative to a
given benchmark model. Section 2.2 defines our measure of conditional abnormal performance and
discusses the estimation. Section 2.3 compares our measure to others in the literature.

2.1     Benchmark Models

Our paper examines fund performance relative to two benchmark pricing models and this sub-
section describes the two models. The first is the conditional factor model and the second is the
unconditional factor model. Both can have multiple factors.

2.1.1    Conditional Factor Model

We start by assuming a conditional beta pricing model of the form

                                       Et [rt+1 ] = Et [r1,t+1 ]> β t ,                              (1)

                                                      9
where β t is a column vector equal to

                                   β t = Vart (r1,t+1 )−1 Covt (r1,t+1 , rt+1 ),

and r1,t+1 is an Kx1 column vector of returns on zero-cost benchmark portfolios. In what follows,
we will denote excess returns using lower-case r; gross returns will be denoted R. In the case where
r1,t+1 is the return on the market in excess of the riskfree rate, (1) is a conditional CAPM. When
K is greater than 1, (1) can be interpreted as an ICAPM, or as a factor model where the factors
are returns on zero-cost portfolios.
       As is well-known, (1) is equivalent to specifying a conditional stochastic discount factor model
in which the stochastic discount factor is linear in r with coefficients that are elements of the time-t
information:
                                             Mt+1 = at + c>
                                                          t r1,t+1 .                                            (2)

With a stochastic discount factor model, any return Rt+1 that is correctly priced by the stochastic
discount factor, Mt+1 , satisfies
                                               Et [Rt+1 Mt+1 ] = 1,                                             (3)

while any correctly priced, zero-cost return rt+1 satisfies

                                               Et [rt+1 Mt+1 ] = 0.                                             (4)

Following Cochrane (2001), we make the further assumption that the coefficients are linear functions
of an information variable Zt , which summarizes the information available to the investor at time t.6
The linearity assumption has also been recently used in tests of the conditional CAPM (see Lettau
and Ludvigson, 2001). With this assumption, the stochastic stochastic discount factor associated
with the conditional factor model is given by:

                                    Mt+1 = a + bZt + (c + dZt )> r1,t+1 .                                       (5)

2.1.2      Unconditional Factor Model

We also consider an unconditional factor model as the benchmark. An unconditional beta pricing
model can be written
                                            E[rt+1 ] = E[r1,t+1 ]> β,                                           (6)
   6
    The assumption of a single information variable is made for notational convenience. The model easily generalizes
to multiple information variables, and even to the case where coefficients are nonlinear functions of Zt .



                                                        10
where β is a column vector equal to

                                  β = Var(r1,t+1 )−1 Cov(r1,t+1 , rt+1 ).

It is easy to show that an unconditional beta pricing model with r1,t+1 as the factors is equivalent
to specifying a stochastic discount factor model in which the stochastic discount factor is linear in
r1,t+1 with coefficients that are constants:

                                          Mt+1 = a + c> r1,t+1 .                                   (7)

With an unconditional stochastic discount factor model, any return Rt+1 that is correctly priced
by the stochastic discount factor, Mt+1 , satisfies

                                            E[Rt+1 Mt+1 ] = 1,                                     (8)

while any correctly priced, zero-cost return rt+1 satisfies

                                             E[rt+1 Mt+1 ] = 0.                                    (9)

2.2     Performance Measures

For the conditional model, we consider two performance measures, one that allows performance
to be a function of the state of the economy at the start of the period, and one that assumes
that the abnormal performance is the same each period. For the unconditional model, the only
measure we consider assumes that the abnormal performance is the same each period. To identify
the stochastic discount factor coefficients associated with the benchmark model, we always assume
that the stochastic discount factor correctly prices the factor returns and the riskless asset.

2.2.1    Performance Relative to the Conditional Factor Model

Consider the excess return on a fund ri,t+1 and suppose that this excess return can be described by

                                  Et [ri,t+1 ] = αit + Et [r1,t+1 ]> β i,t+1 ,                    (10)

where αit represents abnormal performance relative to the conditional factor model described in
(1), just as in the static case. This abnormal performance is in the time-t information. Recall
that the stochastic discount factor, Mt+1 = at + c>
                                                  t r1,t+1 , prices any asset return satisfying the

conditional beta pricing model described in (1). It is easy to show that the following modification
to the conditional stochastic discount factor model holds for ri,t+1 :
                                  h                                i
                               Et (at + c>  r
                                          t 1,t+1 )(ri,t+1 − α it )  = 0.                         (11)

                                                      11
   We consider two specifications for the abnormal performance. In the first, we let ei and fi be
fund-specific constants such that
                                             αit = ei + fi Zt .

Under this specification, performance is allowed to be linear in the information variable Zt . Conse-
quently, we refer to this specification as conditional performance relative to the conditional factor
model. This specification for the abnormal performance together with the linear specification for
the stochastic discount factor in (5) implies that the following moment condition must hold:
                        h                                                     i
                      Et (ri,t+1 − ei − fi Zt )(a + bZt + (c + dZt )> r1,t+1 ) = 0.             (12)

In the second specification, we let ei be a fund-specific constant such that

                                                 αit = ei .

Since performance is a constant, we refer to this specification as unconditional performance relative
to the conditional factor model. Using the linear specification for the stochastic discount factor in
(5), we obtain the following moment condition:
                            h                                             i
                          Et (ri,t+1 − ei )(a + bZt + (c + dZt )> r1,t+1 ) = 0.                 (13)

2.2.2    Performance Relative to the Unconditional Factor Model

Again consider the excess return on a fund ri,t+1 , but suppose that this excess return can be
described by
                                     E[ri,t+1 ] = αi + E[r1,t+1 ]> β i ,                        (14)

where αi represents abnormal performance relative to the unconditional factor model described in
(6). It is easy to show that the following modification to the unconditional stochastic discount
factor model holds for ri,t+1 :
                                   h                              i
                                  E (ri,t+1 − αi )(a + c> r1,t+1 ) = 0.                         (15)

2.3     Comparison to other measures

An alternative to our method is the regression-based approach of Ferson and Harvey (1999) and
Ferson and Schadt (1996). Both papers examine performance relative to the conditional pricing
model (1). However, they differ from us in their specification of the conditional moments. Rather


                                                     12
than assuming that the stochastic discount factor (5) is linear in the information variables, they
assume that the conditional betas are linear.
      Ferson and Schadt (1996) estimate a regression equation

                            ri,t+1 = δ0,i + δm,i rm,t+1 + δZm,i Zt rm,t+1 + εi,t+1 ,                          (16)

where rm,t+1 is the excess return on the market, using ordinary least squares.7 If fund return
satisfies (10) with αit = ei , βt linear in Zt , and rm,t+1 the only factor, Ferson and Schadt show that
δ0,i equals ei . Thus, δ0,i can be regarded as a measure of the fund’s unconditional performance
relative to the conditional factor model in (1).
      Ferson and Harvey (1999) extend this approach to estimate conditional abnormal performance.
Ferson and Harvey estimate the following unconditional regression:

                         ri,t+1 = δ0,i + δZ,i Zt + δm,i rm + δZm,i Zt rm,t+1 + εi,t+1 .                       (17)

This specification can measure performance, αit , of the form ei + fi Zt . In particular, if the fund
return satisfies (10) with αit = ei + fi Zt , βt linear in Zt , and rm,t+1 as the only factor, it is possible
to show show that δ0,i equals ei and δZ,i equals fi .
      The disadvantage of this approach is that the interpretations of non-zero δ0,i and δZ,i are
sensitive to the assumed linearity of beta as a function of the information variable. For example,
suppose that, with r1,t+1 set equal to rm,t+1 , (5) represents a stochastic discount factor that prices
ri,t+1 . As we have shown, (1) holds for ri,t+1 , but βt need not be linear in Zt . Taking unconditional
expectations of (3) and using the usual reasoning, it follows that

                     1     ³                                                                            ´
  E[ri,t+1 ] = −             bCov(ri,t+1 , Zt ) − c> Cov(ri,t+1 , rm,t+1 ) − d> Cov(ri,t+1 , Zt rm,t+1 )
                 E[Mt+1 ]
               £                        ¤
             =   βi,Z , βi,rm , βi,Zrm λ                                                                 (18)
              £                      ¤                                  £                           ¤
where λ> =        λZ , λrm , λZrm        is a vector of constants and       βi,Z , βi,rm , βi,Zrm       is a vector
of regression slope coefficients from a regression of ri,t+1 on Zt , rm,t+1 , Zt rm,t+1 and a constant.
Because (18) must hold for the factor portfolio rm,t+1 , as well as for the scaled portfolio Zt rm,t+1 ,
it follows that the last two elements of λ are the expected returns on these two portfolios; i.e.,
λrm = E[rm,t+1 ] and λZrm = E[Zt rm,t+1 ]. Our model thus implies an unconditional model with
3 factors. Using the definition of regression, it follows that: δZ,i = βi,z , δm,i = βi,rm and δZm,i =
  7
   Ferson and Schadt (1996) also consider multi-factor models, but use a single-factor model to illustrate their
methodology.



                                                      13
βi,zrm . When conditional betas are not linear, we can expect δZ,i to pick up unconditional residual
correlation between ri,t+1 and Zt . It is therefore possible for δZ,i to be nonzero even if skill is not
time-varying (fi = 0).
    Using the expressions for δm,i and δZm,i , it follows that δ0,i and δZ,i are related in the following
manner:
                                        δ0,i = δZ,i (λZ − E[Zt ]).

Consequently, depending on the relative values of λZ and E[Zt ], δ0,i need not be zero either. If the
betas are not linear, nonzero loadings on Zt and a nonzero constant term do not necessary imply
abnormal performance.
    Our approach has several advantages over the regression-based approach. First, it makes clear
assumptions about the stochastic discount factor associated with the factor model. Given that
β is a characteristic of the asset rather than the economy, it may not be possible to write down
the stochastic discount factor that would deliver the Ferson and Schadt (1996) specification. Our
method is also very flexible. We could allow the coefficients of the stochastic discount factor to be
nonlinear functions of Zt without a significant change to the methodology. While the regression-
based approach delivers an estimate of a tightly-parameterized time-varying beta of a mutual fund,
our approach delivers an estimate of time-varying performance that is robust to the specification
for beta.
    We estimate performance using both the SDF and the regression-based approaches. We can
therefore determine the extent to which the performance estimates from the regression-based ap-
proach arise from the assumption that beta is linear in the information variables.


3    Data

The riskfree and factor return data come from Ken French’s website. Fama and French (1993)
describe the construction of the riskfree rate series, the excess market return, the high minus low
book-to-market portfolio return (HML), and the small minus big market capitalization portfolio
return (SMB) are constructed. A description of the momentum portfolio return (UMD) can be
found on the website. We use two information variables. The first is the 12-month dividend yield
on the value-weighted NYSE and the data used to construct this series come from CRSP. The
second is a yield spread variable, which up until 12/96 is the yield spread between 20-year and one-
month Treasury securities obtained from the Ibbotson data service, and from 1/97 is the the yield



                                                   14
spread between 5-year and 3-month discount bonds obtained from the CRSP Fama-Bliss Discount
Bond files. We have data on dividend yield, term spread, and the factors from 1/27 to 12/07.
    We standardize the term spread to have a mean of zero and a variance of one in each of two
sub-samples: 1/27 to 12/96, and 1/97 to 12/07. We do this because our data source for the two
sub-samples is different. We standardize the dividend yield to have a mean of zero and a variance
of one in each of three sub-samples: 1/27 to 12/54, 1/55 to 12/94, and 1/95 to 12/07. We do this
because the dividend yield process likely has structural breaks since Lettau and van Nieuwerburgh
(2008) are able to reject the hypothesis of zero breaks in the process. When Lettau and van
Nieuwerburgh allow for two breaks, they estimate the breaks to occur at the end of 12/54 and at
the end of 12/94.
    The mutual fund data is from the CRSP mutual fund database which is free of survivorship
bias. For disappearing funds, returns are included through until disappearance so the fund-type
returns do not suffer from survivor conditioning.8 CRSP uses fund style classifications from three
sources: Wiesenberger(1961-92), Strategic Insight (1992-99), and Lipper (1999 onwards). Also,
Wiesenberger changed its system entirely in 1990, leaving us with four classification schemes. From
1961-1990, CRSP reports Wiesenberger’s policy code, and since we are only interested in equity
funds, we keep only funds for which the policy code is either reported as ’CS’ (common stock) or
is missing. From 1990 onwards, there is no counterpart to policy available, so we rely on the fund
style classifications to determine whether a fund is an equity fund.
    Given the series for a fund (which may have gaps), we need to decide from what date onwards
to include the fund in our sample. We apply two filters: a TNA-based filter and a return-based
filter. The TNA filter requires that the fund must, at some time before the inclusion date, have had
a TNA of at least 2.5 million in December 1976 dollars.9 Once a fund has satisfied this criterion, we
examine subsequent January data for that fund to find the earliest January in which CRSP reports
a nonmissing return value, and for which the TNA in the December immediately prior was also
nonmissing. This is our return-based filter. We include all returns from that January onwards in
our sample. For instance, a fund may have TNA data beginning October 1994, but may not have a
    8
      See Brown, Goetzmann, Ibbotson and Ross (1992) and Carpenter and Lynch (1999) for discussions of the effects
of survivor conditioning on performance measurement.
    9
      According to Elton and Gruber (2011), funds with under $15 million in assets are not required to report TNA on
a daily basis, which creates a bias in the CRSP data if these funds are selectively reporting only when their returns are
good. For this reason, we redo our analysis using a TNA filter of $15 million for all years. The results are qualitatively
similar. According to Evans (2010), incubator funds only report returns from inception if fund performance is good,
which creates a bias that is akin to backfill bias. For this reason, we redo our analysis imposing a filter that discards
the first 36 months of returns of any new funds added to the database. Again, the results are qualitatively similar.



                                                           15
TNA of 2.5 million in December 1976 dollars (which works out to approximately 6.5 million in 1995
dollars) until November of 1995. If both the return of January 1996 and the TNA of December
1995 are available, the fund is included in our sample from January 1996 onwards.
       To assess the extent to which missing returns is an issue given the two filters we use to determine
the start of each fund’s inclusion in the sample, we calculate the ratio of the number of nonmissing
return observations a fund actually has to the number of nonmissing return observations it would
have if its return series was complete. Since we form portfolios based on total net assets under
management (TNA) as well as style, we also omit from the sample the returns on any fund in a
calendar year with no TNA value in the CRSP database at the start of that year. Before omitting
fund returns with no TNA, we find that less than 4% of the funds in the sample have any missing
returns, and less than 2% have more than 5% of their returns missing. After omitting fund returns
with no TNA, we find that less than 5% of the funds in the sample have any missing returns and
less than 2% have more than 7% of their returns missing. Where a fund has multiple share groups
in the sample in a year, we keep the share class for which the sum of front load, rear load and
expense ratio is lowest at the end of the previous year.10
       To create a single aggregate fund style classification that is valid at all points in time, we need to
combine the four fund style classifications reported by CRSP that are described above. We generate
cross-tabulations which show how funds move from an old scheme to a new scheme at each point
at which the reported classification changes. We also calculate frequency tables that report the
number of funds in each style in each month, where the set of possible styles each month depends
on the classification scheme in place for that month. Each cross-tabulation calculation includes all
funds that are in the sample for the two months that straddle the date that the classification scheme
changes, even those funds without returns for both those months. Based on the frequency tables
and cross-tabulations, we come up with a list of “usable” styles for each classification scheme. We
then use the cross-tabulations to group the “usable styles” into 12 aggregate styles. The twelve
aggregate styles are as follows: growth-income (GRI), growth (GRO), income (INC), maximum
capital gains (CGM), midcap (MCG), small cap growth (SCG), flexible (FLX), and five sector
styles (energy/natural resources, ENR, financial services, FIN, health, HLT, technology TCH, and
utilities,UTL).11 The starting dates of all the fund series are not all the same, and are given in
  10
     Where two share classes have equal total fees computed in this way, we choose the share class with the highest
TNA at the end of the previous year. If any of the share classes has a missing value for a given fee (expense, front
load, or back load) then that fee is not included in the sum. If all three have at least one missing value across the
share classes, then we choose the share class with the highest TNA at the end of the previous year.
  11
     The mapping from our aggregate styles to the underlying CRSP “usable” styles and the cross-tabulations that



                                                         16
Table 1. All twelve data series end in 12/07. Table 1 also reports the mean, the minimum, and the
maximum number of funds in each aggregate style, from the start date for each style through until
12/07.
    We then form the equal-weighted portfolios to be used in the estimation. In each month we
assign funds to aggregate style categories based on their CRSP styles at the beginning of that
month and then, since we want to consider the effect of TNA on fund performance, we bifurcate
each style based on TNA at the beginning of the calendar year in which that month falls. Thus,
we are careful to form our small and large fund groups for each fund type each year based on
information that is publicly available at the start of the year.


4     Empirical Methodology

An advantage of our measure of performance is the ease with which it can be estimated. The first
subsection describes the moments used in the estimation. These come from the pricing restrictions
involving the SDF that were derived in the previous section. The second subsection describes how
the usual GMM methodology is used to estimate the parameters, and also how the new methodology
of Lynch and Wachter (2007) for unequal data lengths is applied to take advantage of the longer
data series for factor returns than for fund portfolio returns, and the longer data series for some
fund portfolio returns than other fund portfolio returns.

4.1      Moment restrictions used in the SDF-based estimation

The moment restrictions that we use depend on whether we are using the conditional or uncondi-
tional factor model as the benchmark model.

4.1.1     Conditional factor model as the benchmark

Since Zt is always a scalar in our specifications, the associated SDF in (5) for a conditional K factor
model has 2(K + 1) parameters to be estimated. The coefficients a, b, c, and d can be estimated
using the following 2(K + 1) moment conditions:


            ³                               ´· R      ¸ ·
                                                          1
                                                             ¸   · ¸ ·
                                                                  1    1
                                                                          ¸
                                    >           f,t+1
          E[ (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt ) r1,t+1            ⊗       −    ⊗       ]=0                                  (19)
                                               r1,t+1     Zt      0    Zt
use the individual styles (i.e., as reported by CRSP) and that use the aggregate styles are available from the authors
on request.




                                                         17
These must hold if the stochastic discount factor in (5) correctly prices the riskfree return, Rf,t+1 ,
using (3) and the zero-cost factor portfolio returns, r1,t+1 using (4). Since (3) and (4) are conditional
moment restrictions, it is possible to multiply both sides of each by 1 and Zt and then use the law
of iterated expectations to arrive at the unconditional moment restrictions in (19). Since there are
2(K + 1) moments and parameters, these moments are able to just-identify the SDF parameters.12
       The moments used to identify the fund-specific performance parameters depend on the abnormal
performance specification. However, the basic approach is to take the modified SDF model that
prices fund excess returns, (11), and again multiply by variables in the time-t information set before
conditioning down. When fund performance is allowed to be linear in Zt such that αit = ei + fi Zt ,
the following 2 moments conditions can be obtained for excess return ri by multiplying by 1 and
Zt :
               ³                      ³                              ´´ · 1 ¸    · ¸
                                                                                  0
                                                              >
             E[ (ri,t+1 − ei − fi Zt ) (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt ) r1,t+1 ⊗      ] =     .                      (20)
                                                                          Zt      0

Since there are 2 moments and parameters, these moments are able to just-identify the fund-specific
performance parameters.
       When fund performance is restricted to be a constant such that αit = ei , the following moment
condition can be obtained for excess return ri by multiplying by 1 and conditioning down:
                                         ³                               ´
                         E[(ri,t+1 − ei ) (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt )> r1,t+1 ] = 0.                            (21)

Since there is 1 moment and parameter, the fund-specific performance parameter is again just-
identified. We could have multiplied by Zt as for the previous specification, but then the parameter
would be over-identified. The SDF parameters are estimated using the moment conditions (19) as
before.

4.1.2      Unconditional factor model as the benchmark

With an unconditional K factor model, the associated SDF in (7) has (K + 1) parameters to be
estimated. There is one performance parameter per fund. The (K + 1) moments used to identify
the (K + 1) SDF parameters, follow immediately from the following moment conditions:
                          ³            ´· R        ¸      · ¸
                                                             1
                                  >          f,t+1
                       E[ a + c r1,t+1                −         ]=0                                         (22)
                                           r1,t+1            0
  12
    The conditional moment restrictions in (3) and (4) can also be multiplied by nonlinear functions of Zt before
conditioning down, which would allow the parameters to be over-identified by the moments.




                                                       18
These must hold if the stochastic discount factor in (7) correctly prices the riskfree return, Rf,t+1 ,
using (8) and the zero-cost factor portfolio returns, r1,t+1 using (9). The fund-specific performance
parameter, ei = αi is identified directly by the moment restriction (15). Notice that again the
number of moments just equals the number of parameters so that the parameters are just identified.

4.2   GMM estimation with unequal length data

We divide the fund styles into three groups, and report results for each group separately. The first
group consists of styles for which we have relatively longer data series: GRI, GRO, CGM and INC.
The second group consists of the sector funds: ENR, FIN, HLT, TCH and UTL. The third consists
of non-sector styles for which we have relatively short series: SCG, FLX and MCG. When using
the short and regression-based estimations, we report results for each group using data from the
intersection of the sample periods for all the TNA-style portfolios in that group.
   We have factor return and instrument data back to 1/27, and multiple start dates for the funds,
all after 1/27, which means we have factor return data that goes back much further than fund return
data. Moments that identify the SDF parameters do not use fund return data and so we have data
on these moments back to 1/27. When using the adjusted-moment estimator, the estimation for
a given group uses moments for the fund styles in that group and in any group whose fund styles
all have start dates which are the same or earlier than those for the fund styles in that group. So
there is a set of fund styles used in the estimation for each fund-style group. The set for the first
group of fund styles is just the first group itself, while the set for the second group is the second
group plus the first group. The set for the third group is all three groups of fund styles.
   For a given set of fund styles, let n be the number of fund-style start dates plus 1 and let the
ith sample period refer to the ith longest period of data for a set of fund styles or factors. So the
nth sample period always refers to the period from 1/27 to 12/07. For all three sets, the (n − 1)th
sample period always refers to the period from 1/62 to 12/07, the (n − 2)th sample period always
refers to the period from 1/69 to 12/07, and (n − 3)th sample period always refers to the period
from 1/72 to 12/07. For the first set, n is equal to 4. For the last two sets, the (n − 4)th sample
period always refers to the period from 1/91, and for the second set, n is equal to 5. For the last
set, the (n − 5)th sample period always refers to the period from 1/95 to 12/07, and (n − 6)th
sample period always refers to the period from 1/95 to 12/07. For the last set, n is equal to 7. For
each set, define the first sample interval to be the short sample period. Define the ith interval λi




                                                  19
as follows:
                                                         ti − ti−1
                                                  λi =                                                          (23)
                                                             tn
where ti is the number of observations in the ith sample period and t0 is set equal to 0. So T equals
tn .
       The usual GMM estimation strategy takes the sample period to be that for which data is
available for all moments. Here, estimating GMM in the usual way uses only the short sample
period data. The problem with this approach is that any information contained in data available
before the start of the short period is completely ignored. The factor return data, the instrument
data, and the fund return data of funds with earlier start dates than the short sample period
start date, all are available before the start of the short period. Lynch and Wachter (2011) have
developed asymptotic theory for a variety of GMM estimators that use this additional information.
They present two GMM estimators and show that they both have the same asymptotic variance and
that this variance is always weakly smaller than that for the usual short sample GMM estimator.
The asymptotic theory assumes that data is added to the n intervals in the same ratio as in the
available sample. We utilize one of these GMM estimators as a way to utilize useful data available
outside the short period.
       We describe the two estimation methods that we employ to assess conditional performance
relative to the conditional model and then briefly describe how these methods apply to the other
performance measures considered. Let N be the number of funds in a given set and divide the
funds into (n − 1) groups based on their start dates. Let ri,t+1 be the vector of returns on the Ni
funds with the ith earliest start date and let r1,t+1 be the vector of returns on the N1 factors. To
make notation more compact, we define
                                  ·        ¸                               ´ · 1 ¸ · 1 ¸ · 1 ¸
                                    Rf,t+1 ³                        >
f1 (r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , Zt , θ1 ) =            (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt ) r1,t+1 ⊗     −     ⊗      (24)
                                    r1,t+1                                     Zt    0     Zt

and
                                                                        ³                              ´ · 1 ¸
                                                                                                >
fi (ri,t+1 , r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , Zt , θ1 , θi ) = (ri,t+1 − ei − fi Zt ) ⊗ (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt ) r1,t+1 ⊗      ,(25)
                                                                                                           Zt

for i = 2, 3, ... n, where ei = [e1 ... eNi ]0 , fi = [f1 ... fNi ], θ1 = [a b c0 d0 ]0 and θi = [ei 0 fi 0 ]0 . Note
that the f1 moments identify the SDF parameters while the fi moments identify the parameters
for the ith fund group of the set.
       Define



                                                         20
                                                    i
                                               . X
                                           λ̄i =   λk ,           i = 1, 2, ..., n,                                   (26)
                                                  k=1
                                                               .
                                                           λ̄0 = 0,                                                   (27)

                                         (1−λ̄i−1 )T
                                  1           X
                g1,λi T (θ) =                            f1 (r1,t , Rf,t , Zt−1 , θ1 )                                (28)
                                 λi T
                                        t=(1−λ̄i )T +1
                                       i
                                   1 X
                g1,λ̄i T (θ) =           (λk T )g1,λk T (θ)                                                           (29)
                                 λ̄i T
                                        k=1
                                         (1−λ̄i−1 )T
                                  1           X
                gj,λi T (θ) =                            fj (ri,t , r1,t , Rf,t , Zt−1 , θ1 , θ2 ),   j = 2, ..., n   (30)
                                 λi T
                                        t=(1−λ̄i )T +1
                                       i
                                   1 X
                gj,λ̄i T (θ) =           (λk T )gj,λk T (θ),            j = 2, ..., n,                                (31)
                                 λ̄j T
                                        k=1
                                                                                                                      (32)

where θ = [θ1 θ2 ].
       The canonical GMM estimator takes the following form:

                                              θ̂T = argminθ h>
                                                             T WT hT .                                                (33)

The usual GMM estimator only uses data from the period with data for all the sample moments.
This estimator is referred to as the Short estimator and sets
                                             h                             i>
                                    hST (θ) = g1,λ1 T (θ)> ... gn,λ1 T (θ)> .                                         (34)

These sample moments correspond to the population moments on the left hand sides of (19) and (20)
which explains why asymptotically they are equal to zero under the null, as required by the GMM
methodology. For each of the three groups, the Short estimates of the performance coefficients for
all the TNA-style portfolios in that group and all the hypothesis tests for that group are performed
using data from the intersection of the sample periods for all the TNA-style portfolios in that
group.13
       Before we define the estimator that uses more data than the short sample period, we define the
asymptotic covariance matrix S for sample moments of the Short estimator by defining the (i, j)th
  13
    The Short estimation results are qualitatively unchanged if the e and f coefficients for a fund-style portfolio are
estimated using all available data for that portfolio, and if each hypothesis test is performed using data from the
intersection of the sample periods for the fund-style portfolios involved in the test.


                                                               21
element of S, which might be a matrix or a vector depending on the dimensions of fi and fj :
                                               ∞
                                               X         h                        i
                                      Sij =             E fi (r0 , θ)fj (r−k , θ)> ,                                  (35)
                                              k=−∞

where

                    f1 (rt+1 , θ) = f1 (r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , Zt , θ1 )

                    fi (rt+1 , θ) = fi (ri,t+1 , r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , Zt , θ1 , θ2 ),       i = 2, 3, ..., n.

We assume Ŝij (θ̃) is a consistent estimator of Sij whenever the parameter estimate θ̃ is a consistent
estimator of the true parameter vector θ0 .
   The estimator that uses more data than the short sample period is labeled the adjusted moment
estimator by Lynch and Wachter [2007] and sets
                                                                                                                                 
             g1,λ̄n T (θ)
                              λn                                                                                                 
            g2,λ̄n−1 T (θ) −      B̂2,1→1 [ḡ1,λ̄n−1 T (θ) − ḡ1,λn T (θ)]                                                       
                              λ̄n                                                                                                
                              λn−1                                                 λn                                            
                                                                                                                                 
            g3,λ̄n−2 T (θ) −          B̂3,1→2 [ḡ2,λ̄n−2 T (θ) − ḡ2,λn−1 T (θ)] −     B̂3,1→1 [g1,λ̄n−1 T (θ) − ḡ1,λn T (θ)]   
                              λ̄n−1                                                λ̄n                                           
                                                                                                                                 
            .                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                 
            .                                                                                                                    
hT (θ) = 
 A
                             j−1
                              X
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                   λn−j+i+1                                                                                      
            gj,λ̄n−j+1 (θ) −                   B̂j,1→j−i [ḡj−i,λ̄n−j+i (θ) − ḡj−i,λn−j+i+1 (θ)]                                
                                   λ̄
                              i=1 n−j+i+1
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                 
            .                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                 
            .                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                 
                          n−1
                           X λi+1                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
             gn,λ̄1 (θ) −              B̂n,1→n−i [ḡn−i,λ̄i (θ) − ḡn−i,λi+1 (θ)]
                                λ̄
                           i=1 i+1
                                                                                                                      (36)
where                                                      
                                                   g1,. (θ)
                                                  g2,. (θ) 
                                                           
                                                  g3,. (θ) 
                                               .           
                                     ḡi,. (θ) = 
                                                  .
                                                             , i = 1, 2, ..., n,
                                                                                                                     (37)
                                                  .        
                                                           
                                                  .        
                                                   gi,. (θ)
                                                         ³           ´−1
                                B̂i,j→k = Ŝi,j→k (θ̃) Ŝj→k,j→k (θ̃)    , j ≤ k,                                     (38)
                                                  £                             ¤
                                 Ŝi,j→k (θ̃) =       Ŝij (θ̃) ... Ŝik (θ̃)       ,   j≤k                           (39)



                                                              22
and                                                                   
                                               Ŝjj (θ̃) ... Ŝjk (θ̃)
                             Ŝj→k,j→k (θ̃) =  ...      ...    ...  ,         j≤k                 (40)
                                               Ŝkj (θ̃) ... Ŝkk (θ̃)
for some prespecified θ̃ that is a consistent estimate of θ0 , the true parameter vector. Note that
B̂i,j→k is a consistent estimate of Bi,j→k , the matrix of regression coefficients from regressing the
fi functions for the funds with the ith earliest start date on the fj , ..., and fk functions for funds
with the jth through kth earliest start dates.
   Given S, the covariance matrix of the unadjusted moments, we can obtain an analytical expres-
sion for SA , the covariance matrix of the adjusted moments. There is a simple expression for the
the (k, j)th block of the SA matrix: for any j ≤ k ≤ n,
                                         j−1
                                         X
                 A          Sk,j                   λn−j+i+1                −1
                Sk,j   =             −                           Sk,1→j−i S1→j−i,1→j−i S1→j−i,j .
                           λ̄n−j+1       i=1
                                               λ̄n−j+i+1 λ̄n−j+i

   Notice that there are two differences between this estimator,which we refer to as the Full esti-
mator, because it uses all available data for the estimation, and the usual Short GMM estimator.
First, the sample moments that estimate the stochastic discount factor parameters use the entire
sample period for which we have factor and instrument data going back to 1/27 instead of just
the short sample period for which there is data for all the sample moments. Second, the sample
moments used to estimate the fund performance parameters for each set of fund types with the
same data start dates take the analogous short sample moments and modify them to incorporate
information from the sample SDF moments and the sample moments for the fund types with earlier
data start dates.
   To use the adjusted-moment method, we need consistent estimates of Bi,1→k where k ≤ i
which requires consistent estimates of S1→i,1→i . To estimate S1→i,1→i consistently, we need a
consistent estimate of the parameter vector that determines the sample moments with the the first
i start dates, θ̃1→i . To obtain the estimate θ̃j for funds with the jth earliest data start date (so
j = 2, 3, · · · , n for a given set of funds), we run separate adjusted-moment estimations for each
fund, that is, estimations in which we adjust each fund’s moments only with respect to the factor
moments. To do this for each fund, we first need an estimate of the covariance matrices of each
fund’s moments and the factor moments. We calculate this covariance matrix using the fund-by-
fund short estimates just talked about and the intersection of the data series of each fund with the
factor series. Each such separate adjusted-moment estimation yields estimates of the parameters



                                                           23
of the fund under consideration, but also yields estimates of the SDF parameters θ̃1 .14 This is how
we construct θ̃1→i for a given i.
    Given this parameter vector, we can now construct the adjusted moments for each fund. Using
θ̃1→i , we calculate an estimate of S1→i,1→i for the funds with the ith earliest data start date,
Ŝ1→i,1→i (θ̃), which is then used to construct B̂i,1→k , the estimate of Bi,1→k . We use as much
data as possible in this estimation: that is, we use the intersection of each fund’s data series
with the data series of all funds which have a longer data series and with the factor series.15 We
estimate covariances and variances of the moments consistently using Newey-West with 6 lags and
centered moments. The advantage of this estimator is that the estimate of S1→i,1→i is the same no
matter how many funds with later start dates than the ith earliest start date are included in the
estimation. In other words, adding funds with a shorter data length does not affect the estimate
of the covariances for the moments of those funds with longer data and of the factors.
    With appropriate regularity conditions, Lynch and Wachter (2007) show that this estimator is
consistent. They also show that the Full method achieves asymptotic efficiency gains relative to the
usual Short method. Hansen [1982] shows that the asymptotically efficient GMM estimator for a
given set of moment conditions is obtained by using a weighting matrix that converges to the inverse
of covariance matrix for the sample moments. The GMM objective function is exactly identified
so the adjusted moment estimator based on these S1→i,1→i estimates, θ̂1→i does not depend on the
GMM weighting matrix.
    The covariance matrix of the Full estimates is obtained as follows:

                                               √
                                            V [ T θ̂] = D0−1 S A D−1

where D the matrix of derivatives of the moments with respect to the parameters. We obtain
                             √
a consistent estimator of V [ T θ̂] by using D̂0−1 Ŝ A D̂−1 where Ŝ A is a consistent estimator of
the covariance matrix of the adjusted moments and D̂ a consistent estimator of the matrix of
derivatives of the moments with respect to the parameters. The Ŝ A matrix is calculated from
the covariance matrix of the unadjusted moments, S, which we again estimate using Newey-West
with six lags and centered moments. Rather than obtain a single estimate of D̂ and Ŝ using the
intersection of all data series, we instead estimate, for each hypothesis test we perform, different
  14
     Note that the estimates of the SDF parameters are always the same, however, because these estimates depend
only on the factor and instrument data back to 1/27, which do not change.
  15
     This is an improvement on using a single variance covariance matrix, which would have to be estimated with the
intersection of the data series of all funds and the factors.



                                                        24
D̂ and Ŝ matrices, using the longest data series possible for the funds involved in that hypothesis
test. So the significance tests for the coefficients for a fund with the ith earliest data start date are
based on Ŝ1→i,1→i calculated using all data from the ith earliest data start date onwards. So each
Ŝ1→i,1→i matrix is calculated in the same way as the estimate of Ŝ1→i,1→i is obtained to calculate
the estimate of Bi,1→k , except that that θ1→i is set equal to the Full estimator, θ̂1→i , rather than
θ̃1→i . This procedure has the advantage that the p-values of the hypothesis tests of the parameters
of funds with earlier start-dates are invariant to the addition of new funds with shorter series. For
the Short estimation, standard errors are calculated using Newey-West evaluated at the parameter
estimates reported for the Full estimation.16 Doing so allows the efficiency gains from using the
Full estimators instead of the Short estimator to be quantified more easily.
    The Full method achieves asymptotic efficiency gains relative to the usual Short method. The
maximum possible gain is 1 less the square root of the ratio of the length of the short sample to the
length of the longest sample, which is the factor and instrument data. This maximum efficiency gain
is achieved for the SDF parameters since the SDF moments are able to identify these parameters and
there is data for these moments back to 1927. For the fund specific performance parameters, which
only appear in the fund-specific moments, the magnitude of the gain increases as the correlation
between the SDF and the fund-specific moments increases.
    The above discussion focuses on how to implement the two estimation methods when estimat-
ing conditional performance relative to a conditional model. It is straight forward to adapt these
implementations to estimate unconditional performance relative to a conditional model and uncon-
ditional performance relative to an unconditional model. To estimate the former, the definition for
f1 remains the same, but the definition for fi , i = 2, 3, ..., n becomes:
                                                                      ³                               ´
        fi (ri,t+1 , r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , Zt , θ1 , θ2 ) = (ri,t+1 − e) ⊗ (a + bZt ) + (c + dZt )> r1,t+1 .           (41)

With this definition of fi , the associated sample moments gi,λ1 T in the Short estimation correspond
to the population moments on the left hand side of (21). Notice that the Short and Full estimations
remain just-identified. To estimate unconditional performance relative to the unconditional model,
the definitions for f1 and fi , i = 2, 3, ..., n become
                                                 ·        ¸              ´ · 1 ¸
                                                   Rf,t+1 ³
                    f1 (r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , θ1 ) =            a + c> r1,t+1 −                                        (42)
                                                   r1,t+1                    0
  16
     The results are qualitatively similar if, for the Short estimation, standard errors are calculated using Newey-West
evaluated at the parameter estimates reported for the Short estimation itself.




                                                          25
and
                                                                                ³             ´
               fi (ri,t+1 , r1,t+1 , Rf,t+1 , θ1 , θ2 ) = (ri,t+1 − e − f Zt ) ⊗ a + c> r1,t+1 .                 (43)

With these definitions, the associated sample moments g1,λ1 T and gi,λ1 T in the Short estimation
correspond respectively to the population moments on left hand sides of (22) and (15) with ei = αi .
Again, the Short and Full estimations remain just-identified.

4.3    Regression-based estimation

The regression-based (Reg) estimation approach of Ferson and Harvey (1999), Ferson and Schadt
(1996) and Fama and French (1993) is also used to estimate performance parameter estimates.
While efficiency gains could also be achieved for the regression-based estimation by using the ad-
justed moment method, we only report results using the standard GMM method.17 For each of the
three groups, the Reg estimates of the performance coefficients for all the TNA-style portfolios in
that group and all the hypothesis tests for that group are performed using data from the intersection
of the sample periods for all the TNA-style portfolios in that group.18 Standard errors are again
calculated using Newey-West with 6 lags. All three performance measures are estimated using the
regression-based methodology: conditional performance relative to the conditional model; uncon-
ditional performance relative to the conditional model; and unconditional performance relative to
the unconditional model.

4.4    Performance in excess of a matched portfolio

One concern is that any abnormal performance we detect for the fund portfolios is not due to the
skill of the fund managers but due to the abnormal performance of the underlying stocks held by
the funds. To control for this possibility, we match each fund portfolio to one of the 25 FF size
and book-to-market portfolios, using the mean-squared deviation between the factor loadings of
the fund portfolio and the FF portfolio as a matching criterion. We then repeat the estimation
using the return on the fund portfolio in excess of the return on its matched FF portfolio, instead
of the return in excess of the risk-free rate.
  17
     When using the Reg method, efficiency gains are possible for the TNA-style portfolios with later start dates
because their moments are likely correlated with the moments for the TNA-style portfolios with earlier start dates;
however, there are no efficiency gains when all fund styles have the same start date, with only the factors and
instruments having earlier start dates.
  18
     The Reg estimation results are qualitatively unchanged if the e and f coefficients for a fund-style portfolio are
estimated using all available data for that portfolio, and if each hypothesis test is performed using data from the
intersection of the sample periods for the fund-style portfolios involved in the test.



                                                         26
   Consider, for concreteness, unconditional performance relative to an unconditional factor model.
Let δi be the coefficient vector for the factors in a regression of fund portfolio i on the factors. Let
δp be the coefficient vector for the factors in a regression of any given FF portfolio, p, on the factors.
Then we choose as the matching portfolio the portfolio p that minimizes:

                                           (δi − δp )0 (δi − δp ).                                   (44)

   Mutual funds may hold part of their assets in cash, or may be levered up. We adjust our
matching procedure to take care of this. Let a be the reciprocal of the weight of the portfolio that
is invested in cash. Let δs be the vector of factor loadings on the stock component of the fund’s
portfolio. Then,
                                                 aδi = δs .

We do not observe a, but instead, for each pair of fund and FF portfolios, we choose a to be that
value that minimizes the squared deviation between the factor loadings on the fund portfolio and
the FF portfolio; that is, we choose a to minimize:

                                          (aδi − δp )0 (aδi − δp ).                                  (45)

The solution is
                                             a = δi0 δp /(δi0 δi ).

Having chosen a in this manner for all fund-FF portfolio pairs, we then choose, as the matched
portfolio, the FF portfolio p that minimizes the expression in (45) above.
   We run the matching procedure for each of the five models we consider: unconditional perfor-
mance with an unconditional factor model, unconditional performance with a conditional factor
model (two instruments) and conditional performance with a conditional factor model (two instru-
ments).
   We test two forms of the matching criterion function: mean squared deviation and mean absolute
deviation. In the conditional models, we also make sure our results are robust to whether or
not we include the coefficient on the interaction term between the factor and the instrument in
the matching criterion. The interaction term allows the conditional loadings to be linear in the
information variable which means that matching on this term ensures that the conditional loadings
for the matching FF portfolio move with the information variable in a similar fashion to those
for the fund-style portfolio being matched. For each of these four cases, we obtain similar results.
This is principally due to the fact that the procedure produces similar matches for any one fund,

                                                      27
regardless of what criterion is used. We report results using the mean squared deviation, and
including the loadings on the interaction terms.


5    Results

This section reports performance results when funds are grouped on the basis of the equity fund
style classifications reported by CRSP and when each fund category is bifurcated on the basis of
net asset value. CRSP reports fund style classifications from 3 sources: Wiesenberger(1961-92),
Strategic Insight (1992-99), and Lipper (1999 onwards). Also, Wiesenberger changed its system
entirely in 1990, leaving us with four classification schemes. Performance is assessed relative to two
different factor models: the Fama and French (1993) model (FF model) whose three factors are the
market excess return, the return on a portfolio long high and short low book-to-market stocks, and
the return on a portfolio long big stocks and short big stocks; and the four factor model of Carhart
(1997) (C model) whose factors are the three FF factors plus the return on a portfolio long stocks
that performed well the previous year and short stocks that performed poorly.
    The conditional performance of a fund’s underlying stocks could vary over the business cycle,
which would cause the conditional performance of the fund to vary over the business cycle, even
if the manager did not possess any stock-picking ability. This section also examines whether such
mispricing of the underlying stocks held by the funds can explain the conditional fund performance
that we document, by considering, for each TNA-style portfolio, performance in excess of a matched
FF 25 portfolio, where the matching is performed based on FF-model loadings. All the conditional
models are estimated using two different instruments: dividend yield and term spread. So there are
8 specifications for each portfolio when estimating performance relative to conditional models, since
all possible combinations of two excess-return definitions, two pricing models, and two instruments
are estimated. Similarly, there are 4 specifications for each portfolio when estimating performance
relative to unconditional models.
    Throughout, unless stated otherwise, we normalize both instruments to be mean zero and unit
standard deviation, as described in section 3. Doing so makes ei and fi easier to interpret. In
particular, an e value of zero implies that the unconditional mean abnormal performance is zero.
Further, f measures the shift in conditional abnormal performance that results from a one standard
error shift in the instrument’s value. For the hypothesis tests, significance is determined using a
5% cutoff, while for the coefficient estimates, significance is determined using a 5% one-tail cutoff.




                                                   28
5.1   Conditional performance: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO),
      Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), and Income (INC)

Table 2 reports conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with dividend
yield as the instrument for the following fund styles: growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO),
maximum capital gains (CGM), and income (INC). Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with
beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style. Performance results
are reported relative to the FF pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart
pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model, performance results are reported for
return in excess of the riskfree rate (excess-of-riskfree return) in the first 4 columns, and in excess
of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of FF loadings (excess-of-matched return) in the
last 4 columns. The matched portfolio is always one of the FF 25 portfolios formed on the basis
of market capitalization and book-to-market. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance
parameters e and f respectively for the TNA-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional
performance and f measures the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the
information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (19) and (20),
they are estimated for each TNA-style portfolios using the adjusted moment (Full) method that
uses all available data, and using the standard (Short) GMM method that only uses data from the
intersection of the sample periods for the 4 fund styles. Standard errors for both are calculated
using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each TNA-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also
estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from
the intersection of the sample periods for the 4 fund styles. Newey-West standard errors for the
parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. For each style-TNA portfolio, the % Reduction column
(% Red) contains the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row)
using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full
method rather than a portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which uses only the factor
moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for
the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for
Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. Table 3 reports conditional
fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with term spread as the instrument, and
is formatted exactly the same as Table 2.
   Relying on the Full estimation for excess-of-riskfree returns, we can reject the hypothesis that
all f coefficients are equal to zero using either instrument for the FF model, but only using term


                                                  29
spread for the C model. Both the hypothesis that all f coefficients are the same for all these TNA-
style portfolios, and the hypothesis that the f coefficients are the same for the low and high TNA
portfolios for all 4 fund styles, can also be rejected for the same three out of four specifications.
The f coefficient for the INC-Lg portfolio is significantly larger than both the f coefficient for
the INC-Sm portfolio and zero in the same three cases. For the FF model, the f coefficients are
significantly greater than zero for both the small- and large-fund GRI portfolios using dividend yield
as the instrument but only for the GRI-Sm portfolio using term spread. Lastly, for the FF model
using dividend yield as the instrument, the f coefficient for the GRO-Sm portfolio is significantly
greater than 0, and the f coefficient for the INC-Sm portfolio is significantly less than 0.
   Turning to Full estimation results for excess-of-matched returns, the general hypothesis tests
of all f coefficients being equal to zero, all f coefficients being equal, and the f coefficients for the
low and high TNA portfolios being equal for all fund styles all remain significant whenever the FF
model is used, but are never significant using the C model. This suggests that the significant con-
ditional performance of these fund styles relative to the FF model might be robust to correcting for
conditional abnormal performance by the underlying stocks. However, the patterns of significance
when using the FF model are not the same for excess-of-matched return as for excess-of-riskfree
return. The lower f coefficient of the small-fund INC portfolio relative to the large-fund INC
portfolio is robust when using dividend yield but not term spread. Using dividend yield as the
instrument, the significant f coefficients on the GRI portfolios disappear, while the f coefficients
on both GRO portfolios become significantly negative and the f coefficients on both CGM port-
folios become significantly positive. Using term spread as the instrument for the GRI portfolios,
the f coefficient becomes significantly negative on the large-fund portfolio and insignificant on the
small-fund portfolio, while the difference between the two coefficients, small fund minus large fund,
becomes significantly positive. Finally, the 2 hypothesis tests that the average f coefficient is equal
to zero for the 4 small-TNA portfolios, and for the 4 large-TNA portfolios, are both insignificant
for all 8 specifications, irrespective of the pricing model, the instrument, and whether returns are
in excess of the riskfree rate, or matched portfolio returns.
   These results provide only weak evidence of variation in conditional performance for these 4 fund
styles over the business cycle. Across the 8 portfolios for these 4 styles, conditional performance
relative to the C model only varies over the business cycle for the INC-Lg portfolio, and even then
only when term spread is used as the instrument and returns are in excess of the riskless rate.
Hence, the evidence for variation in conditional performance over the business cycle for these 4



                                                   30
fund styles relative to the C model is very weak. The evidence is stronger for the FF model, but
the patterns of variation observed depend on the instrument used and whether returns are in excess
of the riskfree rate or a matched portfolio. There is some evidence of counter-cyclical variation in
conditional performance relative to the FF model for returns in excess of the riskfree rate: both GRI
portfolios, the low-TNA GRO portfolio, and the high-TNA INC portfolio all have counter-cyclical
performance for at least one of the instruments, while only the INC-Sm portfolio with term spread
as the instrument produces pro-cyclical performance. Measuring return in excess of matched FF-
portfolio return causes the performance of all but the two CGM portfolios to either be pro-cyclical or
not move with the business cycle, with the CGM portfolios exhibiting counter-cyclical performance
only when dividend yield is being used as the instrument. Our results suggest that these 4 fund
styles, with the possible exception of the CGM style, do not produce counter-cyclical performance
once the conditional abnormal performance of the underlying stocks is accounted for. There is also
evidence that when returns are measured in excess of matched FF-portfolio returns, fund TNA
affects how performance relative to the FF model moves over the business cycle for the INC, GRI,
and CGM styles, though only using one or other of the instruments, never both: increasing TNA
makes INC performance less cyclical and GRI and CGM performance more cyclical.
   Comparing the performance results from using the Full method (which uses all available factor,
instrument, and fund portfolio return data) rather than the Short method (which only uses factor,
instrument, and fund portfolio data from 1/72, the latest start date of the 4 styles in this group),
we see substantial improvements in the precision of the point estimates of e and f . The reduction
in the standard errors for the estimates of performance sensitivity to the information variable (the
f estimates) from using the Full method rather than the Short method is on average around 28%,
but never less than 20%, irrespective of pricing model or instrument, when using excess-of-riskfree
returns. Since the fund styles in this first group have the earliest start dates, with 2 of the 4 styles
having the earliest start date of any fund style, and the other 2 both starting no more than 10
years after this date, the improvement for a given portfolio is largely coming from the additional
information provided by the factor and instrument data from the period between 1/27 and 1/72,
and any return data for the portfolio available before 1/72. For a given style-TNA portfolio, only
a small fraction of the improvement is coming from the additional information provided by the
return data available for the other portfolios prior to 1/72. Consistent with this argument, the
second row entries of the “% Red” column report reductions that are on average around 1%, but
never higher than 3%, in the magnitude of the standard errors for the f coefficients going from



                                                  31
an adjusted moment estimation, one that estimates performance for a given TNA-style portfolio
using all available factor and instrument data from 1/27, and all available return data for only
that TNA-style portfolio, to the Full estimation (that also uses the return data for all the fund
styles with earlier start dates); by construction, these reductions are 0 for the two styles with the
earliest start dates, GRI and GRO. The reductions in the standard errors for the estimates of e
and f are typically lower when returns are in excess of matched FF-portfolio returns and not the
riskfree rate: for the f estimates, the reduction is on average around 15%, and never higher than
21%. This result is to be expected since subtracting out the matched FF-portfolio return would
be expected to reduce the correlations across the fund portfolio moments and between the factor
moments and the the fund portfolio moments.
   Moreover, using the Short method, we can only reject two of the 24 general hypothesis tests of
all f coefficients being equal to zero, all f coefficients being equal, and the f coefficients for the
low and high TNA portfolios being equal for all the fund styles: the two tests are all f coefficients
equal for the case using dividend yield, the FF model and excess-of-matched returns and all f
coefficients equal to zero for the case using term spread, the FF model and excess-of-riskfree returns.
Consequently, our ability to reject joint hypotheses is severely curtailed by using the Short method
rather than the Full method, which further confirms the greater precision of the estimates using
the Full method instead of the Short method.
   Turning to the Reg estimation results, only one of these 24 hypothesis tests, all f coefficients
equal to zero for the case using dividend yield, the FF model and excess-of-riskfree returns, is
rejected by the Reg method. This hypothesis is also rejected by the Full method. For this case,
the two methods generate the same pattern of significant coefficients, except that the Reg method
produces a significant f coefficient for one portfolio whose f coefficient using the Full method is
the same sign but insignificant. In sum, the Reg results are much weaker than the Full results, but
are quite similar when both produce significant coefficients. The reduced significance is likely due
to the Reg method using less data than the Full method.
   Turning our attention to the e coefficient estimates and focusing on the results for the Full
estimation, the hypothesis test of all e coefficients equal to zero can be easily rejected, irrespective
of pricing model, instrument or whether excess-of-riskfree or excess-of-matched returns are used.
However, only 11 out of 64 e coefficients (across 8 portfolios and 8 specifications) are significantly
different from zero and 7 of those 11 are for the 2 CGM portfolios. The 2 GRO portfolios never have
a significant e coefficient while for the GRI portfolios, only the large-GRI portfolio using excess-of-



                                                  32
matched returns together with the FF model and term spread has a significant e coefficient, and
that coefficient is negative. And when using the excess-of-matched returns of the 2 INC portfolios,
both the small INC portfolio using term spread and the large INC portfolio using dividend yield
have a significant e coefficient relative to the C model, and those coefficients are positive. In
contrast, when using the excess-of-matched returns of the 2 CGM portfolios, only the large-cap
CGM portfolio using dividend yield and the FF model and the small-cap CGM portfolio using
term spread and the FF model have e coefficients that aren’t significantly negative. We also
test equality of the e coefficients across the 8 TNA-style portfolios and are always able to reject
this hypothesis. While the hypothesis of average e equal to zero is never rejected, the average
e coefficient is negative for 6 of the 8 specifications, with the average only being positive for the
specification using excess-of-riskfree returns together with dividend yield and the FF model and the
specification using excess-of-matched returns together with term spread and the C model. For the
other two estimation methods, Short and Reg, the average e coefficient is always negative, though
the the hypothesis test of the average e coefficient being equal to zero is only rejected by the Reg
estimation when using excess-of-riskfree returns.

5.2   Unconditional and average conditional performance: Growth and Income
      (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), and Income (INC)

Table 4 reports unconditional fund performance relative to an unconditional factor model for the
following fund styles: growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), maximum capital gains (CGM),
and income (INC). The format of the table is similar to Table 2 except there are 2 panels rather
than 3; the columns are the same. Panel A reports the abnormal performance parameter e for the
TNA-style portfolios, where e measures unconditional performance. When parameter e is identified
by moment conditions (22) and (15), it is estimated for each TNA-style portfolio using the adjusted
moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM (Short) method
that only uses data from the intersection of the sample periods for the 4 fund styles. Standard
errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each TNA-style portfolio,
parameter e is also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Fama and French (1993)
using data from the intersection of the sample periods for the 4 fund styles. Newey-West standard
errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. The % Reduction column (% Red) is the
same as in Table 2. Panel B reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the
Newey-West covariances.
   Focusing on the results for the Full estimation, the hypothesis test of all e coefficients equal

                                                 33
to zero can be easily rejected, irrespective of pricing model or whether excess-of-riskfree or excess-
of-matched returns are used. However, only 4 out of 32 e coefficients (across 8 portfolios and 4
specifications) are significantly different from zero, and those are the negative coefficients obtained
for the 2 CGM portfolios when using excess-of-matched returns and either pricing model. We also
test equality of the e coefficients across the 8 TNA-style portfolios and are always able to reject
this hypothesis. While the hypothesis of average e equal to zero is never rejected, the average e
coefficient is always negative, except for the specification using dividend yield, the FF model and
excess-of-riskfree returns. For the other two estimation methods, Short and Reg, the average e
coefficient is always negative, though the the hypothesis test of the average e coefficient being equal
to zero is only rejected by the Reg estimation for both specifications that use excess-of-riskfree
returns.
   Table 5 reports unconditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with
dividend yield as the instrument for the same 4 fund styles. The format of the table is similar to
Table 2 except there are 2 panels rather than 3; the columns are the same. Panel A reports the
abnormal performance parameter e for the TNA-style portfolios, where e measures unconditional
performance. When parameter e is identified by moment conditions (19) and (21), it is estimated for
each TNA-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and
using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from the intersection of the sample
periods for the 4 fund styles. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment
coefficients. For each TNA-style portfolio, parameter e is also estimated for the regression-based
(Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from the intersection of the sample periods
for the 4 fund styles and setting f = 0 in the regression. Newey-West standard errors for the
parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. The % Reduction column (% Red) is the same as in
Table 2. Panel B reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West
covariances. Table 6 reports unconditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model
with term spread as the instrument for the same 4 fund styles, and is formatted exactly the same
as Table 5.
   Focusing on the results for the Full estimation, the hypothesis test of all e coefficients equal to
zero can be easily rejected, irrespective of pricing model, instrument or whether excess-of-riskfree
or excess-of-matched returns are used. Turning to the individual e coefficients for the portfolios, we
first focus on the specifications that use excess-of-riskless returns. Only five of the 32 e coefficients
(8 portfolios and 4 specifications) are significant: both GRI portfolios have significantly negative



                                                   34
coefficients using dividend yield and the FF model, and 3 of the 8 e coefficients for the INC portfolios
are significant, one negative and one positive for the INC-Lg portfolio, and one positive for the INC-
Lg portfolio. Turning to the specifications that use excess-of-matched returns, we find that, for the
2 GRI portfolios, only the large-GRI portfolio using the FF model and term spread has a significant
e coefficient and that significant coefficient is negative. The 2 GRO portfolios only have significant
e coefficients when using the FF model and dividend yield, and both significant coefficients are
positive, while the 2 CGM portfolios always have significantly negative e coefficients using excess-of-
matched returns. Using the Carhart model, each INC portfolio has only one significant e coefficient,
the large-INC portfolio when using dividend yield, and the small-INC portfolio when using term
spread, with both coefficients positive; the large-INC portfolio using term spread is the only e
coefficient that is significant using the FF model, and this coefficient is negative.
   We also test equality of the e coefficients across the 8 TNA-style portfolios and are always able
to reject this hypothesis across all 8 specifications, irrespective of pricing model, instrument or
whether excess-of-riskfree or excess-of-matched returns are used. While the hypothesis of average
e equal to zero is only rejected when using excess-of-matched returns together with the FF model
and term spread, the average e coefficient is always negative across all 8 specifications. For the
other two estimation methods, Short and Reg, the average e coefficient is always negative, though
across the two estimation methods, the hypothesis test of the average e coefficient being equal to
zero is only rejected by the Reg estimation in three of the 4 specifications that use excess-of-riskfree
returns.
   To summarize, there is strong evidence that not all the portfolios have zero unconditional per-
formance relative to any of the unconditional or conditional factor models we examine:when using
excess-of-matched returns, both CGM portfolios always have significantly negative unconditional
performance irrespective of the factor model being used. However, somewhat surprisingly, there is
very little evidence that the average unconditional performance across the 8 portfolios is different
from 0 relative to any of the unconditional or conditional factor models we examine, though the
point estimates for the average unconditional performance are almost always negative, irrespective
of whether the unconditional performance is relative to a conditional or an unconditional factor
model. There is some evidence from the Reg method that the average unconditional performance
is negative when using excess-of-riskless returns, but this negative unconditional performance dis-
appears once we control for the unconditional performance of the matched FF portfolios.
   It is interesting to compare the unconditional performance of the TNA-style portfolios rela-



                                                  35
tive to conditional models with their unconditional performance relative to unconditional models.
Such a comparison is similar to the comparison performed in Ferson and Schadt (1996) using the
regression-based methodology. They find that unconditional performance for mutual funds is typ-
ically higher when measured relative to the conditional rather than the unconditional version of
a particular factor model. Their explanation for this finding relies on the negative covariances
between conditional fund betas and conditional risk premia that they find in their sample. The
intuition is that for a given mean conditional beta, this negative correlation causes the product of
conditional beta and the risk premia to be lower on average, which, for given performance relative
to the conditional factor model, makes unconditional expected fund return lower. Since a fund’s
mean conditional beta is likely close to its unconditional beta, a zero value for this correlation
translates into near-identical performance for the conditional and unconditional versions of the
model. Taking performance relative to the conditional factor model as given, performance relative
to the unconditional factor model becomes lower as this correlation becomes more negative.
   Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, comparing Tables 5 and 6 to Table 4, we see that the signs
of the differences between the e coefficients for conditional and unconditional models vary across
the TNA-style portfolios and across the specifications. The implication is that the signs of the
covariances between conditional fund betas and conditional risk premia vary across the TNA-style
portfolios and across the specifications.

5.3   Conditional performance: Sector funds

Tables 7 and 8 report conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with
dividend yield and term spread respectively as the instrument for the following fund styles: energy
(ENR), financial (FIN), health (HLT), technology (TCH), and utilities (UTL). Both these tables
are formatted exactly the same as Table 2. Relying on the Full estimation, we can always reject
the hypotheses that all f coefficients are equal to zero, that all f coefficients are the same, and that
the f coefficients are the same for the low and high TNA portfolios for all fund styles, irrespective
of the instrument, the pricing model, or the particular excess returns being used. In contrast, using
the Short method, not one of these hypotheses is rejected for the 5 sector-fund styles across the 8
specifications reported, while using the Reg method, only one of these hypotheses is rejected, and
only for one of the 8 specifications reported.
   This finding highlights the improvement in the precision of the e and f estimates obtained from
using the Full method (which uses all available factor, instrument, and fund portfolio return data)



                                                  36
rather than the Short method (which only uses factor, instrument, and fund portfolio data from
1/91, the start date of the 5 sector styles in this group). The reductions in the standard errors for
the estimates of performance sensitivity to the information variable (the f estimates) from using the
Full method rather than the Short method are larger in magnitude than for the first group of fund
styles, on average around 43% but never less than 25%, irrespective of pricing model or instrument,
when using excess-of-riskfree returns. Part of the improvement in precision of the estimates here
is coming from the additional information provided by the factor and instrument data from the
period between 1/27 and 1/91. However, since the sector-fund styles have a much later start date
than the start dates for the 4 fund styles in the first group, an important part of the improvement
in precision could also be coming from information provided by the return data available before
1/91 for the TNA-style portfolios in the first group. It turns out this second channel makes a
non-trivial contribution to the improvements in precision going from Short to Full, because the
second row entries of the “% Red” column report reductions that are on average around 12%, and
sometimes as high as 22%, in the magnitude of the standard errors for the f coefficients going from
an adjusted moment estimation, one that estimates performance for a given TNA-style portfolio
using all available factor and instrument data from 1/27, and return data from 1/91 for only that
TNA-style portfolio, to the Full estimation (that also uses the return data for all the fund styles with
earlier start dates). As would be expected, the reductions in the standard errors for the estimates
of e and f are typically smaller when returns are in excess of a matched FF-portfolio’s return and
not the riskfree rate, though not for every e and f coefficient: for the f estimates, the reductions
are on average 34% and never more than 47%, irrespective of pricing model or instrument. Based
on the second row entries of the “% Red” column, information provided by the moments for the
TNA-style portfolios in the first group, constructed using data prior to 1/91, are again making a
non-trivial contribution to the improvements in precision going from Short to Full when returns
are in excess of matched FF-portfolio returns.
   Focusing first on the performance results for the excess-of-riskfree returns, the average f coef-
ficents for the small-fund and the large-fund portfolios are both significantly positive using term
spread irrespective of the pricing model, but are both significantly negative with the former signifi-
cantly less negative than the latter using dividend yield and the FF model. However, the behavior
of average f is not the whole story because there is considerable variation in the signs and magni-
tudes of the f coefficients across the sector-style portfolios. Using the FF model, the ENR portfolios
both have f coefficients that are significantly positive irrespective of the instrument, while using



                                                  37
the C model, the small-fund ENR portfolio has a f coefficient that is significantly positive us-
ing dividend yield but significantly negative using term spread. When using dividend yield for
the UTL portfolios, both portfolios using the FF model and the small-fund portfolio using the C
model have f coefficients that are significantly negative. However, when using term spread, both
UTL portfolios have significantly positive f coefficients irrespective of the pricing model. The FIN
portfolios only have significant f coefficients when using the FF model and dividend yield: both
have significantly negative f coefficients in this case. The f coefficients for both HLT portfolios
are significantly negative when dividend yield is used, irrespective of the pricing model, but are
significantly positive for both when term spread and the C model is used. When the FF model
is used, both TCH portfolios have significantly negative f coefficients with dividend yield as the
instrument, while the large-fund TCH portfolio has a significant positive f coefficient when term
spread is the instrument.
   Let the difference between the small-fund and the large-fund f coefficients for a sector-style
be the small-fund f less the large-fund f for that sector-style. We find that the direction of any
significant difference between the small-fund and the large-fund f coefficients for a given sector-
style is always the same irrespective of the pricing model used (holding the instrument fixed), but
switches sign for 2 of the 5 sector-styles depending on the instrument. For the ENR sector-style, the
difference is significantly positive using dividend yield, but significantly negative using term spread,
while the converse is true for the UTL sector-style. The difference is only significant for 2 of the 4
specifications for the FIN sector-style (both positive), the HLT sector-style (both positive), and the
TCH sector-style (both negative). While the hypothesis of the small-fund portfolio’s f coefficient
equalling the large-fund’s coefficient for all 5 sector-styles can be rejected for all 4 specifications
using excess-of-riskless returns, the average f coefficient is only significantly larger for the small-
fund than the large-fund portfolios when dividend yield is used, irrespective of the pricing model,
though only the ENR style has a small-fund portfolio with a significantly larger f coefficient than
the large-fund portfolios for both pricing models when using dividend yield.
   Turning to the performance results for excess-of-matched returns, there is considerable variation
in the signs and magnitudes of the f coefficients across the sector-styles. The f coefficients for the
ENR portfolios exhibit the same patterns as exhibited for excess-of-riskfree returns for all cases
except the low-TNA portfolio when the term spread is used. The small-fund ENR portfolio has a
significantly positive f coefficient for both specifications that use dividend yield, while the large-
fund ENR portfolio has a significantly positive f coefficient when using the FF model irrespective



                                                  38
of the instrument. The f coefficients for both FIN portfolios are significantly negative for excess-
of-matched returns when using term spread irrespective of the pricing model, while the only f
coefficient that is significant when using dividend yield is the negative one obtained for the FIN-Lg
portfolio when the FF model is used. The average f coefficient for the FIN portfolios is always
significantly lower than for the average of the other sector-style portfolios, except when using
dividend yield and the C model; the same is true for excess-of-riskfree returns, except when using
dividend yield and either model. None of the f coefficients for the HLT portfolios are significant
when dividend yield is used, while only 2 of the 4 are significant and positive when term spread is
used, namely, for the HLT-Sm portfolio when using the FF model, and for the HLT-Lg portfolio
when using the C model. The TCH portfolios only have significant f coefficients using the C model
and term spread: the coefficients are negative for both portfolios. The average f coefficient for
the TCH portfolios is significantly lower than the average coefficient for the remaining portfolios
for this specification and the one using the FF model and dividend yield. When excess-of-matched
rather than excess-of-riskfree returns are used, the f coefficients for three of the UTL portfolio
go from negative to positive or insignificant using dividend yield and the FF model, while the f
coefficients for both UTL portfolios remain positive using term spread and the C model. As reported
for the excess-of-riskless returns, both the large- and small-fund UTL portfolios have significantly
positive f coefficients for the specification using the C model and term spread, while the only other
significant f coefficient on a UTL portfolio is the positive one on the UTL-Sm portfolio for the
specification using dividend yield and the FF model.
   Continuing to focus on the excess-of-matched return results, the average f coefficient for the
small-fund portfolios is significantly larger than that for the large-fund portfolio when using dividend
yield and either model. We can see which sector styles are driving these results by seeing which
sector styles have a small-fund portfolio with a significantly larger f coefficient than its large-fund
portfolio when using dividend yield: this is true for the ENR and FIN styles irrespective of the
model, and for the HLT and UTL styles only when using the FF model. When using term spread,
the same result is obtained for the UTL style in both specifications, and for the HLT style using
the FF model, while the only other significant difference between the small-fund and large-fund f
coefficients is the lower small-fund coefficient for the ENR style using the FF model.
   These results show that, when using dividend yield as an instrument, the average conditional
performance of the sector-style portfolios, particularly the small-fund portfolios, after adjusting
for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks, is countercyclical. However, the same



                                                  39
result does not hold when using term spread as the instrument. The results are quite sensitive to
adjusting for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks, with the average performance
of the large- and small-fund portfolios typically going from pro-cyclical to counter-cyclical after the
adjustment when using dividend yield, but often becoming more pro-cyclical after the adjustment
when using term spread. There is substantial variation in the sign of the significant f coefficients
across the various styles: after adjusting for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks,
any significant cyclicality in performance that we find is always counter-cyclical for the ENR and
UTL portfolios and always pro-cyclical for the FIN portfolios. For many specifications and styles,
the f coefficient using excess-of-matched returns for the small-fund portfolio is significantly more
counter-cyclical than that for the large-fund portfolio, while the converse is only true for one style
in one specification.
   Focusing on the e coefficients for the Full estimation, the hypothesis tests of all e coefficients
equal to zero, and all e coefficients equal to each other, can both be easily rejected, irrespective of
pricing model, instrument or whether excess-of-riskfree or excess-of-matched returns are used. The
following patterns of e coefficients are obtained when excess-of-matched return is used. First, the e
coefficients are significantly positive for both ENR portfolios when using the C model and dividend
yield, and insignificant otherwise. Both FIN portfolios have significant negative e coefficients irre-
spective of pricing model when using dividend yield, while FIN-Sm has a significantly positive e
coefficient when using the FF model and term spread. Both HLT and both UTL portfolios almost
always have significantly positive e coefficients irrespective of the pricing model or instrument,
with the exceptions being the UTL-Lg portfolio when using the FF model and term spread and
the two HLT portfolios when using the C model and dividend yield. The TCH portfolios only have
4 significant e coefficients out of 16 coefficients across the 8 specifications reported, two signifi-
cantly positive for the TCH-Lg portfolio, and one significantly positive and another significantly
negative for the TCH-Sm portfolio. The average e coefficient is positive for all 8 specifications,
and the hypothesis that the average e coefficient is equal to zero is always rejected, except when
using excess-of-riskfree returns together with the C model and either instrument. For the other
two estimation methods, Short and Reg, the average e coefficient is also always positive, though
the the hypothesis test of the average e being equal to zero is only rejected by the Reg estimation
when using excess-of-matched returns together with dividend yield and the FF model.




                                                  40
5.4   Conditional performance: Small-cap Growth (SCG), Flexible (FLX), and
      Mid-cap Growth (MCG)

Tables 9 and 10 report conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with
dividend yield and term spread respectively as the instrument for the following three fund styles:
small-cap growth (SCG), flexible (FLX), and mid-cap growth (MCG). Both these tables are for-
matted exactly the same as Table 2. Relying on the Full estimation for either excess-of-riskfree or
excess-of-matched returns, we can always reject the hypotheses that all f coefficients are equal to
zero, that all f coefficients are the same, and that the f coefficients are the same for the low and
high TNA portfolios for all fund styles, irrespective of the instrument, the pricing model or the
particular excess returns being used. Turning to the Short method, 11 of these 24 hypotheses (3
hypotheses across 8 specifications) are rejected, while only 5 of them, all using term spread as the
instrument, are not rejected using the Reg method.
   This finding suggests some improvement in the precision of the e and f estimates obtained from
using the Full method (which uses all available factor, instrument, and fund portfolio return data)
rather than the Short method (which only uses factor, instrument, and fund portfolio data from
1/95, the latest start date of the 3 styles in this group) for these 3 fund styles. However, the reduc-
tions in the standard errors for the estimates of performance sensitivity to the information variable
(the f estimates) from using the Full method rather than the Short method are larger in magnitude
than for the first and second groups of fund styles, on average around 58%, but never less than
55%, when using excess-of-riskfree returns, irrespective of pricing model or instrument. Somewhat
surprisingly, most of the improvement in precision of the estimates here for a given portfolio is com-
ing from the additional information provided by the factor and instrument data from the period
between 1/27 and 1/95 and any return data available before 1/95 for the given portfolio. Only a
very small component of the improvement in precision is coming from the additional information
provided by the portfolio return data available before 1/95 for the other styles, including those
styles in the first two groups. The second row entries of the “% Red” column report reductions in
the magnitude of the standard errors for the f coefficients that average only 7% going from the
adjusted moment estimation, one that estimates performance for a given TNA-style portfolio using
all the factor and instrument data from 1/27, and all available return data for only that TNA-style
portfolio, to the Full estimation (that uses all available factor, instrument and fund data that is
useful), which is small relative to the average reduction going from the Short to the Full method.
Again, as would be expected, the reductions in the standard errors for the estimates of e and f are


                                                  41
typically smaller when returns are in excess of matched FF-portfolio returns and not the riskfree
rate, though not for every e and f coefficient, and by less than for the second group of styles: for
the f estimates, the reductions are on average 51% and never more than 59% irrespective of pricing
model or instrument. Based on an average second row entry in the “% Red” column of around
17%, information provided by the moments for the TNA-style portfolios in the first two groups are
making a larger contribution to the improvements in precision going from Short to Full when using
excess-of-matched returns rather than excess of riskfree returns.
   We again focus on the results for the Full estimation when assessing the conditional performance
of these 3 mutual fund styles. Starting with the performance results for the excess-of-riskfree
returns, the average f for the both the small-fund and the large-fund portfolios are both significantly
positive using term spread, irrespective of the pricing model. Using the term spread, both portfolios
for all three styles have f coefficients that are significantly positive irrespective of the pricing
model, while using dividend yield and the FF model, both MCG portfolios and the large-fund SCG
portfolio have f coefficients that are significantly negative. The small-fund SCG portfolio has a
significantly higher f coefficient than the large-fund SCG portfolio for all specifications. The small-
fund MCG portfolio has a significantly lower f coefficient than the large-fund MCG portfolio for
the 2 specifications that use dividend yield as the instrument, while the small-fund FLX portfolio
has a significantly lower f coefficient than the large-fund FLX portfolio for the 2 specifications that
use the FF model.
   We turn now to the performance results for excess-of-matched returns. For both specifica-
tions that use dividend yield, the average f coefficient is significantly negative for the small-fund
portfolios, significantly positive for large-fund portfolios, and significantly higher for the large-fund
portfolios than the small-fund portfolios. The same is true for the specification that uses the FF
model and term spread, except that the average f coefficient for the large-fund portfolios, while
significantly larger than for the average small-fund portfolio f coefficient, is still significantly less
than zero, just like the average small-fund portfolio f coefficient. For the specification that uses
the C model and term spread, the average f coefficient for the large-fund portfolios is significantly
negative, just like the other specification that uses term spread, and significantly lower for the
large-fund portfolios than the small-fund portfolios, which is not the case for any of the other three
specifications.
   When using dividend yield, the f coefficient for the large-MCG portfolio is significantly positive
irrespective of the pricing model, which explains why the average f coefficient is positive and



                                                   42
significant for both these specifications. The average f coefficient is negative and significant for both
specifications that use term spread as the instrument, with the 3 large-fund portfolios all having
significantly negative average f coefficients using the FF model, and the large-MCG portfolio being
the only large-fund portfolio with a significantly negative f coefficient using the C model. For the
small-fund portfolios, the significantly negative average f coefficient when dividend yield is the
instrument is being driven by the significantly negative f coefficient for the small-MCG portfolio,
irrespective of pricing model, while the significantly negative average f coefficient when using term
spread and the FF model is being driven by the significantly negative f coefficients for all three
small-TNA portfolios.
   For the FLX style, the small-fund portfolio always has a significantly smaller f coefficient
than the large fund portfolio, except when using the C model and term spread. For the MCG
style, except when using term spread and the C model, the small-MCG portfolio always has a
significantly smaller f coefficient than the large-MCG portfolio, while for the SCG style, except
when using dividend and the C model, the small-SCG portfolio always has a significantly larger f
coefficient than the large-SCG portfolio
   Finally, the Reg method produces only 2 significant f coefficients estimates where the corre-
sponding Full estimates are insignificant or significant with the opposite sign, and both these Reg
method estimates are negative, which means pro-cyclical performance. Further, the Short method
produces only 2 significant f coefficient estimates where the corresponding Full estimates are in-
significant or significant with the opposite sign, and again, all three of these Short method estimates
are negative.
   The results suggest that conditional performance becomes less counter-cyclical for these 3 styles
after adjusting for the cyclicality of the conditional performance of the underlying stocks. The large-
MCG portfolio still exhibits counter-cyclical performance using dividend yield as the instrument,
but otherwise, any business-cycle variation in performance is procyclical, irrespective of the instru-
ment or pricing model. After adjusting for the conditional performance of the underlying stocks,
significant pro-cyclical performance is exhibited by both the low and high TNA portfolios for all
three styles using term spread and the FF model, by the large-MCG portfolio using term spread
and the C model, and by the small-MCG portfolio for all specifications but the one using term
spread and the C model. The small-fund portfolio is more cyclical than the large-fund portfolio for
the FLX and MCG styles, while the converse is true for the SCG style.
   Continuing to focus on the results for the Full estimation, the hypothesis test of all e coefficients



                                                   43
equal to zero can be easily rejected, irrespective of pricing model, instrument or whether excess-
of-riskfree or excess-of-matched returns are used. When using excess-of-matched returns, the 2
FLX portfolios only have significant e coefficients using dividend yield and the C model, and those
coefficients are both negative. The large-SCG portfolio only has two significant e coefficients,
both negative, one using excess-of-riskfree returns and the other using excess-of-matched returns,
while the small-SCG portfolio always has a significantly negative e coefficient when using excess-
of-matched returns and the term spread as the instrument. When using the excess-of-matched
returns, the e coefficient is always significantly negative for the large-MCG portfolio, but is only
significant for the small-MCG portfolio in the specification with the C model and dividend yield that
produces a negative coefficient. In contrast, when using excess-of-riskfree returns, the e coefficient
is only significant for the small-MCG portfolio when using term spread and the FF model, and
this significant coefficient is positive. We also test equality of the e coefficients across the 6 TNA-
style portfolios and are always able to reject this hypothesis. The hypothesis of average e equal
to zero is only rejected when using excess-of-matched returns and dividend yield, and the average
e coefficient is negative for 5 of the 8 specifications, including both of the specifications that use
excess-of-matched returns and dividend yield. For the other two estimation methods, Short and
Reg, the average e coefficient is always negative, except for one Short estimation, and the hypothesis
test of the average e coefficient being equal to zero is only rejected for one Reg estimation with a
negative average e coefficient.

5.5   Conditional performance using NBER business cycle variable: GRI(Growth
      and Income), GRO(Growth), CGM(Maximum Capital Gains), and INC(Income)

Tables 2 and 3 contains conditional performance results for the 4 styles for which we have the most
data (growth and income, GRI, growth, GRO, maximum capital gains, CGM, and income, INC)
using dividend yield and term spread as the instruments. Both these variables have been found to
move countercyclically with the business cycle, yet we find very little evidence in support of the
conjecture first advanced by Moskowitz (2000) that conditional fund performance is countercyclical,
even before we adjust fund returns for any cyclical variation in the conditional performance of the
typical stocks held by the various fund styles. Papers that explore Moskowitz’s conjecture including
Moskowitz himself use measures of the state of the economy that are not known at the start of
the period like the NBER business-cycle dummy. The NBER recession start and end dates are not
announced until months after those dates occur, and so it is unlikely that the NBER business-cycle
dummy is in the information set of investors at the start of each month. The instruments that we

                                                  44
use, dividend yield and term spread, are both publicly available at the start of each month, which
is one reason why we chose them. To examine whether conditional performance for these 4 mutual
fund styles varies depending on the value taken by the NBER business-cycle dummy, we repeated
the analysis reported in Tables 2 and 3 using the NBER business-cycle dummy as the instrument.
    The results are presented in Table 11, which is formatted exactly the same as Table 2. We find
no evidence of counter-cyclical performance by these 4 fund styles using the NBER business-cycle
variaable as the indicator, irrespective of whether the excess-of-riskless or excess-of match returns
are used, or whether the Full, Short, or Reg method is used. When using the Short method, the
hypotheses that all f coefficients are equal to zero is only rejected for one of the 4 specifications, the
one using the C model and excess-of-matched returns. The same is true when using the Reg model.
When using the Full method, the hypotheses that all f coefficients are equal to zero is rejected for
all but the specification using the C model and excess-of-riskfree returns. However, the tests for
significance of the individual f coefficients are always insignificant for all 8 coefficients, irrespective
of method or specification, with one exception: the f coefficient for the CGM-Lg portfolio is
significantly negative when using the C model and excess-of-matched returns. The same is true
when we test for the significance of the average f coefficients grouped by style (4 styles) and by
TNA (low TNA portfolios across styles and high TNA portfolios across styles).
    Using the Short method, the average f coefficient across the 8 style-TNA portfolios is positive
for three of the four specifications, though the maximum recession-in-excess-of-expansion perfor-
mance, attained by the specification that uses the C model and excess-of-matched returns is only
around 0.5% p.a., ; when only considering the specifications that use excess-of-riskfree returns,
the maximum recession-in-excess-of-expansion performance is less than 0.28% p.a. While the f
coefficient estimates obtained for the Reg method are always the same as those obtained for the
Small method, the average f coefficient is always negative for the Full method. So while there
is some evidence that there exists linear combinations of the f coefficients that are non-zero, our
analysis does not produce any evidence that conditional performance of these fund portfolios is
higher during NBER recessions than NBER expansions.19
   19
      Kosowski (2006) reports results that indicate that the conditional performance of equity mutual funds is higher
in NBER recessions than NBER expansions and show that the magnitude is both statistically and economically
significant. However, we are not able to produce the same results when we attempt to implement his methodology.
An Appendix A available from the authors upon request summarizes how we implement the Kosowski methodology,
and what we find when we do so.




                                                         45
6    Conclusions

We develop a new methodology that allows conditional performance to be a function of information
variables available at the start of the period, but without making assumptions about the behavior
of the conditional betas. This methodology uses the Euler equation restriction that comes out of
the factor model rather than the beta pricing formula itself. It assumes that the stochastic discount
factor (SDF) parameters are linear in the information variables. The Euler equation restrictions
that we develop can be estimated using standard GMM, which does not use all available data when
the mutual fund data starts at different times for different funds and later than the factor and
instrument data. We also use econometric techniques developed by Lynch and Wachter (2007) to
estimate the Euler equation restrictions taking account of all available factor return, instrument,
and mutual fund data. These techniques allow us to produce more precise parameter estimates
than those obtained from the usual GMM estimation. We use our SDF-based method to assess the
conditional performance of funds in the CRSP mutual fund data set. We are careful to condition
only on information available to investors at the start of the period, and to control for any cyclical
performance by the underlying stocks held by the various fund styles.
    Using dividend yield and term spread to track the business cycle, we find that conditional
mutual fund performance relative to conditional versions of the Fama-French and Carhart pricing
models moves with the business cycle. However, we find that not all funds styles produce counter-
cyclical performance: instead, many fund styles exhibit pro-cyclical or non-cyclical performance,
especially after controlling for any cyclicality in the performance of the underlying stocks. For
many fund styles, conditional performance often differs across large-TNA and small-TNA funds,
and switches from counter-cyclical to pro- or non-cyclical depending on the instrument or pricing
model used. Moreover, we find very little evidence of any business cycle variation in conditional
performance for the 4 oldest fund styles, even though we estimate the cyclicality parameter using
Lynch and Wachter’s GMM method, which uses all available factor, instrument and fund return
data.
    Moskowitz (2000) conjectures that mutual funds may add value by performing well during
recessions. However, contrary to accepted wisdom and Moskowitz’s conjecture, our results suggest
that, once care is taken to conditional only on information available to investors and to control
for cyclical performance by the underlying stocks, the real picture may be more complicated than
this, with some fund styles exhibiting counter-cyclical performance, and others exhibiting pro- or
non-cyclical performance.


                                                 46
   Our results raise the question of why mutual fund performance varies over the business cycle. In
particular, what are the economic mechanisms that cause managerial skill to vary over the business
cycle? Why does this variation exhibit different patterns for different fund styles? We leave these
questions to future research.




                                                47
References

Avramov, D., and Chordia, T., 2006, Asset Pricing Models and Financial Market Anomalies, The
Review of Financial Studies 19, 1001-1040.

Avramov, D., and Wermers, R., 2006, Investing in Mutual Funds when Returns are Predictable,
Journal of Financial Economics 81, 339-377.

Brown, S.J., Goetzmann, W.N., Ibbotson,R.G. and Ross, S.A., 1992, Survivorship Bias in Perfor-
mance Studies, Review of Financial Studies, 5, 553-580.

Campbell, J.Y. and Shiller, R.J., 1988, The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195228.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57-82.

Carpenter, J.N. and Lynch, A.W., 1999, Survivorship Bias and Attrition Effects in Measures of
Performance Persistence, Journal of Financial Economics, 54, 337-374.

Chen,J., Hong, H., Huang, M. and Kubik J, 2004, Does Fund Size Erode Mutual Fund Performance?
The Role of Liquidity and Organization. American Economic Review, 94, 1276-1302.

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., 2011 Mutual Funds. forthcoming in Constantinides,G, Harris, M. and
Stulz, R., 2012. Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier.

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J. and Blake, C.R., 1996, Survivorship Bias and Mutual Fund Performance,
Review of Financial Studies 9, 1097-1120.

Evans, R.B, 2010. Mutual Fund Incubation Journal of Finance 65, 1581-1611.

Fama, E. and French, K., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.

Fama, E. and French, K., 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Bonds and Stocks, Journal
of Financial Economics, 33, 3-53.



                                               48
Ferson, W.E., Farnsworth, H., Jackson, D., and Todd, S., 2002, Performance Evaluation with
Stochastic Discount Factors, Journal of Business 75, 473-504.

Ferson, W.E., Henry, T., and Kisgen, D., 2006, Evaluating Fixed income fund returns with Stochas-
tic Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 19, 423-456.

Ferson, W.E., and Schadt, R.W., 1996, Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in Changing
Economic Conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-462.

Ferson, W.E., and Harvey, C.R., 1999. Conditioning Variables and the Cross Section of Stock
Returns. Journal of Finance 54, 1325-1360.

Glode, V., 2010. Why Mutual Funds “Underperform”. Forthcoming Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics.

Glode, V., Hollifield, B., Kacperczyk, M., and Kogan, S., 2011. Time-varying Predictability in
Mutual Fund Returns. Working paper, University of Pensylvania.

Kosowski, R., 2001, Do Mutual Funds Perform When It Matters Most to Investors? US Mutual
Fund Performance and Risk in Recessions and Booms 1962-1994, Working Paper, London School
of Economics.

Kosowski, R., 2006, Do Mutual Funds Perform When It Matters Most to Investors? US Mutual
Fund Performance and Risk in Recessions and Expansions, Working Paper, INSEAD.

Kacperczyk, M., van Nieuwerburgh, S and Veldkamp, L., 2010. Attention Allocation over the
Business Cycle. Working paper, New York University.

Lettau, M. Ludvigson, S., 2001a, Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock Returns,
Journal of Finance 56,815-849.

Lettau, M. Ludvigson, S., 2001b, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk
Premia Are Time-Varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238–1287.

Linnainmaa, J., 2011. Reverse survivorship bias. Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Lynch, A. and Wachter, J., 2007. Does Mutual Fund Performance Vary over the Business Cycle?
Working paper, New York University.

                                               49
Lynch, A.W. and Wachter, J., 2011. Using Samples of Unequal Length in Generalized Method of
Moments Estimation. Forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., 2000, Discussion: Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition
Into Stock-Picking Talent, Style, Transaction Costs, and Expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 16551703.

Pastor, L. and Stambaugh, R., 2002a, Mutual fund performance and seemingly unrelated assets,
Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315-349.

Pastor, L. and Stambaugh, R., 2002b, Investing in equity mutual funds, Journal of Financial
Economics 63, 351-380.

Staal, A., 2006. Essays in empirical finance. Doctoral dissertation. Northwestern University.

Stambaugh, R., 1997, Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length, Journal of Financial
Economics 45, 285-331.

Stambaugh, R., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-421.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition Into Stock-Picking
Talent, Style, Transaction Costs, and Expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655 1703.




                                                50
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the CRSP mutual fund data.
This table reports the mean, minimum and maximum number of funds per month over the length of the available data
series for the 12 mutual fund styles in our sample. Starting dates for each style’s return series are also reported in the
last column. All style return series end 12/07. The mutual fund data used in this paper is from the CRSP mutual
fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. A TNA-based filter and a return-based filter are used to determine the
start date for each fund in our sample. CRSP uses fund style classifications from three sources: Wiesenberger(1961-
92), Strategic Insight (1992-99), and Lipper (1999 onwards). Also, Wiesenberger changed its system entirely in 1990,
leaving us with four classification schemes. From 1961-1990, we keep only funds for which Wiesenberger’s policy code
is either reported as ’CS’ (common stock) or is missing. After 1990, we rely solely on the fund style classification to
determine whether a fund is an equity fund. A single aggregate fund style classification that is valid at all points in
time is obtained by combining together the four fund style classifications used by CRSP using cross-tabulations, which
show how funds move from an old scheme to a new scheme at each point at which the classifications used by CRSP
changes, and frequency tables, which report the number of funds in each style in each month. The frequency tables and
cross-tabulations identify 12 aggregate styles: growth-income (GRI), growth (GRO), income (INC), maximum capital
gains (CGM), midcap growth (MCG), small cap growth (SCG), flexible (FLX), and five sector styles (energy/natural
resources, ENR, financial services, FIN, health, HLT, technology TCH, and utilities, UTL). Further details of the
sample construction are contained in section 3.

                                              Average     Min    Max     Start-date
                                     GRI       182.31     52     483        1/62
                                     GRO       309.70     49     975        1/62
                                     CGM       111.02     62     208        1/69
                                     INC       69.83       5     265        1/72

                                     ENR        29.43      14     45        1/91
                                     FIN        25.69       7      43       1/91
                                     HLT        31.60       9      69       1/91
                                     TCH        59.08      15     137       1/91
                                     UTL        32.65      15      46       1/91

                                     SCG       319.27      46     540       1/91
                                     FLX       116.84      41     262       1/93
                                     MCG       198.15      51     344       1/95
Table 2: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with dividend yield as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07 for
INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style.
Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model,
performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last
4 columns. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures
the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each
fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard
errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson
and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/72 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent
reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the
portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for
the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the
Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                               Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                          Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.             Full    Short    % Red     Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm                    -0.074    -0.128    30.1      -0.123       -0.058    -0.158    12.5     -0.160       -0.048    -0.085    29.7      -0.080        -0.086     -0.132    14.0     -0.134
                            0 .064    0 .092    0.0       0 .031       0 .060    0 .069    0.0      0 .069       0 .064    0 .091    0.0       0 .031        0 .063     0 .073    0.0      0 .071
 GRI-Lg                    -0.039    -0.087    31.4      -0.084       -0.022    -0.118    13.1     -0.121       -0.039    -0.060    31.4      -0.056        -0.077     -0.107    14.3     -0.110
                            0 .063    0 .092    0.0       0 .025       0 .057    0 .066    0.0      0 .066       0 .062    0 .090    0.0       0 .023        0 .058     0 .068    0.0      0 .066
 GRO-Sm                     0.068    -0.065    26.2      -0.060        0.135     0.098    14.5      0.101        0.005    -0.071    27.0      -0.065         0.073      0.029    13.1      0.032
                            0 .078    0 .106    0.0       0 .039       0 .090    0 .105    0.0      0 .087       0 .080    0 .109    0.0       0 .041        0 .079     0 .091    0.0      0 .077
 GRO-Lg                     0.014    -0.060    28.7      -0.057        0.081     0.102    15.8      0.104       -0.042    -0.071    29.1      -0.068         0.026      0.029    14.3      0.030
                            0 .069    0 .097    0.0       0 .035       0 .084    0 .100    0.0      0 .089       0 .072    0 .101    0.0       0 .038        0 .073     0 .086    0.0      0 .079
 CGM-Sm                     0.104    -0.145    22.5      -0.142       -0.227    -0.301    10.1     -0.291       -0.102    -0.230    24.3      -0.225        -0.304     -0.398    12.6     -0.386
                            0 .091    0 .118    1.7       0 .081       0 .103    0 .115    1.0      0 .107       0 .112    0 .148    2.2       0 .083        0 .105     0 .120    1.4      0 .106
 CGM-Lg                     0.157     0.027    25.0       0.027       -0.127    -0.130    10.2     -0.122       -0.037    -0.067    26.9      -0.068        -0.214     -0.235    11.5     -0.228
                            0 .086    0 .115    1.3       0 .073       0 .083    0 .092    0.9      0 .082       0 .101    0 .139    1.5       0 .066        0 .081     0 .091    1.3      0 .075
 INC-Sm                    -0.090    -0.094    26.9      -0.100       -0.038    -0.044     9.7     -0.051       -0.037    -0.037    26.5      -0.043         0.034      0.037    12.2      0.025
                            0 .066    0 .090    1.4       0 .042       0 .082    0 .091    1.7      0 .083       0 .063    0 .086    1.3       0 .041        0 .090     0 .102    1.7      0 .086
 INC-Lg                     0.018    -0.019    24.0      -0.014        0.065     0.031     6.2      0.035        0.087     0.032    21.8       0.031         0.154      0.106     8.7      0.099
                            0 .075    0 .099    0.9       0 .055       0 .082    0 .088    3.5      0 .089       0 .074    0 .095    1.4       0 .056        0 .086     0 .094    2.6      0 .088
 Average e                  0.020    -0.071              -0.069       -0.024    -0.065             -0.063       -0.027    -0.074              -0.072        -0.049     -0.084             -0.084
                                                   Fama-French                                                                        Carhart
                                  Excess of rf                  Excess of matched portfolio                  Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                        Full    Short    % Red   Reg.        Full     Short     % Red    Reg.      Full     Short    % Red   Reg.               Full    Short    % Red     Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
GRI-Sm                 0.136   0.123  30.4      0.104       -0.050    -0.023    15.8    -0.017     0.062    0.091    29.9    0.071         -0.060       0.001    16.5      0.013
                      0 .069  0 .099   0.0      0 .035       0 .056    0 .066    0.0     0 .062    0 .067   0 .095    0.0    0 .036         0 .058      0 .069    0.0      0 .064
GRI-Lg                 0.140   0.107  31.8      0.094       -0.046    -0.040    15.8    -0.027     0.052    0.072    31.6    0.053         -0.070      -0.018    16.5     -0.005
                      0 .070  0 .102   0.0      0 .027       0 .056    0 .066    0.0     0 .063    0 .066   0 .097    0.0    0 .025         0 .055      0 .066    0.0      0 .061
GRO-Sm                 0.135   0.141  27.7      0.117       -0.187     0.062    19.1     0.045     0.041    0.103    27.7    0.079         -0.036       0.035    17.6      0.020
                      0 .074  0 .102   0.0      0 .041       0 .096    0 .119    0.0     0 .089    0 .071   0 .098    0.0    0 .044         0 .088      0 .107    0.0      0 .077
GRO-Lg                 0.088   0.094  29.1      0.079       -0.234     0.015    20.1     0.007     0.030    0.064    28.4    0.048         -0.047      -0.004    18.4     -0.010
                      0 .068  0 .096   0.0      0 .037       0 .093    0 .116    0.0     0 .091    0 .066   0 .092    0.0    0 .039         0 .084      0 .103    0.0      0 .076
CGM-Sm                 0.127   0.110  26.5      0.097        0.287     0.208     9.5     0.162    -0.046    0.047    26.0    0.025          0.030       0.130    14.2      0.075
                      0 .083  0 .114   1.5      0 .074       0 .087    0 .096    0.9     0 .088    0 .098   0 .133    2.0    0 .081         0 .088      0 .102    1.5      0 .094
CGM-Lg                 0.047   0.068  27.2      0.066        0.179     0.166     9.6     0.131     0.008    0.034    27.1    0.035          0.073       0.116    11.3      0.085
                      0 .077  0 .106   1.1      0 .069       0 .073    0 .081    0.6     0 .074    0 .087   0 .119    1.6    0 .064         0 .074      0 .083    1.1      0 .068
INC-Sm                 0.016   0.032  29.8      0.056       -0.180    -0.035    13.2    -0.006     0.076    0.045    28.3    0.071         -0.024       0.029    14.2      0.085
                      0 .079  0 .112   0.9      0 .043       0 .081    0 .093    3.6     0 .077    0 .067   0 .094    1.0    0 .042         0 .085      0 .099    3.2      0 .088
INC-Lg                 0.197   0.136  25.2      0.113        0.003     0.068    10.8     0.051     0.173    0.157    22.8    0.160          0.078       0.141    13.8      0.174
                      0 .071  0 .095   1.1      0 .054       0 .072    0 .081    3.0     0 .089    0 .072   0 .094    1.6    0 .058         0 .082      0 .095    1.9      0 .093
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0               0.000    0.031           0.001      0.000     0.006              0.005    0.029     0.154            0.056          0.000       0.000              0.001
All e same              0.000    0.018           0.016      0.000     0.015              0.012    0.017     0.108            0.077          0.000       0.005              0.003
Avg e = 0               0.772    0.468           0.024      0.623     0.269              0.215    0.721     0.493            0.028          0.289       0.128              0.072
All f = 0               0.001    0.107           0.029      0.000     0.061              0.082    0.294     0.422            0.107          0.491       0.539              0.265
All f same              0.003    0.195           0.392      0.000     0.045              0.057    0.637     0.500            0.447          0.387       0.494              0.237
Av f = 0                0.044    0.250           0.001      0.377     0.626              0.723    0.386     0.390            0.029          0.243       0.902              0.946
Av fGRI = Av frest      0.043    0.275           0.006      0.402     0.223              0.373    0.421     0.456            0.071          0.157       0.495              0.651
Av f = 0                0.112    0.231           0.010      0.025     0.741              0.768    0.595     0.372            0.116          0.627       0.882              0.948
Av fGRO = Av frest      0.148    0.219           0.034      0.010     0.899              0.948    0.816     0.497            0.250          0.595       0.898              0.725
Av f = 0                0.257    0.405           0.227      0.002     0.027              0.059    0.830     0.741            0.653          0.500       0.164              0.291
Av fCGM = Av frest      0.529    0.569           0.505      0.000     0.025              0.065    0.500     0.981            0.935          0.413       0.219              0.447
Av f = 0                0.119    0.390           0.015      0.209     0.835              0.765    0.047     0.246            0.003          0.724       0.348              0.128
Av fINC = Av frest      0.210    0.542           0.218      0.183     0.871              0.988    0.011     0.218            0.015          0.623       0.409              0.148
Av fSm = 0              0.149    0.328           0.012      0.517     0.389              0.346    0.662     0.510            0.140          0.650       0.423              0.318
Av fLg = 0              0.081    0.305           0.007      0.612     0.379              0.450    0.354     0.427            0.022          0.852       0.305              0.176
Av fSm =Av fLg          0.513    0.988           0.839      0.720     0.988              0.839    0.134     0.677            0.610          0.155       0.677              0.610
All fSm = fLg           0.002    0.137           0.152      0.001     0.136              0.152    0.411     0.365            0.218          0.445       0.365              0.218
fGRI-Sm = fGRI-Lg       0.838    0.498           0.664      0.838     0.498              0.664    0.624     0.430            0.451          0.624       0.430              0.451
fGRO-Sm = fGRO-Lg       0.053    0.102           0.025      0.053     0.102              0.025    0.667     0.215            0.101          0.667       0.215              0.101
fCGM-Sm = fCGM-Lg       0.105    0.448           0.536      0.029     0.457              0.536    0.315     0.818            0.867          0.423       0.818              0.867
fINC-Sm = fINC-Lg       0.004    0.151           0.408      0.003     0.151              0.408    0.119     0.108            0.157          0.103       0.109              0.157
Table 3: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with term spread as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07 for
INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style.
Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model,
performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last
4 columns. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures
the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each
fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard
errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson
and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/72 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent
reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the
portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for
the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the
Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                               Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                          Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm                    -0.067    -0.114    30.9      -0.116       -0.089     0.039    15.7      0.045       -0.036    -0.071    30.0      -0.075         0.036       0.016    15.2     0.025
                            0 .070    0 .101    0.0       0 .034       0 .077    0 .091    0.0      0 .087       0 .069    0 .098    0.0       0 .031        0 .071      0 .084    0.0     0 .079
 GRI-Lg                    -0.070    -0.069    32.0      -0.072       -0.166    -0.132    15.9     -0.130       -0.034    -0.038    31.6      -0.044        -0.012      -0.117    14.2    -0.109
                            0 .071    0 .105    0.0       0 .031       0 .063    0 .075    0.0      0 .069       0 .068    0 .099    0.0       0 .029        0 .059      0 .069    0.0     0 .068
 GRO-Sm                    -0.024    -0.058    27.2      -0.060       -0.046     0.094    15.9      0.101        0.025    -0.057    27.5      -0.059         0.097       0.029    14.8     0.042
                            0 .082    0 .112    0.0       0 .038       0 .094    0 .112    0.0      0 .097       0 .082    0 .112    0.0       0 .039        0 .082      0 .097    0.0     0 .084
 GRO-Lg                    -0.054    -0.072    29.3      -0.073       -0.077     0.081    16.2      0.088       -0.042    -0.079    29.3      -0.083         0.030       0.008    15.4     0.018
                            0 .074    0 .104    0.0       0 .035       0 .088    0 .105    0.0      0 .096       0 .075    0 .106    0.0       0 .036        0 .077      0 .091    0.0     0 .084
 CGM-Sm                     0.133    -0.094    22.7      -0.105       -0.156    -0.195     9.8     -0.212       -0.076    -0.186    24.1      -0.200        -0.247      -0.292    12.2    -0.305
                            0 .092    0 .118    2.1       0 .080       0 .105    0 .116    2.1      0 .117       0 .106    0 .139    2.3       0 .080        0 .099      0 .113    2.0     0 .107
 CGM-Lg                     0.106     0.015    24.6       0.011       -0.187    -0.085    10.3     -0.096       -0.016    -0.070    26.4      -0.075        -0.182      -0.176    11.6    -0.180
                            0 .086    0 .113    1.8       0 .064       0 .084    0 .094    2.1      0 .080       0 .096    0 .131    1.8       0 .061        0 .082      0 .092    2.0     0 .071
 INC-Sm                    -0.006    -0.073    27.3      -0.068        0.028     0.080    17.0      0.093        0.038    -0.025    27.4      -0.025         0.242       0.050    17.1     0.049
                            0 .066    0 .091    1.4       0 .041       0 .091    0 .109    8.0      0 .099       0 .069    0 .095    1.4       0 .043        0 .113      0 .136    1.6     0 .106
 INC-Lg                    -0.184    -0.063    25.8      -0.064       -0.138    -0.007     9.2     -0.009       -0.038    -0.013    22.5      -0.014         0.093       0.062    12.4     0.061
                            0 .080    0 .108    1.1       0 .055       0 .093    0 .102    3.9      0 .102       0 .078    0 .100    1.7       0 .057        0 .097      0 .110    3.0     0 .097
 Average e                 -0.021    -0.066              -0.069       -0.104    -0.016             -0.015       -0.023    -0.067              -0.072            0.007   -0.053            -0.050
                                                       Fama-French                                                                         Carhart
                                   Excess of rf                      Excess of matched portfolio                   Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                         Full    Short       % Red   Reg.       Full       Short    % Red     Reg.      Full     Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
GRI-Sm                 0.086    0.015  30.6       0.004         0.068      0.038    15.8      0.062     0.031     0.018    29.3     0.000         0.043       0.024    15.2     0.066
                       0 .047   0 .068  0.0       0 .026        0 .064     0 .076    0.0      0 .069    0 .046    0 .065    0.0     0 .026        0 .062      0 .073    0.0     0 .068
GRI-Lg                 0.066    0.010  31.5      -0.005        -0.114     -0.021    14.6     -0.010     0.035     0.014    30.9    -0.008        -0.081      -0.047    15.0    -0.014
                       0 .048   0 .070  0.0       0 .025        0 .064     0 .075    0.0      0 .065    0 .044    0 .064    0.0     0 .025        0 .061      0 .072    0.0     0 .066
GRO-Sm                 0.064    0.035  26.8       0.028         0.046      0.059    14.6      0.087     0.062     0.033    28.0     0.026         0.074       0.039    13.8     0.093
                       0 .058   0 .079  0.0       0 .030        0 .077     0 .090    0.0      0 .074    0 .058    0 .081    0.0     0 .029        0 .070      0 .082    0.0     0 .071
GRO-Lg                 0.047    0.006  29.3       0.002         0.029      0.029    14.5      0.061     0.058     0.021    29.6     0.003         0.070       0.026    14.3     0.070
                       0 .056   0 .079  0.0       0 .032        0 .072     0 .085    0.0      0 .075    0 .057    0 .081    0.0     0 .031        0 .067      0 .078    0.0     0 .074
CGM-Sm                 0.092    0.020  23.6      -0.027        -0.026     -0.010    10.9     -0.083     0.101     0.046    25.1    -0.013         0.049      -0.015    12.2    -0.072
                       0 .080   0 .104  1.5       0 .069        0 .078     0 .087    1.7      0 .089    0 .087    0 .116    1.7     0 .063        0 .074      0 .085    2.3     0 .083
CGM-Lg                 0.093    0.075  27.8       0.055        -0.003      0.045    10.3     -0.001     0.075     0.083    28.8     0.063         0.027       0.022    14.3     0.004
                       0 .077   0 .106  1.4       0 .047        0 .065     0 .072    2.2      0 .064    0 .085    0 .119    1.5     0 .043        0 .065      0 .076    3.0     0 .055
INC-Sm                -0.068   -0.062  23.5      -0.041        -0.029     -0.039    20.9      0.018    -0.046    -0.039    25.8    -0.041         0.083      -0.059    19.8    -0.062
                       0 .040   0 .053  1.5       0 .038        0 .078     0 .098    6.5      0 .079    0 .046    0 .062    1.9     0 .035        0 .102      0 .127    2.8     0 .086
INC-Lg                 0.165    0.063  23.7       0.056         0.092      0.048     9.1      0.037     0.107     0.054    20.6     0.048         0.160       0.034    17.2     0.027
                       0 .064   0 .084  1.6       0 .044        0 .082     0 .090    5.5      0 .078    0 .061    0 .077    2.2     0 .043        0 .091      0 .110    3.4     0 .081
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0               0.001    0.101               0.006     0.000       0.002              0.004    0.000     0.115             0.039             0.000   0.006              0.011
All e same              0.001    0.068               0.061     0.026       0.083              0.078    0.000     0.079             0.061             0.000   0.055              0.080
Avg e = 0               0.760    0.505               0.018     0.069       0.820              0.813    0.754     0.516             0.019             0.893   0.401              0.355
All f = 0               0.000    0.020               0.169     0.000       0.283              0.540    0.031     0.147             0.117             0.094   0.874              0.480
All f same              0.000    0.070               0.139     0.000       0.261              0.433    0.034     0.206             0.085             0.059   0.810              0.376
Av f = 0                0.106    0.858               0.982     0.669       0.895              0.644    0.451     0.795             0.855             0.707   0.849              0.638
Av fGRI = Av frest      0.130    0.956               0.771     0.400       0.983              0.678    0.812     0.961             0.575             0.146   0.731              0.622
Av f = 0                0.322    0.791               0.626     0.609       0.613              0.321    0.291     0.735             0.616             0.288   0.676              0.257
Av fGRO = Av frest      0.579    0.849               0.626     0.438       0.496              0.227    0.453     0.845             0.622             0.313   0.554              0.166
Av f = 0                0.221    0.643               0.789     0.833       0.820              0.563    0.288     0.573             0.598             0.563   0.966              0.598
Av fCGM = Av frest      0.278    0.602               0.825     0.720       0.889              0.413    0.317     0.554             0.596             0.830   0.980              0.476
Av f = 0                0.282    0.998               0.799     0.639       0.954              0.677    0.508     0.904             0.902             0.188   0.913              0.828
Av fINC = Av frest      0.577    0.746               0.916     0.557       0.931              0.721    0.884     0.829             0.959             0.204   0.880              0.705
Av fSm = 0              0.419    0.979               0.749     0.786       0.861              0.717    0.557     0.870             0.810             0.234   0.967              0.898
Av fLg = 0              0.132    0.670               0.253     0.983       0.643              0.666    0.299     0.657             0.240             0.350   0.875              0.655
Av fSm =Av fLg          0.027    0.174               0.151     0.692       0.749              0.981    0.163     0.296             0.161             0.454   0.694              0.546
All fSm = fLg           0.000    0.141               0.169     0.001       0.134              0.207    0.031     0.440             0.188             0.238   0.580              0.204
fGRI-Sm = fGRI-Lg       0.232    0.806               0.664     0.009       0.472              0.323    0.801     0.847             0.646             0.077   0.388              0.280
fGRO-Sm = fGRO-Lg       0.467    0.278               0.107     0.467       0.278              0.107    0.873     0.640             0.140             0.873   0.640              0.140
fCGM-Sm = fCGM-Lg       0.996    0.231               0.130     0.574       0.236              0.130    0.557     0.457             0.150             0.625   0.457              0.150
fINC-Sm = fINC-Lg       0.000    0.053               0.088     0.162       0.384              0.820    0.008     0.156             0.100             0.179   0.152              0.100
Table 4: Unconditional fund performance relative to an unconditional factor model.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07
for INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund
style. Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing
model, performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings
in the last 4 columns. Panel A reports the abnormal performance parameter e for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures unconditional performance. When parameter e is identified by
moment conditions (24) and (17), it is estimated for each fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method
(Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameter e is also estimated
for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Fama and French (1993) using data from 1/72 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the %
Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second
row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style
portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel B reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the
Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                Fama-French                                                                               Carhart
                           Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                          Excess of matched portfolio
                Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm        -0.071    -0.114    30.6      -0.114       -0.094     0.026    15.2      0.026       -0.062    -0.073    30.1      -0.073        -0.003       0.015    15.0     0.015
                0 .071    0 .103    0.0       0 .033       0 .079    0 .094    0.0      0 .084       0 .071    0 .102    0.0       0 .031        0 .071      0 .083    0.0     0 .076
 GRI-Lg        -0.052    -0.066    31.7      -0.066       -0.096    -0.125    11.9     -0.125       -0.045    -0.041    31.5      -0.041        -0.079      -0.109    12.4    -0.109
                0 .072    0 .106    0.0       0 .029       0 .061    0 .069    0.0      0 .068       0 .071    0 .103    0.0       0 .027        0 .058      0 .066    0.0     0 .066
 GRO-Sm         0.048    -0.051    27.1      -0.051        0.025     0.089    13.7      0.089       -0.022    -0.056    27.3      -0.056         0.037       0.033    14.5     0.033
                0 .083    0 .114    0.0       0 .038       0 .098    0 .113    0.0      0 .096       0 .084    0 .115    0.0       0 .039        0 .083      0 .097    0.0     0 .081
 GRO-Lg        -0.013    -0.053    29.3      -0.053       -0.036     0.087    14.6      0.087       -0.065    -0.065    29.2      -0.065        -0.006       0.023    15.6     0.023
                0 .075    0 .106    0.0       0 .034       0 .092    0 .108    0.0      0 .096       0 .076    0 .107    0.0       0 .035        0 .079      0 .094    0.0     0 .081
 CGM-Sm         0.108    -0.107    23.4      -0.107       -0.191    -0.215     8.9     -0.215       -0.129    -0.190    23.5      -0.190        -0.289      -0.307    10.4    -0.307
                0 .094    0 .123    1.4       0 .075       0 .103    0 .113    1.3      0 .109       0 .107    0 .140    2.0       0 .079        0 .100      0 .112    1.3     0 .102
 CGM-Lg         0.111     0.014    25.7       0.014       -0.181    -0.093     8.8     -0.093       -0.087    -0.079    26.5      -0.079        -0.245      -0.195     9.3    -0.195
                0 .089    0 .120    1.3       0 .064       0 .082    0 .090    1.4      0 .078       0 .096    0 .131    1.5       0 .059        0 .077      0 .085    1.1     0 .069
 INC-Sm        -0.023    -0.088    27.2      -0.088        0.034    -0.017    16.6     -0.017       -0.013    -0.031    26.8      -0.031        -0.002      -0.031    14.5    -0.031
                0 .069    0 .095    1.1       0 .044       0 .094    0 .112    1.4      0 .084       0 .067    0 .091    1.2       0 .042        0 .096      0 .112    1.3     0 .085
 INC-Lg        -0.103    -0.031    24.4      -0.031       -0.064     0.019     6.4      0.019        0.026     0.013    21.2       0.013         0.071       0.089     8.5     0.089
                0 .079    0 .104    0.5       0 .060       0 .086    0 .092    3.4      0 .094       0 .078    0 .098    0.9       0 .061        0 .088      0 .096    1.7     0 .093
 Average e      0.001    -0.062              -0.062       -0.076    -0.029             -0.029       -0.050    -0.065              -0.065        -0.064      -0.060            -0.060

 Panel B: Null hypotheses and test p-values
 All e = 0      0.000     0.111               0.028       0.000     0.013               0.009        0.042     0.254               0.159            0.000   0.014              0.012
 All e same     0.000     0.077               0.113       0.000     0.154               0.134        0.025     0.188               0.156            0.003   0.150              0.086
 Avg e = 0      0.993     0.551               0.035       0.173     0.665               0.603        0.492     0.534               0.037            0.169   0.288              0.205
Table 5: Unconditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with dividend yield as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07
for INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund
style. Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing
model, performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings
in the last 4 columns. Panel A reports the abnormal performance parameter e for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures unconditional performance. When parameter e is identified by
moment conditions (21) and (23), it is estimated for each fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method
(Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameter e is also estimated for
the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/72 to 12/07 and setting f = 0 in the regression. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates
of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short
method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the
moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel B reports the p-values for Wald tests of
joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are
in section 4.


                                                Fama-French                                                                              Carhart
                           Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm        -0.144    -0.100    30.6     -0.105       -0.041    -0.164    12.6      -0.163       -0.050    -0.064    29.7     -0.069        -0.084      -0.131    13.6    -0.132
                0 .066    0 .095    0.0      0 .030       0 .061    0 .069    0.0       0 .068       0 .064    0 .091    0.0      0 .029        0 .063      0 .073    0.0     0 .071
 GRI-Lg        -0.112    -0.063    31.6     -0.068       -0.008    -0.127    13.2      -0.125       -0.040    -0.044    31.4     -0.047        -0.075      -0.111    13.8    -0.110
                0 .066    0 .096    0.0      0 .027       0 .058    0 .066    0.0       0 .067       0 .062    0 .090    0.0      0 .023        0 .058      0 .068    0.0     0 .067
 GRO-Sm        -0.003    -0.034    26.8     -0.040        0.185     0.111    13.4       0.109        0.004    -0.048    27.0     -0.053         0.074       0.037    13.0     0.036
                0 .079    0 .108    0.0      0 .040       0 .088    0 .102    0.0       0 .084       0 .080    0 .109    0.0      0 .039        0 .079      0 .091    0.0     0 .074
 GRO-Lg        -0.036    -0.039    29.1     -0.043        0.152     0.106    14.3       0.105       -0.043    -0.057    29.2     -0.060         0.028       0.028    14.1     0.029
                0 .070    0 .099    0.0      0 .034       0 .082    0 .096    0.0       0 .084       0 .072    0 .101    0.0      0 .035        0 .073      0 .085    0.0     0 .075
 CGM-Sm         0.030    -0.121    22.9     -0.126       -0.337    -0.255    10.5      -0.263       -0.124    -0.220    24.2     -0.221        -0.234      -0.244    10.4    -0.240
                0 .091    0 .118    1.5      0 .077       0 .098    0 .109    1.0       0 .103       0 .109    0 .144    1.7      0 .079        0 .085      0 .095    0.9     0 .085
 CGM-Lg         0.111     0.042    25.6      0.038       -0.217    -0.093    10.9      -0.099       -0.045    -0.060    27.2     -0.062        -0.205      -0.209    11.0    -0.215
                0 .084    0 .113    1.3      0 .068       0 .078    0 .087    1.0       0 .080       0 .096    0 .133    1.3      0 .060        0 .076      0 .085    1.0     0 .072
 INC-Sm        -0.115    -0.087    27.6     -0.090       -0.008    -0.052     7.1      -0.052       -0.012    -0.027    26.3     -0.032         0.011       0.043    10.2     0.038
                0 .068    0 .093    1.1      0 .041       0 .079    0 .085    1.5       0 .084       0 .063    0 .085    1.2      0 .040        0 .088      0 .098    1.3     0 .085
 INC-Lg        -0.056     0.011    23.5      0.005        0.066     0.046     4.5       0.044        0.119     0.067    19.9      0.056         0.156       0.137     8.9     0.126
                0 .072    0 .094    0.7      0 .058       0 .079    0 .083    2.2       0 .090       0 .071    0 .088    1.6      0 .057        0 .087      0 .095    2.0     0 .089
 Average e     -0.041    -0.049             -0.054       -0.026    -0.053              -0.056       -0.024    -0.057             -0.061        -0.041      -0.056            -0.059

 Panel B: Null hypotheses and test p-values
 All e = 0      0.000    0.013                0.002       0.000     0.002               0.002        0.007    0.068               0.021            0.000   0.000              0.001
 All e same     0.000    0.007                0.011       0.000     0.003               0.005        0.004    0.050               0.023            0.000   0.006              0.006
 Avg e = 0      0.551    0.622                0.077       0.551     0.302               0.264        0.738    0.583               0.046            0.351   0.282              0.216
Table 6: Unconditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with term spread as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07
for INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund
style. Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing
model, performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings
in the last 4 columns. Panel A reports the abnormal performance parameter e for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures unconditional performance. When parameter e is identified by
moment conditions (21) and (23), it is estimated for each fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method
(Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameter e is also estimated for
the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/72 to 12/07 and setting f = 0 in the regression. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates
of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short
method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the
moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel B reports the p-values for Wald tests of
joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are
in section 4.


                                                Fama-French                                                                              Carhart
                           Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm        -0.052    -0.117    30.7     -0.117       -0.072     0.030    16.3       0.034       -0.033    -0.075    30.0     -0.075         0.041       0.010    15.6     0.015
                0 .067    0 .097    0.0      0 .033       0 .078    0 .093    0.0       0 .087       0 .068    0 .097    0.0      0 .030        0 .072      0 .085    0.0     0 .077
 GRI-Lg        -0.058    -0.071    32.0     -0.071       -0.181    -0.128    15.3      -0.128       -0.031    -0.042    31.5     -0.042        -0.019      -0.106    13.8    -0.107
                0 .069    0 .102    0.0      0 .030       0 .061    0 .072    0.0       0 .069       0 .067    0 .098    0.0      0 .028        0 .057      0 .067    0.0     0 .068
 GRO-Sm        -0.009    -0.067    26.9     -0.065       -0.030     0.081    16.2       0.087        0.031    -0.065    27.2     -0.063         0.105       0.020    15.3     0.028
                0 .080    0 .110    0.0      0 .038       0 .095    0 .113    0.0       0 .097       0 .080    0 .111    0.0      0 .039        0 .084      0 .099    0.0     0 .082
 GRO-Lg        -0.045    -0.073    29.1     -0.073       -0.065     0.074    16.4       0.078       -0.036    -0.084    29.1     -0.083         0.038       0.002    15.9     0.007
                0 .073    0 .103    0.0      0 .034       0 .089    0 .106    0.0       0 .096       0 .074    0 .104    0.0      0 .035        0 .079      0 .094    0.0     0 .082
 CGM-Sm         0.080    -0.099    23.3     -0.101       -0.245    -0.192     9.3      -0.198       -0.076    -0.197    24.0     -0.198        -0.258      -0.289    12.3    -0.294
                0 .093    0 .121    1.3      0 .078       0 .103    0 .113    1.3       0 .116       0 .102    0 .134    1.9      0 .078        0 .098      0 .112    1.3     0 .106
 CGM-Lg         0.082    -0.002    25.5      0.001       -0.247    -0.096    10.4      -0.096       -0.017    -0.089    26.8     -0.084        -0.193      -0.181    11.3    -0.181
                0 .086    0 .116    1.4      0 .065       0 .080    0 .089    1.2       0 .077       0 .095    0 .129    1.5      0 .062        0 .077      0 .087    1.3     0 .070
 INC-Sm        -0.009    -0.059    28.0     -0.061        0.021     0.089    18.6       0.090        0.021    -0.016    27.8     -0.019         0.171       0.064    14.8     0.059
                0 .072    0 .100    0.9      0 .043       0 .091    0 .112    7.2       0 .096       0 .071    0 .099    1.0      0 .043        0 .097      0 .114    0.9     0 .099
 INC-Lg        -0.189    -0.077    26.6     -0.073       -0.180    -0.018     8.8      -0.015       -0.054    -0.025    23.3     -0.021         0.060       0.054    10.5     0.057
                0 .080    0 .109    0.4      0 .054       0 .086    0 .094    2.8       0 .095       0 .076    0 .099    0.9      0 .057        0 .086      0 .096    1.8     0 .090
 Average e     -0.025    -0.071             -0.070       -0.125    -0.020              -0.018       -0.024    -0.074             -0.073        -0.007      -0.053            -0.052

 Panel B: Null hypotheses and test p-values
 All e = 0      0.002    0.069                0.006       0.000     0.002               0.007        0.000    0.091               0.029            0.000   0.026              0.023
 All e same     0.001    0.049                0.062       0.024     0.098               0.099        0.000    0.057               0.060            0.000   0.140              0.122
 Avg e = 0      0.734    0.510                0.013       0.025     0.769               0.764        0.739    0.483               0.014            0.886   0.369              0.312
Table 7: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with dividend yield as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Energy (ENR), Financial (FIN), Health (HLT), Technology (TCH), Utilities (UTL). The mutual fund data is from CRSP’s
mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/91 for all 5 fund styles and from dates earlier than 1/91 for other fund styles: growth and income (GRI),
growth (GRO), maximum capital gains (CGM), and income (INC). Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07.
Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style. Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing
model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model, performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate
in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last 4 columns. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters
e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the information
variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all
available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/91 to 12/07. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each
fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/91 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors
for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full
method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only
the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the
p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/91 to 12/07. Further details of the
methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                           Fama-French                                                                               Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                      Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                          Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short    % Red      Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 ENR-Sm                     2.148     0.026    46.4      0.069        0.225     0.027    38.2      0.011        0.652    -0.075    24.5      -0.038         0.814       0.055    31.9    -0.137
                            0 .307    0 .572   10.9      0 .313       0 .285    0 .460   16.0      0 .289       0 .206    0 .273   16.7       0 .306        0 .243      0 .356    9.1     0 .284
 ENR-Lg                     2.119     0.120    45.0      0.184        0.319     0.120    37.1      0.125        0.783     0.025    26.9       0.085         1.035       0.155    32.0    -0.014
                            0 .295    0 .536   10.8      0 .317       0 .278    0 .441   14.8      0 .294       0 .215    0 .295   17.6       0 .309        0 .250      0 .368   10.5     0 .288
 FIN-Sm                    -0.696     0.053    49.1      0.061       -0.355     0.158    32.9      0.159       -0.359     0.038    45.3       0.051        -0.299       0.078    31.5     0.081
                            0 .225    0 .443    7.4      0 .165       0 .147    0 .219   13.1      0 .199       0 .195    0 .356    7.3       0 .158        0 .144      0 .210    9.9     0 .197
 FIN-Lg                    -0.982    -0.056    50.0     -0.050       -0.516     0.049    35.9      0.047       -0.348    -0.035    45.4      -0.024        -0.318       0.005    29.8     0.006
                            0 .241    0 .482    5.3      0 .169       0 .145    0 .226   10.7      0 .215       0 .191    0 .350    6.2       0 .169        0 .136      0 .194   10.4     0 .215
 HLT-Sm                     0.159     0.231    44.3      0.203        0.454     0.087    30.0      0.037       -0.439     0.207    47.3       0.213        -0.288       0.022    25.0    -0.007
                            0 .407    0 .730   20.7      0 .238       0 .207    0 .296   22.1      0 .240       0 .298    0 .566    9.4       0 .258        0 .168      0 .224   20.7     0 .247
 HLT-Lg                     0.453     0.379    45.2      0.344        0.505     0.235    29.6      0.178       -0.303     0.263    48.6       0.251        -0.226       0.078    26.6     0.030
                            0 .418    0 .763   19.4      0 .197       0 .185    0 .263   19.8      0 .221       0 .268    0 .521    6.9       0 .210        0 .163      0 .223   16.0     0 .220
 TCH-Sm                     0.351     0.041    49.3      0.059        0.115    -0.103    32.9      0.259        1.410     0.142    49.4       0.170         0.366      -0.043    38.9     0.315
                            0 .287    0 .566    8.9      0 .195       0 .163    0 .243   13.9      0 .221       0 .322    0 .636    7.7       0 .198        0 .187      0 .306    8.3     0 .209
 TCH-Lg                     0.648     0.182    48.9      0.196        0.296     0.038    34.0      0.396        1.296     0.213    49.5       0.240         0.236       0.028    36.9     0.385
                            0 .287    0 .563    9.8      0 .190       0 .155    0 .234   15.1      0 .222       0 .306    0 .606    6.8       0 .184        0 .175      0 .277    9.0     0 .204
 UTL-Sm                    -0.015    -0.009    41.3     -0.005        0.758     0.349    37.5      0.328       -0.479    -0.058    42.1      -0.048         0.353       0.196    25.5     0.224
                            0 .185    0 .314   17.9      0 .189       0 .190    0 .304    8.4      0 .179       0 .178    0 .308   13.7       0 .189        0 .174      0 .233   10.6     0 .193
 UTL-Lg                     0.061     0.066    39.8      0.065        0.814     0.268    38.4      0.398       -0.372     0.036    41.7       0.042         0.447       0.184    28.8     0.315
                            0 .155    0 .257   14.7      0 .177       0 .167    0 .271   18.4      0 .169       0 .171    0 .293   13.7       0 .182        0 .157      0 .221   18.5     0 .190
 Average e                  0.425    0.103               0.113        0.262     0.123              0.194        0.184     0.076               0.094            0.212   0.076              0.120
                                                   Fama-French                                                                         Carhart
                                  Excess of rf                   Excess of matched portfolio                   Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                        Full    Short    % Red   Reg.        Full      Short    % Red     Reg.      Full     Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
ENR-Sm                 2.383   0.220  47.4       0.425       1.968     0.386    46.3      0.283     0.563     0.112    34.4     0.291         0.432       0.028    38.1     0.158
                       0 .423  0 .803 20.5       0 .275      0 .341    0 .635   19.3      0 .258    0 .200    0 .305   21.6     0 .332        0 .232      0 .374   14.6     0 .310
ENR-Lg                 2.136   0.104  46.3       0.409       1.763     0.270    45.2      0.266     0.358    -0.024    32.3     0.263         0.136      -0.108    34.6     0.129
                       0 .396  0 .737 20.3       0 .309      0 .321    0 .585   18.4      0 .295    0 .231    0 .341   20.4     0 .373        0 .256      0 .391   15.7     0 .349
FIN-Sm                -0.440  -0.060  51.7      -0.021      -0.070    -0.248    32.5      0.020     0.110    -0.060    49.8     0.003        -0.073      -0.201    35.8     0.033
                       0 .269  0 .557   4.6      0 .155      0 .131    0 .194    7.3      0 .176    0 .201    0 .400    3.2     0 .176        0 .137      0 .214    6.3     0 .175
FIN-Lg                -0.657  -0.055  51.6      -0.028      -0.424    -0.243    39.4      0.013     0.050    -0.049    49.4     0.005        -0.224      -0.189    34.2     0.035
                       0 .314  0 .650   5.7      0 .171      0 .157    0 .259    6.8      0 .209    0 .210    0 .414    3.5     0 .202        0 .145      0 .221    8.4     0 .211
HLT-Sm                -2.779   0.172  46.2       0.041       0.094     0.392    27.4      0.157    -0.776     0.287    47.6     0.313         0.152       0.475    29.6     0.334
                       0 .582  1 .081 13.3       0 .305      0 .236    0 .325   17.7      0 .301    0 .361    0 .689    6.8     0 .333        0 .188      0 .266   17.2     0 .326
HLT-Lg                -3.117  -0.012  46.6      -0.178      -0.208     0.209    29.0     -0.061    -0.922     0.086    48.2     0.025         0.013       0.274    33.4     0.046
                       0 .604  1 .131 13.5       0 .266      0 .219    0 .309   16.5      0 .275    0 .335    0 .647    6.4     0 .273        0 .187      0 .281   13.9     0 .278
TCH-Sm                -0.718  -0.489  49.9      -0.400      -0.068    -0.269    31.2     -0.347    -0.052    -0.474    51.1    -0.337        -0.026      -0.285    42.2    -0.241
                       0 .324  0 .646 10.5       0 .307      0 .193    0 .281   19.3      0 .358    0 .377    0 .772    6.7     0 .316        0 .213      0 .368   14.1     0 .350
TCH-Lg                -0.861  -0.380  49.9      -0.311       0.009    -0.160    29.4     -0.257    -0.032    -0.377    51.4    -0.250         0.125      -0.189    39.6    -0.154
                       0 .328  0 .655 10.2       0 .281      0 .183    0 .259   17.3      0 .340    0 .352    0 .725    4.9     0 .274        0 .194      0 .322   13.0     0 .320
UTL-Sm                -0.883   0.158  47.1       0.180       0.770     0.176    43.5      0.353    -0.347     0.194    46.6     0.241         0.001       0.198    35.3     0.423
                       0 .222  0 .421 11.4       0 .195      0 .265    0 .469   12.7      0 .239    0 .179    0 .336   11.4     0 .204        0 .200      0 .309   11.0     0 .246
UTL-Lg                -0.509   0.157  46.6       0.155       0.187     0.226    44.1      0.328    -0.231     0.210    46.9     0.240         0.018       0.323    40.1     0.423
                       0 .168  0 .315   9.8      0 .161      0 .183    0 .328   18.4      0 .201    0 .161    0 .303    9.4     0 .175        0 .158      0 .263   17.8     0 .215
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0              0.000     0.025           0.083      0.000      0.067              0.017    0.000     0.178             0.113             0.000   0.860              0.134
All e same             0.000     0.024           0.120      0.000      0.077              0.098    0.000     0.134             0.174             0.000   0.852              0.188
Avg e = 0              0.004     0.718           0.198      0.000      0.279              0.025    0.217     0.807             0.275             0.000   0.392              0.148
All f = 0              0.000     0.642           0.457      0.000      0.571              0.360    0.000     0.173             0.385             0.003   0.299              0.191
All f same             0.000     0.662           0.367      0.000      0.476              0.329    0.000     0.159             0.375             0.002   0.225              0.214
Av f = 0               0.000     0.833           0.147      0.000      0.590              0.313    0.030     0.890             0.427             0.237   0.915              0.659
Av fENR = Av frest     0.000     0.876           0.132      0.000      0.612              0.365    0.013     0.908             0.449             0.277   0.740              0.782
Av f = 0               0.059     0.924           0.876      0.074      0.256              0.929    0.694     0.894             0.982             0.281   0.358              0.856
Av fFIN = Av frest     0.160     0.934           0.819      0.000      0.382              0.914    0.224     0.927             0.850             0.192   0.426              0.901
Av f = 0               0.000     0.942           0.806      0.798      0.333              0.863    0.014     0.780             0.568             0.648   0.161              0.520
Av fHLT = Av frest     0.000     0.864           0.741      0.003      0.599              0.967    0.002     0.543             0.620             0.992   0.331              0.624
Av f = 0               0.014     0.502           0.221      0.873      0.419              0.383    0.908     0.569             0.313             0.805   0.486              0.551
Av fTCH = Av frest     0.807     0.217           0.168      0.001      0.322              0.276    0.502     0.357             0.208             0.829   0.286              0.393
Av f = 0               0.000     0.668           0.342      0.021      0.592              0.119    0.088     0.526             0.201             0.954   0.324              0.065
Av fUTL = Av frest     0.414     0.560           0.322      0.306      0.668              0.082    0.628     0.550             0.227             0.573   0.258              0.056
Av fSm = 0             0.008     0.999           0.685      0.000      0.677              0.469    0.572     0.975             0.445             0.238   0.760              0.279
Av fLg = 0             0.002     0.925           0.929      0.001      0.652              0.644    0.381     0.934             0.663             0.848   0.853              0.447
Av fSm =Av fLg         0.000     0.454           0.328      0.000      0.800              0.328    0.039     0.309             0.226             0.047   0.753              0.226
All fSm = fLg          0.000     0.286           0.483      0.000      0.314              0.483    0.003     0.151             0.305             0.002   0.191              0.305
fENR-Sm = fENR-Lg      0.001     0.314           0.877      0.004      0.248              0.877    0.012     0.246             0.796             0.001   0.312              0.796
fFIN-Sm = fFIN-Lg      0.002     0.969           0.927      0.000      0.973              0.927    0.247     0.885             0.985             0.015   0.907              0.985
fHLT-Sm = fHLT-Lg      0.000     0.147           0.103      0.001      0.162              0.103    0.070     0.083             0.034             0.127   0.085              0.034
fTCH-Sm = fTCH-Lg      0.094     0.349           0.328      0.324      0.256              0.328    0.812     0.429             0.414             0.086   0.428              0.414
fUTL-Sm = fUTL-Lg      0.000     0.995           0.687      0.002      0.870              0.687    0.002     0.764             0.997             0.918   0.577              0.997
Table 8: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with term spread as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Energy (ENR), Financial (FIN), Health (HLT), Technology (TCH), Utilities (UTL). The mutual fund data is from CRSP’s
mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/91 for all 5 fund styles and from dates earlier than 1/91 for other fund styles: growth and income (GRI),
growth (GRO), maximum capital gains (CGM), and income (INC). Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07.
Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style. Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing
model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model, performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate
in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last 4 columns. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters
e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the information
variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all
available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/91 to 12/07. Standard errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each
fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/91 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors
for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full
method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only
the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the
p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/91 to 12/07. Further details of the
methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                              Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 ENR-Sm                     0.818    -0.207    33.8     -0.211       -0.037    -0.150    21.9      -0.077       -0.183    -0.160    27.6     -0.164        -0.227      -0.167    20.9    -0.065
                            0 .268    0 .405   23.9      0 .365       0 .220    0 .282    9.9       0 .315       0 .264    0 .365   20.7      0 .349        0 .208      0 .263   14.7     0 .275
 ENR-Lg                     1.001    -0.097    34.5     -0.097       -0.167    -0.160    23.7      -0.144        0.040    -0.046    29.8     -0.049        -0.340      -0.129    24.1    -0.123
                            0 .286    0 .437   25.6      0 .391       0 .232    0 .303   18.1       0 .358       0 .265    0 .378   23.5      0 .382        0 .234      0 .308   20.6     0 .331
 FIN-Sm                     0.045    -0.037    45.2     -0.108        0.315    -0.002    31.0       0.026       -0.248    -0.085    44.7     -0.186         0.044      -0.129    28.7    -0.087
                            0 .174    0 .317    9.8      0 .172       0 .129    0 .187    5.2       0 .176       0 .168    0 .305   14.2      0 .157        0 .124      0 .174    8.6     0 .169
 FIN-Lg                    -0.168    -0.155    45.1     -0.217        0.072    -0.120    26.5      -0.083       -0.294    -0.154    44.0     -0.230        -0.081      -0.199    25.8    -0.132
                            0 .170    0 .309    8.1      0 .168       0 .127    0 .173    4.8       0 .184       0 .165    0 .295   12.8      0 .165        0 .122      0 .165    8.2     0 .185
 HLT-Sm                     1.022     0.406    29.9      0.346        0.754     0.279    32.5       0.226        0.263     0.339    44.2      0.319         0.587       0.209    31.9     0.205
                            0 .260    0 .371   18.8      0 .330       0 .269    0 .398   21.3       0 .321       0 .228    0 .408   12.6      0 .295        0 .200      0 .294   15.5     0 .290
 HLT-Lg                     0.858     0.605    34.2      0.541        0.486     0.478    34.7       0.421        0.308     0.478    43.5      0.449         0.355       0.348    36.1     0.334
                            0 .206    0 .313   13.9      0 .278       0 .210    0 .322   15.3       0 .298       0 .192    0 .341   10.7      0 .245        0 .201      0 .315   13.4     0 .263
 TCH-Sm                    -0.021     0.128    45.6      0.164       -0.425     0.001    34.4       0.298        0.871     0.263    49.1      0.308         0.264       0.133    37.9     0.394
                            0 .252    0 .463   10.6      0 .283       0 .189    0 .288   15.7       0 .353       0 .352    0 .692    6.3      0 .289        0 .206      0 .331   12.7     0 .318
 TCH-Lg                     0.117     0.255    46.4      0.273       -0.050     0.128    34.2       0.391        1.003     0.324    49.4      0.346         0.338       0.194    39.5     0.432
                            0 .230    0 .428   10.0      0 .242       0 .172    0 .262   12.2       0 .306       0 .341    0 .672    4.8      0 .240        0 .188      0 .310   13.1     0 .282
 UTL-Sm                     0.244    -0.003    24.9      0.009        0.418     0.103    35.9       0.155       -0.089    -0.025    34.0     -0.002         0.327       0.037    27.0     0.093
                            0 .160    0 .214   13.5      0 .196       0 .190    0 .297   23.4       0 .254       0 .179    0 .271   17.5      0 .178        0 .165      0 .225   18.6     0 .222
 UTL-Lg                     0.092     0.098    28.8      0.123        0.235     0.204    34.4       0.269       -0.063     0.076    34.7      0.117         0.326       0.138    25.5     0.212
                            0 .140    0 .197    9.9      0 .169       0 .177    0 .271   22.2       0 .231       0 .167    0 .255   15.8      0 .157        0 .157      0 .211   19.7     0 .206
 Average e                  0.401    0.099               0.082        0.160     0.076               0.148        0.161    0.101               0.091            0.159   0.044              0.126
                                                   Fama-French                                                                         Carhart
                                  Excess of rf                   Excess of matched portfolio                   Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                        Full    Short    % Red   Reg.        Full      Short    % Red     Reg.      Full     Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
ENR-Sm                 1.181  -0.023  35.7      -0.034       0.147    -0.093    24.7      0.080    -0.449    -0.031    33.3    -0.042         0.141      -0.105    24.7     0.086
                       0 .227  0 .353 21.1       0 .319      0 .158    0 .211   13.5      0 .293    0 .216    0 .324   20.2     0 .295        0 .164      0 .218   17.2     0 .245
ENR-Lg                 1.383   0.018  35.7       0.016       0.535    -0.063    29.5     -0.018    -0.205     0.017    34.2     0.008         0.028      -0.055    23.7    -0.017
                       0 .247  0 .383 21.0       0 .337      0 .192    0 .272   16.1      0 .316    0 .204    0 .310   22.3     0 .314        0 .185      0 .242   20.3     0 .273
FIN-Sm                -0.137  -0.235  43.8      -0.438      -0.864    -0.514    28.2     -0.323     0.145    -0.135    43.0    -0.421        -0.769      -0.400    23.4    -0.294
                       0 .119  0 .213 11.2       0 .171      0 .126    0 .176    9.8      0 .180    0 .122    0 .214   14.1     0 .141        0 .118      0 .154   13.8     0 .165
FIN-Lg                -0.137  -0.220  43.1      -0.396      -0.859    -0.499    27.3     -0.282    -0.010    -0.179    41.1    -0.396        -0.755      -0.444    21.9    -0.268
                       0 .118  0 .208 12.3       0 .158      0 .125    0 .172   10.2      0 .180    0 .116    0 .197   15.2     0 .146        0 .123      0 .157   14.7     0 .178
HLT-Sm                 0.285   0.201  25.4       0.031       0.623     0.207    35.0      0.058     0.405     0.103    40.4     0.046         0.240       0.083    32.8     0.072
                       0 .238  0 .319 17.5       0 .295      0 .252    0 .387   20.6      0 .284    0 .200    0 .335   12.9     0 .235        0 .195      0 .291   19.6     0 .232
HLT-Lg                 0.036   0.149  26.1      -0.033       0.243     0.155    40.3     -0.006     0.363     0.086    39.0     0.001         0.298       0.066    37.7     0.027
                       0 .187  0 .253 11.6       0 .261      0 .205    0 .343   15.5      0 .257    0 .169    0 .278   10.6     0 .194        0 .176      0 .283   16.1     0 .206
TCH-Sm                 0.073   0.135  47.7       0.239      -0.190     0.141    36.3      0.354    -0.108     0.076    51.4     0.204        -0.380       0.057    45.6     0.137
                       0 .237  0 .454   8.5      0 .194      0 .163    0 .256   12.8      0 .256    0 .361    0 .742    6.8     0 .189        0 .186      0 .341   13.6     0 .218
TCH-Lg                 0.398   0.138  47.2       0.188      -0.134     0.144    32.8      0.110     0.240     0.111    51.4     0.173        -0.347       0.091    44.9     0.106
                       0 .239  0 .453 11.3       0 .188      0 .157    0 .234   14.6      0 .243    0 .355    0 .731    5.9     0 .183        0 .178      0 .323   13.1     0 .211
UTL-Sm                 0.869   0.239  40.3       0.273       0.045     0.129    39.3      0.138     1.368     0.218    42.0     0.283         0.810       0.082    34.3     0.163
                       0 .150  0 .251 17.4       0 .180      0 .150    0 .247   20.8      0 .209    0 .187    0 .322   19.0     0 .154        0 .130      0 .198   21.7     0 .163
UTL-Lg                 0.692   0.206  42.8       0.277      -0.083     0.095    36.5      0.141     1.163     0.170    43.3     0.284         0.594       0.034    34.2     0.165
                       0 .143  0 .250 13.4       0 .174      0 .146    0 .231   18.6      0 .207    0 .173    0 .306   18.0     0 .150        0 .124      0 .189   21.2     0 .165
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0              0.000     0.004           0.000      0.000      0.154              0.129    0.000     0.046             0.000             0.001   0.663              0.094
All e same             0.000     0.003           0.000      0.000      0.127              0.205    0.000     0.034             0.000             0.001   0.570              0.145
Avg e = 0              0.001     0.650           0.518      0.028      0.510              0.326    0.238     0.709             0.426             0.006   0.598              0.273
All f = 0              0.000     0.691           0.096      0.000      0.054              0.049    0.000     0.935             0.075             0.000   0.067              0.237
All f same             0.000     0.627           0.225      0.000      0.603              0.275    0.000     0.924             0.090             0.000   0.496              0.205
Av f = 0               0.000     0.995           0.978      0.043      0.736              0.917    0.115     0.982             0.956             0.615   0.717              0.890
Av fENR = Av frest     0.001     0.745           0.959      0.008      0.896              0.945    0.002     0.872             0.933             0.525   0.963              0.917
Av f = 0               0.245     0.276           0.010      0.000      0.003              0.089    0.565     0.440             0.004             0.000   0.006              0.099
Av fFIN = Av frest     0.000     0.187           0.021      0.000      0.071              0.087    0.038     0.514             0.004             0.000   0.094              0.076
Av f = 0               0.441     0.530           0.996      0.052      0.611              0.922    0.033     0.755             0.909             0.133   0.789              0.816
Av fHLT = Av frest     0.005     0.810           0.975      0.002      0.378              0.950    0.645     0.896             0.929             0.054   0.512              0.827
Av f = 0               0.318     0.762           0.255      0.304      0.556              0.330    0.853     0.899             0.302             0.043   0.823              0.567
Av fTCH = Av frest     0.008     0.870           0.259      0.646      0.488              0.285    0.117     0.955             0.330             0.040   0.580              0.572
Av f = 0               0.000     0.370           0.117      0.896      0.636              0.501    0.000     0.535             0.061             0.000   0.761              0.313
Av fUTL = Av frest     0.554     0.457           0.070      0.575      0.299              0.420    0.000     0.650             0.049             0.000   0.397              0.264
Av fSm = 0             0.000     0.770           0.897      0.508      0.815              0.663    0.020     0.844             0.864             0.885   0.488              0.712
Av fLg = 0             0.000     0.781           0.921      0.320      0.720              0.936    0.007     0.859             0.845             0.448   0.376              0.976
Av fSm =Av fLg         0.441     0.887           0.900      0.725      0.875              0.113    0.111     0.863             0.995             0.171   0.918              0.389
All fSm = fLg          0.000     0.986           0.926      0.000      0.989              0.646    0.000     0.950             0.964             0.000   0.809              0.897
fENR-Sm = fENR-Lg      0.000     0.549           0.456      0.000      0.842              0.433    0.000     0.541             0.471             0.256   0.699              0.445
fFIN-Sm = fFIN-Lg      0.991     0.742           0.479      0.885      0.745              0.479    0.000     0.447             0.592             0.706   0.339              0.592
fHLT-Sm = fHLT-Lg      0.013     0.715           0.575      0.001      0.744              0.575    0.608     0.887             0.708             0.552   0.907              0.708
fTCH-Sm = fTCH-Lg      0.000     0.979           0.466      0.343      0.974              0.113    0.000     0.711             0.654             0.575   0.640              0.654
fUTL-Sm = fUTL-Lg      0.000     0.621           0.933      0.005      0.614              0.933    0.000     0.436             0.962             0.000   0.443              0.962
Table 9: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with dividend yield as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Small Cap Growth (SCG), Flexible (FLX), Mid-Cap Growth (MCG). The mutual fund data is from CRSP’s mutual fund
database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/91 for SCG, from 1/93 from FLX, from 1/95 from MCG, and from dates earlier than 1/91 or 1/91 for other fund
styles: growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), maximum capital gains (CGM), income (INC), energy (ENR), financial (FIN), health(HLT), technology (TCH), and utilities (UTL). Factor
and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style. Performance
results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model, performance
results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last 4 columns.
Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures the extent to
which the conditional performance varies with the information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each fund-style
portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/95 to 12/07. Standard errors for both
are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996)
using data from 1/95 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the
coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio
adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the
instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg
methods only use data from 1/95 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                              Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.             Full    Short    % Red     Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 SCG-Sm                     0.097    -0.021    58.6     -0.021       -0.124     0.267    41.1      -0.105       -0.069    -0.073    58.7     -0.072         0.041      0.140    30.0     -0.191
                            0 .165    0 .399    4.5      0 .096       0 .083    0 .141   13.8       0 .125       0 .170    0 .411    5.7      0 .105        0 .074     0 .106   11.6      0 .135
 SCG-Lg                    -0.042    -0.075    58.6     -0.074       -0.272     0.213    41.7      -0.158       -0.156    -0.144    59.0     -0.143        -0.040      0.069    32.8     -0.262
                            0 .192    0 .463    5.9      0 .087       0 .087    0 .149   15.9       0 .130       0 .180    0 .440    3.6      0 .094        0 .066     0 .099   10.1      0 .137
 FLX-Sm                     0.010    -0.078    58.3     -0.078       -0.070    -0.162    53.7      -0.038       -0.141    -0.108    58.9     -0.108        -0.263     -0.226    54.3     -0.145
                            0 .077    0 .186    4.6      0 .041       0 .067    0 .144   22.6       0 .127       0 .091    0 .222    2.7      0 .040        0 .068     0 .148   21.0      0 .128
 FLX-Lg                     0.131    -0.093    58.5     -0.093        0.093    -0.177    55.8      -0.054       -0.035    -0.089    59.1     -0.089        -0.215     -0.207    54.5     -0.126
                            0 .074    0 .179    3.0      0 .033       0 .076    0 .173   21.5       0 .138       0 .089    0 .218    1.8      0 .032        0 .069     0 .152   22.3      0 .137
 MCG-Sm                    -0.142     0.096    59.2      0.097        0.086     0.115    48.8      -0.095       -0.104     0.031    59.3      0.032        -0.168     -0.053    43.2     -0.214
                            0 .209    0 .513    5.1      0 .108       0 .145    0 .284   28.9       0 .103       0 .242    0 .595    5.2      0 .107        0 .100     0 .175   21.0      0 .089
 MCG-Lg                    -0.290     0.095    59.1      0.096       -0.266    -0.097    52.7      -0.097       -0.185     0.021    59.4      0.022        -0.520     -0.224    55.0     -0.224
                            0 .236    0 .578    5.4      0 .109       0 .104    0 .220   25.7       0 .099       0 .267    0 .657    4.2      0 .107        0 .104     0 .230   19.9      0 .090
 Average e                 -0.040    -0.013             -0.012       -0.092     0.026              -0.091       -0.115    -0.060             -0.060        -0.194     -0.083             -0.194
                                                       Fama-French                                                                         Carhart
                                   Excess of rf                      Excess of matched portfolio                   Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                         Full    Short       % Red   Reg.       Full       Short    % Red     Reg.      Full     Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
SCG-Sm                -0.170   -0.013  58.8       0.056         0.081      0.058    39.1     -0.109    -0.010    -0.046    59.0     0.032         0.035       0.044    41.2    -0.122
                       0 .178   0 .433  3.7       0 .102        0 .084     0 .138   13.2      0 .131    0 .186    0 .452    3.7     0 .115        0 .077      0 .131    7.5     0 .124
SCG-Lg                -0.485    0.020  58.7       0.113        -0.062      0.091    40.7     -0.052    -0.111     0.013    59.3     0.153         0.000       0.103    47.5    -0.001
                       0 .221   0 .535  4.6       0 .102        0 .099     0 .167   13.8      0 .145    0 .205    0 .504    2.2     0 .105        0 .086      0 .163    4.9     0 .125
FLX-Sm                -0.010    0.000  58.9       0.018        -0.067     -0.162    55.8      0.042    -0.048    -0.022    59.1    -0.015        -0.050      -0.155    56.8    -0.015
                       0 .089   0 .217  3.3       0 .046        0 .081     0 .183   20.3      0 .159    0 .106    0 .258    2.7     0 .044        0 .075      0 .173   16.2     0 .145
FLX-Lg                 0.066    0.019  58.2       0.000         0.011     -0.143    56.7      0.025    -0.011     0.030    58.9     0.009         0.033      -0.102    56.4     0.009
                       0 .083   0 .198  5.3       0 .040        0 .101     0 .234   20.3      0 .162    0 .102    0 .248    2.6     0 .042        0 .084      0 .194   19.1     0 .160
MCG-Sm                -0.644   -0.277  59.1      -0.137        -1.297     -0.198    54.4     -0.006    -0.326    -0.283    59.4    -0.116        -0.434      -0.182    52.5    -0.089
                       0 .244   0 .597  5.3       0 .131        0 .218     0 .479   27.1      0 .112    0 .268    0 .660    3.7     0 .128        0 .139      0 .293   18.1     0 .108
MCG-Lg                -0.493   -0.019  59.1       0.121         0.640      0.265    54.9      0.252    -0.140    -0.035    59.5     0.161         0.415       0.233    56.5     0.188
                       0 .272   0 .666  6.0       0 .152        0 .119     0 .263   20.3      0 .108    0 .298    0 .735    2.8     0 .137        0 .115      0 .265   15.8     0 .107
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0               0.000    0.140               0.000     0.000       0.405              0.602    0.000     0.062             0.000             0.000   0.585              0.008
All e same              0.000    0.499               0.005     0.000       0.301              0.731    0.000     0.490             0.002             0.000   0.468              0.657
Avg e = 0               0.826    0.977               0.855     0.050       0.751              0.146    0.568     0.904             0.383             0.000   0.262              0.001
All f = 0               0.000    0.000               0.000     0.000       0.191              0.000    0.000     0.000             0.000             0.000   0.057              0.000
All f same              0.000    0.000               0.000     0.000       0.128              0.000    0.000     0.000             0.000             0.000   0.069              0.000
Av f = 0                0.099    0.994               0.392     0.916       0.610              0.553    0.756     0.973             0.386             0.826   0.608              0.611
Av fSCG = Av frest      0.120    0.446               0.272     0.018       0.503              0.402    0.134     0.652             0.309             0.813   0.551              0.575
Av f = 0                0.739    0.964               0.772     0.753       0.461              0.831    0.775     0.987             0.924             0.917   0.479              0.981
Av fFLX = Av frest      0.018    0.871               0.894     0.212       0.561              0.874    0.525     0.855             0.591             0.912   0.483              0.995
Av f = 0                0.027    0.815               0.956     0.000       0.858              0.254    0.409     0.819             0.862             0.888   0.845              0.642
Av fMCG = Av frest      0.000    0.222               0.827     0.016       0.732              0.278    0.000     0.104             0.965             0.900   0.806              0.620
Av fSm = 0              0.146    0.835               0.799     0.000       0.537              0.750    0.542     0.821             0.695             0.017   0.479              0.213
Av fLg = 0              0.154    0.990               0.336     0.002       0.558              0.400    0.705     0.996             0.165             0.000   0.363              0.362
Av fSm =Av fLg          0.378    0.181               0.001     0.000       0.411              0.001    0.207     0.102             0.000             0.000   0.233              0.000
All fSm = fLg           0.000    0.000               0.000     0.000       0.415              0.000    0.000     0.000             0.000             0.000   0.321              0.000
fSCG-Sm = fSCG-Lg       0.000    0.804               0.238     0.001       0.711              0.238    0.009     0.492             0.019             0.325   0.453              0.019
fFLX-Sm = fFLX-Lg       0.028    0.772               0.758     0.028       0.790              0.758    0.227     0.345             0.653             0.006   0.355              0.653
fMCG-Sm = fMCG-Lg       0.000    0.002               0.000     0.000       0.494              0.000    0.000     0.006             0.000             0.000   0.400              0.000
Table 10: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with term spread as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Small Cap Growth (SCG), Flexible (FLX), Mid-Cap Growth (MCG). The mutual fund data is from CRSP’s mutual fund
database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/91 for SCG, from 1/93 from FLX, from 1/95 from MCG, and from dates earlier than 1/91 or 1/91 for other fund
styles: growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), maximum capital gains (CGM), income (INC), energy (ENR), financial (FIN), health(HLT), technology (TCH), and utilities (UTL). Factor
and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style. Performance
results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model, performance
results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last 4 columns.
Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures the extent to
which the conditional performance varies with the information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each fund-style
portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/95 to 12/07. Standard errors for both
are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson and Harvey (1996)
using data from 1/95 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent reduction in the
coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the portfolio-by-portfolio
adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for the factors, the
instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the Short and Reg
methods only use data from 1/95 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                              Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                         Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 SCG-Sm                     0.031    -0.139    57.1     -0.139        0.255     0.069    37.1      -0.017       -0.157    -0.129    56.8     -0.129         0.353       0.005    37.9    -0.064
                            0 .147    0 .343    7.8      0 .091       0 .094    0 .150   12.9       0 .167       0 .171    0 .395   10.9      0 .098        0 .106      0 .171   10.0     0 .137
 SCG-Lg                    -0.031    -0.218    57.7     -0.218        0.128    -0.010    39.1      -0.258       -0.312    -0.228    57.9     -0.228         0.104      -0.094    42.9    -0.299
                            0 .153    0 .363    6.5      0 .090       0 .107    0 .176   16.5       0 .146       0 .176    0 .418    7.0      0 .083        0 .090      0 .158    7.2     0 .119
 FLX-Sm                    -0.015    -0.064    56.3     -0.064       -0.071    -0.103    49.1       0.059       -0.088    -0.093    58.0     -0.093         0.022      -0.164    52.0    -0.028
                            0 .070    0 .160    8.1      0 .037       0 .083    0 .162   28.4       0 .149       0 .084    0 .199    5.5      0 .039        0 .069      0 .143   26.4     0 .136
 FLX-Lg                    -0.115    -0.063    57.8     -0.063       -0.105    -0.103    51.3       0.059       -0.102    -0.064    58.5     -0.064         0.056      -0.134    51.5     0.001
                            0 .071    0 .168    5.3      0 .032       0 .080    0 .164   29.8       0 .153       0 .081    0 .195    5.4      0 .032        0 .072      0 .149   30.2     0 .143
 MCG-Sm                     0.334    -0.058    57.8     -0.057       -0.029     0.189    42.6      -0.127        0.273    -0.074    58.4     -0.074         0.094       0.033    42.4    -0.174
                            0 .145    0 .344   12.7      0 .108       0 .140    0 .244   21.1       0 .110       0 .187    0 .450    8.3      0 .102        0 .100      0 .174   25.2     0 .095
 MCG-Lg                     0.190    -0.089    58.0     -0.089       -0.133    -0.159    49.1      -0.159        0.106    -0.108    59.1     -0.108        -0.348      -0.209    54.4    -0.209
                            0 .161    0 .383   12.0      0 .116       0 .067    0 .131   29.2       0 .113       0 .202    0 .495    5.8      0 .100        0 .085      0 .186   19.6     0 .096
 Average e                  0.066    -0.105             -0.105        0.008    -0.020              -0.074       -0.047    -0.116             -0.116            0.047   -0.094            -0.129
                                                       Fama-French                                                                        Carhart
                                  Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                  Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                        Full     Short       % Red   Reg.       Full       Short    % Red     Reg.      Full    Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short    % Red     Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
SCG-Sm                 0.483   0.154   56.2      0.090         -0.638     -0.318    45.3      0.170    0.507     0.194    56.8     0.105         0.064     -0.191    42.3      0.235
                      0 .126   0 .288  13.9      0 .097         0 .094     0 .172   11.4      0 .210   0 .134    0 .310    9.6     0 .089        0 .078     0 .135   16.3      0 .183
SCG-Lg                 0.297   0.019   56.5      0.019         -0.794     -0.454    44.4     -0.101    0.387     0.070    57.7     0.064        -0.048     -0.315    47.4     -0.034
                      0 .127   0 .291  13.1      0 .128         0 .102     0 .184   10.0      0 .214   0 .145    0 .343    7.6     0 .089        0 .073     0 .139   12.4      0 .158
FLX-Sm                 0.150  -0.046   56.9     -0.074         -0.463     -0.271    50.4      0.007    0.172    -0.024    58.6    -0.073        -0.079     -0.262    53.5      0.057
                      0 .061   0 .142   7.5      0 .040         0 .081     0 .163   22.9      0 .171   0 .079    0 .191    3.8     0 .043        0 .066     0 .141   24.2      0 .163
FLX-Lg                 0.244   0.023   57.8     -0.003         -0.361     -0.203    50.2      0.077    0.210     0.007    58.4    -0.002        -0.096     -0.231    54.1      0.128
                      0 .074   0 .175   9.4      0 .030         0 .069     0 .138   28.2      0 .171   0 .091    0 .218    6.3     0 .031        0 .066     0 .145   25.9      0 .165
MCG-Sm                 0.398   0.077   55.9      0.044         -0.721      0.016    47.6     -0.026    0.485     0.132    58.3     0.077         0.117      0.012    54.0      0.004
                      0 .130   0 .295  20.0      0 .098         0 .123     0 .234   17.6      0 .075   0 .192    0 .460    8.7     0 .081        0 .112     0 .244   19.4      0 .080
MCG-Lg                 0.384   0.014   56.7      0.010         -0.190     -0.038    53.2     -0.060    0.469     0.064    59.0     0.055        -0.244     -0.008    58.4     -0.018
                      0 .138   0 .318  19.8      0 .120         0 .058     0 .123   14.0      0 .079   0 .216    0 .527    5.9     0 .082        0 .132     0 .318    6.7      0 .062
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0               0.000    0.327               0.001     0.000       0.427              0.329    0.000    0.179             0.000         0.000       0.071              0.044
All e same              0.000    0.257               0.016     0.000       0.337              0.423    0.000    0.321             0.001         0.000       0.377              0.604
Avg e = 0               0.608    0.736               0.099     0.905       0.878              0.417    0.765    0.762             0.058         0.234       0.219              0.091
All f = 0               0.000    0.056               0.027     0.000       0.017              0.070    0.000    0.052             0.048         0.000       0.045              0.049
All f same              0.000    0.147               0.014     0.000       0.011              0.181    0.000    0.077             0.026         0.001       0.061              0.046
Av f = 0                0.002    0.765               0.620     0.000       0.029              0.857    0.001    0.686             0.325         0.913       0.058              0.499
Av fSCG = Av frest      0.033    0.448               0.531     0.806       0.200              0.833    0.307    0.767             0.284         0.150       0.717              0.522
Av f = 0                0.003    0.942               0.196     0.000       0.111              0.805    0.023    0.968             0.238         0.179       0.081              0.570
Av fFLX = Av frest      0.004    0.727               0.284     0.000       0.619              0.761    0.006    0.684             0.139         0.620       0.797              0.606
Av f = 0                0.003    0.881               0.795     0.000       0.931              0.545    0.019    0.843             0.388         0.122       0.983              0.914
Av fMCG = Av frest      0.172    0.910               0.779     0.000       0.014              0.542    0.606    0.992             0.377         0.998       0.120              0.648
Av fSm = 0              0.002    0.810               0.750     0.000       0.284              0.680    0.012    0.788             0.506         0.639       0.352              0.356
Av fLg = 0              0.008    0.946               0.916     0.000       0.058              0.822    0.040    0.912             0.471         0.001       0.018              0.780
Av fSm =Av fLg          0.072    0.236               0.761     0.000       0.653              0.248    0.229    0.378             0.924         0.022       0.816              0.236
All fSm = fLg           0.000    0.070               0.019     0.000       0.018              0.099    0.000    0.030             0.055         0.001       0.244              0.076
fSCG-Sm = fSCG-Lg       0.000    0.004               0.252     0.000       0.004              0.118    0.000    0.030             0.386         0.002       0.049              0.113
fFLX-Sm = fFLX-Lg       0.002    0.238               0.065     0.001       0.197              0.065    0.132    0.490             0.067         0.484       0.448              0.067
fMCG-Sm = fMCG-Lg       0.682    0.292               0.576     0.000       0.840              0.576    0.712    0.456             0.695         0.119       0.971              0.695
Table 11: Conditional fund performance relative to a conditional factor model with NBER recession indicator as the instrument.
This table reports performance results for the following fund styles: Growth and Income (GRI), Growth (GRO), Maximum Capital Gains (CGM), Income (INC). The mutual fund data is
from CRSP’s mutual fund database, and is free of survivorship bias. Return data is available from 1/62 to 12/07 for GRI and GRO, from 1/69 to 12/07 for CGM and from 1/72 to 12/07 for
INC. Factor and instrument data are available from 1/27 to 12/07. Sm (Lg) refers to the portfolio of funds with beginning of year TNA below (above) the median for the specified fund style.
Performance results are reported relative to the Fama-French pricing model in the first 8 columns and relative to the Carhart pricing model in the last 8 columns. For each pricing model,
performance results are reported for return in excess of the riskfree rate in the first 4 columns, and in excess of return on a portfolio matched on the basis of Fama-French loadings in the last
4 columns. Panels A and B report the abnormal performance parameters e and f respectively for the fund-style portfolios, where e measures mean conditional performance and f measures
the extent to which the conditional performance varies with the information variable. When parameters e and f are identified by moment conditions (21) and (22), they are estimated for each
fund-style portfolio using the adjusted moment (Full) method that uses all available data, and using the standard GMM method (Short) that only uses data from 1/72 to 12/07. Standard
errors for both are calculated using the adjusted-moment coefficients. For each fund-style portfolio, parameters e and f are also estimated for the regression-based (Reg) approach of Ferson
and Harvey (1996) using data from 1/72 to 12/07. Newey-West standard errors for the parameter estimates of all 3 are in italics. In the % Reduction column (% Red), we report the percent
reduction in the coefficient standard error from (in the first row) using the Full method rather than the Short method and (in the second row) from using the Full method rather than the
portfolio-by-portfolio adjusted moment method, which, for each portfolio, uses only the factor moments and the moments for that TNA-style portfolio, constructed using all available data for
the factors, the instruments and the returns on that portfolio. Panel C reports the p-values for Wald tests of joint significance based on the Newey-West covariances. The Wald tests for the
Short and Reg methods only use data from 1/72 to 12/07. Further details of the methodologies employed are in section 4.


                                                            Fama-French                                                                               Carhart
                                       Excess of rf                       Excess of matched portfolio                       Excess of rf                          Excess of matched portfolio
                            Full     Short     % Red      Reg.         Full     Short     % Red     Reg.          Full     Short    % Red      Reg.             Full    Short    % Red     Reg.
 Panel A: Abnormal performance: e parameters (% per month)
 GRI-Sm                    -0.051    -0.118    29.8      -0.118        0.026     0.006    15.9      0.006       -0.039    -0.074    29.4      -0.074        -0.017     -0.003    14.2     -0.003
                            0 .071    0 .101    0.0       0 .037       0 .084    0 .099    0.0      0 .091       0 .068    0 .097    0.0       0 .034        0 .076     0 .088    0.0      0 .083
 GRI-Lg                    -0.069    -0.085    31.3      -0.085        0.086    -0.001    14.0     -0.001       -0.035    -0.052    31.0      -0.052        -0.039      0.035    13.7      0.035
                            0 .070    0 .101    0.0       0 .030       0 .067    0 .077    0.0      0 .079       0 .065    0 .095    0.0       0 .028        0 .072     0 .083    0.0      0 .081
 GRO-Sm                     0.119    -0.067    26.6      -0.067        0.197     0.058    14.3      0.058        0.009    -0.063    27.1      -0.063         0.031      0.007    13.0      0.007
                            0 .087    0 .118    0.0       0 .040       0 .102    0 .120    0.0      0 .104       0 .089    0 .122    0.0       0 .043        0 .089     0 .102    0.0      0 .089
 GRO-Lg                    -0.001    -0.065    28.7      -0.065        0.076     0.059    15.0      0.059       -0.049    -0.074    28.6      -0.074        -0.027     -0.004    14.2     -0.004
                            0 .077    0 .109    0.0       0 .035       0 .096    0 .113    0.0      0 .104       0 .080    0 .112    0.0       0 .038        0 .084     0 .098    0.0      0 .089
 CGM-Sm                    -0.016    -0.116    24.7      -0.116       -0.189    -0.178     9.2     -0.178       -0.087    -0.184    24.1      -0.184        -0.207     -0.200    10.0     -0.200
                            0 .106    0 .141    1.0       0 .085       0 .110    0 .121    1.1      0 .116       0 .120    0 .158    1.9       0 .089        0 .089     0 .099    1.4      0 .092
 CGM-Lg                     0.063    -0.012    27.2      -0.012       -0.110    -0.075     9.4     -0.075       -0.091    -0.085    27.6      -0.085        -0.159     -0.145    11.4     -0.145
                            0 .100    0 .137    0.8       0 .067       0 .080    0 .088    0.6      0 .070       0 .112    0 .155    1.2       0 .068        0 .077     0 .087    0.6      0 .063
 INC-Sm                     0.048    -0.061    26.2      -0.061        0.194     0.021    20.2      0.021        0.010    -0.023    25.2      -0.023         0.033      0.047    18.1      0.047
                            0 .068    0 .092    1.1       0 .047       0 .097    0 .122    1.3      0 .081       0 .063    0 .085    1.3       0 .044        0 .097     0 .119    7.2      0 .094
 INC-Lg                    -0.183    -0.102    26.8      -0.102       -0.051    -0.018    12.3     -0.018       -0.021    -0.058    24.0      -0.058        -0.065      0.029    13.0      0.029
                            0 .078    0 .106    0.6       0 .054       0 .079    0 .090    7.5      0 .090       0 .074    0 .098    1.1       0 .056        0 .082     0 .094    7.1      0 .089
 Average e                 -0.011    -0.078              -0.078        0.029    -0.016             -0.016       -0.038    -0.077              -0.077        -0.056     -0.029             -0.029
                                                       Fama-French                                                                         Carhart
                                   Excess of rf                      Excess of matched portfolio                   Excess of rf                        Excess of matched portfolio
                         Full    Short       % Red   Reg.       Full       Short    % Red     Reg.      Full     Short     % Red    Reg.             Full    Short     % Red    Reg.
Panel B: Abnormal performance: f parameters (% per month)
GRI-Sm                -0.091   -0.039  32.0      -0.039         0.043      0.048    21.6      0.048    -0.145    -0.088    32.1    -0.088        -0.001       0.060    21.8     0.060
                       0 .234   0 .344  0.0       0 .095        0 .202     0 .258    0.0      0 .219    0 .234    0 .344    0.0     0 .092        0 .201      0 .257    0.0     0 .216
GRI-Lg                 0.062    0.080  31.9       0.080        -0.055      0.044    17.9      0.044    -0.051     0.022    32.2     0.022        -0.035       0.083    18.7     0.083
                       0 .239   0 .352  0.0       0 .088        0 .225     0 .274    0.0      0 .262    0 .240    0 .355    0.0     0 .075        0 .231      0 .283    0.0     0 .287
GRO-Sm                -0.305   -0.065  30.1      -0.065        -0.171      0.021    20.8      0.021    -0.209    -0.084    30.5    -0.084        -0.064       0.064    21.6     0.064
                       0 .249   0 .357  0.0       0 .129        0 .240     0 .303    0.0      0 .265    0 .252    0 .362    0.0     0 .125        0 .238      0 .304    0.0     0 .263
GRO-Lg                -0.139   -0.032  31.2      -0.032        -0.005      0.054    19.6      0.054    -0.099    -0.034    31.4    -0.034         0.045       0.113    20.3     0.113
                       0 .243   0 .354  0.0       0 .111        0 .223     0 .278    0.0      0 .253    0 .250    0 .364    0.0     0 .105        0 .223      0 .279    0.0     0 .257
CGM-Sm                -0.078    0.034  25.5       0.034        -0.240     -0.295    10.1     -0.295    -0.163    -0.022    27.4    -0.022        -0.165      -0.044    16.1    -0.044
                       0 .242   0 .325  1.8       0 .155        0 .295     0 .328    2.8      0 .337    0 .235    0 .324    1.3     0 .148        0 .239      0 .285    1.2     0 .262
CGM-Lg                -0.127   -0.015  26.6      -0.015        -0.279     -0.344    12.2     -0.344    -0.038    -0.046    27.8    -0.046        -0.523      -0.458    11.8    -0.458
                       0 .243   0 .331  2.4       0 .168        0 .278     0 .316    3.2      0 .315    0 .242    0 .335    2.0     0 .166        0 .270      0 .306    2.3     0 .316
INC-Sm                 0.028    0.037  28.2       0.037        -0.077     -0.140    18.8     -0.140     0.007     0.087    28.8     0.087         0.120       0.235    21.3     0.235
                       0 .235   0 .327  1.5       0 .134        0 .302     0 .372    3.5      0 .300    0 .235    0 .330    1.6     0 .140        0 .227      0 .288    6.1     0 .245
INC-Lg                -0.005    0.182  20.1       0.182        -0.134      0.146    18.8      0.146    -0.057     0.221    20.6     0.221         0.088       0.282    19.5     0.282
                       0 .249   0 .312  4.4       0 .205        0 .355     0 .437    7.4      0 .381    0 .246    0 .310    4.7     0 .219        0 .358      0 .445    7.4     0 .416
Panel C: Null hypotheses and test p-values
All e = 0               0.000    0.424               0.051     0.000       0.799              0.538    0.023     0.536             0.267             0.000   0.155              0.190
All e same              0.000    0.342               0.335     0.000       0.785              0.661    0.013     0.429             0.428             0.003   0.253              0.319
Avg e = 0               0.888    0.494               0.011     0.611       0.819              0.774    0.634     0.503             0.025             0.303   0.655              0.606
All f = 0               0.000    0.773               0.718     0.004       0.751              0.601    0.083     0.477             0.406             0.000   0.018              0.007
All f same              0.000    0.740               0.716     0.003       0.655              0.493    0.059     0.517             0.355             0.008   0.159              0.021
Av f = 0                0.951    0.953               0.798     0.973       0.840              0.827    0.677     0.925             0.643             0.922   0.756              0.748
Av fGRI = Av frest      0.826    0.959               0.856     0.614       0.556              0.524    0.671     0.836             0.428             0.880   0.701              0.683
Av f = 0                0.363    0.890               0.677     0.700       0.895              0.883    0.535     0.870             0.599             0.966   0.759              0.732
Av fGRO = Av frest      0.156    0.741               0.427     0.828       0.704              0.688    0.432     0.749             0.397             0.867   0.699              0.671
Av f = 0                0.664    0.976               0.947     0.356       0.312              0.317    0.665     0.917             0.812             0.082   0.280              0.272
Av fCGM = Av frest      0.686    0.994               0.988     0.383       0.265              0.255    0.725     0.859             0.721             0.029   0.083              0.106
Av f = 0                0.955    0.702               0.305     0.666       0.992              0.990    0.903     0.591             0.156             0.668   0.414              0.339
Av fINC = Av frest      0.639    0.490               0.222     0.794       0.891              0.859    0.835     0.283             0.063             0.390   0.250              0.171
Av fSm = 0              0.624    0.980               0.928     0.537       0.690              0.641    0.580     0.937             0.766             0.875   0.734              0.690
Av fLg = 0              0.814    0.865               0.642     0.588       0.926              0.921    0.787     0.900             0.719             0.636   0.985              0.985
Av fSm =Av fLg          0.479    0.511               0.488     0.963       0.689              0.685    0.420     0.471             0.483             0.601   0.674              0.669
All fSm = fLg           0.003    0.655               0.783     0.004       0.839              0.850    0.068     0.698             0.805             0.144   0.799              0.674
fGRI-Sm = fGRI-Lg       0.020    0.138               0.196     0.675       0.988              0.987    0.187     0.199             0.231             0.887   0.934              0.922
fGRO-Sm = fGRO-Lg       0.018    0.704               0.540     0.018       0.704              0.540    0.109     0.555             0.382             0.109   0.555              0.382
fCGM-Sm = fCGM-Lg       0.660    0.701               0.723     0.730       0.701              0.723    0.280     0.855             0.861             0.265   0.257              0.248
fINC-Sm = fINC-Lg       0.899    0.612               0.596     0.898       0.566              0.555    0.804     0.643             0.653             0.928   0.907              0.910
