                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE:
                  EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM ISO 9000 DIFFUSION

                                        Joseph A. Clougherty
                                           Michal Grajek

                                        Working Paper 18132
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18132


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




Financial support from the German Federal Ministry of Education & Research is gratefully acknowledged
(project 01AK702A). We also thank Susanne Prantl, Lars-Hendrik Röller, Oz Shy, Christian Wey,
and Eric van Wincoop, as well as seminar (Univ. of Illinois, ESMT Berlin, SFB in Berlin) and conference
(EARIE in Porto and Ljubljana, Applied Infrastructure Research in Berlin, EEA in Amsterdam, ICT
& Economic Growth in Munich, ETSG in Athens, and the NBER Pre-Conference and Conference
on “Patents, Standards, and Innovation”) participants for helpful comments and discussions. Claudia
Baldermann and Jennifer Rontganger provided excellent research assistance. All remaining errors,
however, are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Joseph A. Clougherty and Michal Grajek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Standards and International Trade: Empirical Evidence from ISO 9000 Diffusion
Joseph A. Clougherty and Michal Grajek
NBER Working Paper No. 18132
June 2012
JEL No. C51,F13,L15

                                               ABSTRACT

Empirical scholarship on the standards-trade relationship has been held up due to methodological challenges:
measurement, varied effects, and endogeneity. Considering the trade-effects of one particular standard
(ISO 9000), we surmount methodological challenges by measuring standardization via national penetration
of ISO 9000, allowing standardization to manifest via multiple (quality-signaling, information/compliance-cost,
and common-language) channels, and using instrumental variable, multilateral resistance and panel
data techniques to overcome endogeneity. We find evidence of common-language and quality-signaling
augmenting country-pair trade. Yet, ISO-rich nations (most notably European) benefit the most from
standardization, while ISO-poor nations find ISO 9000 to represent a trade barrier due to compliance-cost
effects.


Joseph A. Clougherty
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
350 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. 6th Street, MC-706
Champaign, IL 61820
jaclough@illinois.edu

Michal Grajek
ESMT European School of
 Management and Technology
Schlossplatz 1
D-10178 Berlin
Germany
grajek@esmt.org
1. Introduction

           Many trade scholars (e.g., Laird and Yeats 1990; Casella 1996; Deardorff and Stern 1998;

Preeg 1998; Baldwin 2000) have observed that the substantial decrease in trade barriers over the

last few decades has led to technical trade barriers (TTBs) – such as standards – becoming

increasingly important determinants of international trade flows. Yet unlike tariffs and common

non-tariff barriers (NTBs), standards have the potential to not only decrease but also expand

trade. While international standards have been found to promote trade more than national

standards (e.g., Blind 2001; Moenius 2004; Czubala, Shepherd and Wilson 2007; Shepherd

2007)1, they still have the power to be protectionist when consumers and large buyer groups

require production according to these standards and compliance costs are relatively significant

(Moenius 2006). Despite the recognized importance of the subject, there is almost universal

agreement that we lack sufficient empirical evidence concerning the relationship between

standards and trade (e.g., Matutes and Regibeau 1996; Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki 2000; Blind

2004; Moenius 2006). In this vein, Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki (2000: 45) state that “it is

important to obtain as much information as possible about the quantitative implications of

standards … [for] … trade prospects”. Yet three challenges in particular have held back empirical

scholarship on the international trade implications of standardization.

           First, measurability difficulties represent a significant challenge that has curtailed efforts

to successfully capture the impact of standards on trade. Deardorff and Stern (1998) note that

standardization is one of the hardest NTBs imaginable to quantify – a lament echoed by many

other studies (e.g., Laird and Yeats 1990; Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki 2000; Blind 2004;

Shepherd 2007). In short, the evidence on standards does not necessarily come in a form that


1
    Swann, Temple and Shurmer (1996) represent an exception in that they found national standards to promote trade
more than international standards.

                                                          1
facilitates quantitative analysis. As a result, empiricists have tended to construct a simple count of

the number standards – or the number of documents – in existence in order to capture the

applicable degree of standardization in a nation or sector. Yet this inventory approach gives equal

weight to all existing standards, and thus cannot differentiate between the effectiveness and

significance of different standards (Laird and Yeats 1990; Swann, Temple and Shurmer 1996).

Unfortunately, the pre-existing empirical literature appears to lack a natural and straightforward

means to measure the intensity of standardization.

       Second, the varied effects that standards potentially have make it difficult to identify the

particular channels via which standards impact trade, hence empirical scholarship has often

tended to elicit net effects. For one, the diffusion of standards can increase the competitiveness of

a home-nation’s products – signaling quality and safety – therefore leading to enhanced exports

(Swann, Temple and Shurmer 1996; Blind 2001, 2004; Ganslandt and Markusen 2001). Further,

the existence of standards in a host-nation can be favorable to trade as it provides crucial

information to exporting firms on how to adapt a product for a particular market (Moenius 2004,

2006). Yet, host-nation standards may also be used in a protectionist manner to raise the costs of

foreign competition (Boom 1995; Gandal and Shy 2001; Ganslandt and Markusen 2001). Such

protectionist elements can be particularly strong when foreign firms face high adoption costs due

in part to their having little influence on the standardization process (Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki

2000; Blind 2001). In addition, Bénézech et al. (2001) point out that standards also involve

common-language elements that potentially facilitate exchanges between firms from different

countries. For instance, Blind (2001) notes that corresponding-knowledge and absorptive-

capacity in a country-pair yields efficient use of standards; and Moenius (2004) holds that

bilaterally shared standards greatly enhance trade. In light of these multiple potential effects, it is



                                                   2
no surprise that Maskus, Otsuki and Wilson (2004) observe a mixed empirical record with

standards sometimes enhancing and sometimes impeding trade.

       Third, endogeneity represents an additional challenge to the empirical literature on

standards and trade, as the causal inferences concerning the impact of standardization may be

inconsistent and biased. The potential for simultaneity between exports and trade barriers has

been recognized for some time (e.g., Harrigan 1993; Trefler 1993; Lee and Swagel 1997), yet

efforts to deal with endogeneity are a more recent phenomenon (e.g., Baier and Bergstrand 2002,

2007, 2009; Magee 2003). In particular, not only might international trade benefit from

harmonization of standards due to decreasing trade barriers, but the standardization process might

also in turn be determined by foreign trade intensity, as this indicates an economy’s openness

(Casella 1996; Blind 2002). In support of this conjecture, Moenius (2004) employs Granger

testing and finds evidence of two-way causality between standards and trade volumes. As a

consequence, empirical models of international trade using standardization as an explanatory

variable may suffer from endogeneity bias. In addition, Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) point

out that the parameters from log-linearized models (common in gravity trade equations) can also

be misleading due to Jensen’s inequality. Thus, endogeneity issues have also held back efforts to

successfully capture in a consistent manner the impact of standards on international trade.

     With the above issues in mind, we empirically investigate the impact of one particular

international standard – ISO 9000 – on bilateral trade flows using a panel of cross-section time-

series data at five-year intervals from 1995-2005 for 91 nations. The ISO 9000 certification

system for quality management represents the most successful standard – close to 777,000

worldwide certificates by 2005 – implanted by the International Organization for Standardization:

a post-World War II Geneva-based international institution charged with developing standards to

enhance global trade. The merits of studying ISO 9000’s impact on trade reside beyond this being

                                                 3
– by far – the most successful international standard in existence, as we can employ diffusion

data (ISO 2002, 2006) to capture the degree to which the standard is adopted in a particular

nation. We are able to move then beyond the customary inventory approach to measuring

standardization, and instead consider the penetration of this seminal standard in a national

environment. Furthermore, we can use home-nation and host-nation diffusion rates – and the

interaction of the two – in order to identify the different channels via which standardization

affects trade. Finally, we attempt to overcome the limitation of ‘potential endogeneity’ by

employing panel-data procedures and instrumental variable (IV) techniques. In particular, we

conduct estimations using first-differencing and country-pair fixed effects, multilateral resistance

terms a la Baier and Bergstrand (2009), as well as estimations using ISO 14000 – a sister

standard involving environmental procedures – as a potentially powerful and valid instrument.

We also test for heteroscedasticity patterns in our estimated gravity equations in line with the

Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) critique.

      In addition to the above core methodological issues which we attempt to surmount, we will

also consider the issue as to whether the EU potentially used ISO 9000 in a protectionist manner.

The requirement of an EC Mark (a public safety standard based on ISO 9000) to gain access to

European markets and the significant influence held by the EU in the International Organization

for Standardization (where ISO 9000 was designed) suggest that ISO 9000 may have been

employed by the EU as a device to enhance intra-European trade at the expense of imports from

non-European nations. In particular, the trade barrier aspects of ISO 9000 are potentially more

severe for developing nations as they often lack the infrastructure to support implementation of

the standard (Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki 2000) and in turn exhibit relatively slower diffusion of

ISO standards (Delmas 2002). Thus in line with the theoretical work by Gandal and Shy (2001),

ISO 9000 may have been used to create a virtual standardization union. Accordingly, we will

                                                 4
consider whether the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000 has principally benefited European

nations at the expense of non-European – particularly developing – nations.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows in order to support our analysis. Section II

provides relevant background on the ISO 9000 standard and the data employed in the study.

Section III considers the different channels via which standards may impact international trade

flows. Section IV sets out the base gravity equation, discusses econometric issues, and presents

initial empirical findings. Section V considers whether the benefits and costs of worldwide ISO

9000 standardization are evenly distributed among nations. Section VI concludes.




2. Background on ISO 9000 Standard and Employed Data

      The main objective of the International Organization for Standardization is to harmonize

worldwide standards in order to promote trade and thereby global welfare. To this end, ISO 9000

– as already noted – has been the most successful standard implanted by the International

Organization for Standardization. The history of ISO 9000 started in 1987 with the publication of

the ISO 9000 Quality Assurance Standards by a Technical Committee (TC 176) of the

International Organization for Standardization. The standard spread to over 160 countries by the

end of 2005, therefore solidifying its reputation as an international reference for quality

requirements in business-to-business dealings (ISO 2002). Table 1 illustrates the rapid and

successful worldwide penetration of this seminal standard by reporting the number of ISO 9000

certificates present in 2005 for each of the 91 countries from our sample.

       In general, motivations behind the implementation of ISO 9000 could be divided into

three main categories: i) compliance with government regulations, ii) ability to establish business

relationships by meeting buyer requirements, and iii) internal efficiency gains. In fact, all the


                                                  5
factors influencing managers to seek ISO 9000 certification – as identified by Anderson, Daly

and Johnson (1999) in a comprehensive review of practitioner journals – fall into one of these

three categories.

       ISO 9000 adoption is a firm-based (or better said, premise-based) decision and firms

strictly seek certification in their home countries. Each country has one government-designed

accrediting agency that certifies the competence of third party registrars to conduct ISO 9000

quality audits – registrars are also charged with the issuing of certificates (Anderson, Daly and

Johnson 1995, 1999). National-level governance of ISO certification enables our identification

strategy—as explained later in the empirical section—and matters for the interpretation of results.

For example, cross-national variation in institutional set-up, efficiency of administration and

access to financing may result in the cost of acquiring ISO certification to vary substantially

across the different countries in our sample. Such variation allows us to propose an instrumental

variable for the level of ISO 9000 standardization that exploits different degrees of institutional

quality—the suggestion being that countries suffering from poor-quality institutions face higher

costs in adopting standards.

      The ISO 9000 family of standards are often referred to as generic quality management

standards, as they can be implemented by any organization regardless of its size, activity sector,

or managerial/national culture. Quality management reflects what the organization does to

enhance customer satisfaction by meeting buyer requirements and expectations (ISO 2002).

Compliance with ISO 9000 indicates consistent use of documents and standardized procedures to

produce a good or service. In other words, ISO 9000 certifies that a firm’s products – for which a

customer contracts – conform to specification.




                                                  6
           In our analysis, we treat ISO 9000 as a uniform standard even though it consists of a

series of nested standards which evolved over time. Firms originally chose between three core

certificates (ISO 9001, ISO 9002, and ISO 9003) that differed in terms of the covered quality

system elements. The nested nature of these standards allowed firms to accommodate differences

in the scope of their operations.2 The 2000 edition of the ISO 9000 family replaced these three

standards with a single standard labeled ISO 9001:2000. As supplementary standards, the 2000

edition included ISO 9000:2000, which describes fundamentals and specifies vocabulary for a

quality management system, and ISO 9004:2000, which provides guidelines for performance

improvements. Both of these standards (ISO 9000:2000 and ISO 9004:2000) were developed on

the basis of previous ISO standards. Given that the core members of the ISO 9000 family were

finally replaced by a single standard, the simplifying assumption of this paper treating ISO 9000

as a uniform standard seems justified, and has been practiced in the literature (e.g., Guler, Guillén

and Macpherson 2002; Prakash and Potoski 2006, 2007; Terlaak and King 2006).

           Accordingly, data for our empirical analysis is compiled from the International

Organization for Standardization (ISO 2002, 2006) as well as from other sources such as the

UN’s Comtrade and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. We construct a panel (for

every five years) from 1995-2005 of the bilateral trade flows and standard gravity equation

variables among 91 potential trading partners (an actual 7,346 country-pairs with usable data)3,

and then match these data with ISO 9000 diffusion rates for the 91 nations over the same period:

the respective national certification counts for ISO are reported in Table 1. We use five-year time

intervals in order to tease out long-term effects rather than short-term adjustments – a common



2
    See Anderson, Daly and Johnson (1995, 1999) for details.
3
    Note that we define the country-pair as exporter-importer specific; for instance, US-Canada and Canada-US are two
distinct country-pairs.

                                                           7
approach in the international trade literature (e.g., Frankel and Wei 1997a; Rauch and Trindade

2002; Baier and Bergstrand 2007). In the time dimension, the sample is restricted to just three

years (1995, 2000 and 2005) due to availability of instruments.4 Yet in the cross-section

dimension, the sample is fairly large: covering approximately 80% of worldwide trade, and 99%

of worldwide ISO 9000 adoptions. An advantage of the wide sample is that less developed

nations – where the trade barrier elements may manifest – are included; hence, the generality of

our results will not suffer then from selection bias.

           Table 2 lists all variables used in the estimations along with their definitions, sources, and

descriptive statistics. Exports, GDP, population, and distance follow standard definitions used in

gravity models. For the sake of international comparability, the ISO 9000 variable is constructed

in relation to a nation’s population.5 The ISO 14000 variable is treated in the same way. The

infrastructure index is a simple average of road density, air passengers per capita, and telephone

lines per capita—all of which are likely to reduce home-nation and host-nation trade costs

(Carrère 2006). Finally, the FTA variable from Baier and Bergstrand (2007) – further developed

by Jeffrey Bergstrand – covers all free trade agreements worldwide until 2005.6

           The developers of ISO 9000 envisioned that “through world-wide acceptance and use, the

ISO 9000 family of standards will provide an effective means for improving the performance of

individual organizations and providing confidence to people and organizations that products
4
    ISO 14000 represents the main instrument for ISO 9000 – see the description in Section IV.B – and is unavailable
prior to 1995—the year of its initiation.
5
    Because empirical gravity equations employ the logs of variables, we add 1 to the number of ISO 9000 certificates
in a nation – before taking the logarithm of (ISO certificates / population) – in order to avoid losing observations
when the number of certificates in one of the trading nations equals zero. Note also that the reported results are
robust to using GDP as a denominator; however, population is less subject to endogeneity than is GDP.
6
    The FTA variable has been obtained from the Database on Economic Integration Agreements (downloadable from
http://www.nd.edu/~jbergstr) and is defined as a Preferential Trade Agreement or common membership in a Free
Trade Area, a Customs Union, a Common Market, or an Economic Union.

                                                           8
(goods and services) will meet their expectations thereby enhancing trade, global prosperity and

individual well-being” (ISO 2005: 4). In line with this aim, some scholarship has proposed that

the adoption of ISO 9000 certificates enhances international trade (e.g., Hudson and Jones 2003;

Clougherty and Grajek 2008). We now turn to how ISO 9000 – and international standards in

general – may have varied effects on trade between nations.




3. Varied Trade Effects of Standardization

       As noted in the introductory comments, standardization can affect international trade

flows via a variety of channels. In order to begin to break down the net effect of standardization

into composite effects, we will concentrate here on three particular channels: 1) an enhanced-

competitiveness effect captured by home-nation standardization; 2) a combined

information/compliance-cost effect captured by host-nation standardization; 3) a common-

language effect captured by the interaction of home-nation and host-nation standardization.

       First, diffusion of standards in a home-nation environment can yield a competitive

advantage for national firms that leads to augmented exports. This enhanced competitiveness

dynamic may be due to internal efficiency gains and quality improvements on the part of firms

adopting standards (Swann, Temple and Shurmer 1996). For example, Anderson, Daly and

Johnson (1999) report average annual savings of $200,000 for a mid-sized US firm due to ISO

certification. These internal gains would seemingly influence firms’ general competitiveness and

thereby influence trade flows. In light of the fact, however, that ISO certification also involves an

implementation cost – Blind (2004) estimates it to be between $50,000 and $250,000 – it is no

surprise that firms with good pre-existing quality systems may find ISO 9000 to generate internal




                                                  9
losses due to the added costs, delays, and burdensome documents necessary for certification

(Terziovski, Power and Sohal 2003).

       Since internal firm benefits may likely be minimal, most scholarship keys upon external

firm benefits as the principal dynamic via which standardization enhances the competitiveness of

exports (Hudson and Jones 2003). For instance, Blind (2004) notes that minimum quality

standards – like ISO 9000 – can substantially reduce transaction and search costs. In particular,

ISO 9000 not only proxies for conformance of the firm’s product to its specification, but can also

signal a firm’s superior but unobserved attributes. In line with this argument, Terlaak and King

(2006) find ISO certification to increase facility growth when buyers face multiple suppliers and

the attributes of suppliers are intangible. Furthermore, Clougherty and Grajek (2008) find ISO

certification to facilitate trade in developing nations where established institutional frameworks to

detect quality-valuing firms are lacking. In short, ISO 9000 potentially offers a low-cost signal of

a firm’s commitment to quality that alleviates information asymmetries and transaction costs and

can thus lead to enhanced exports when the standard is diffused widely in a home-nation.

       Second, diffusion of standards in a host-nation can involve two countervailing effects – an

information effect and a compliance-cost effect – that impact international trade flows (Moenius

2004, 2006). In terms of the information effect, the adoption of a standard by a nation represents

a mechanism via which local knowledge is disseminated and more easily available to foreign

firms, therefore providing information on the necessary criteria for selling in a national market

(Swann, Temple and Shurmer 1996). This dynamic creates obvious export opportunities for

foreign firms as transparency and clarity are enhanced and the cost of acquiring information

regarding the host-nation environment is reduced. For example, the mass adoption of ISO 9000 in

a target environment represents an efficient improvement for exporters when compared with a

situation where each customer specifies unique quality-control requirements.

                                                 10
       However, the diffusion of standards in a host-nation environment can also hinder trade if

this induces substantial compliance costs on the part of foreign producers (Moenius 2006). In

order to become certified, foreign producers must adapt manufacturing design, reorganize

production systems, and comply with multiple certification and testing procedures (Brenton,

Sheehy and Vancauteren 2001). These compliance costs have been found to be substantial for

middle- to smaller-sized firms (Hanson 2005) and for firms hailing from developing nations

(Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki 2000; Czubala, Shepherd and Wilson 2007). Thus bearing out

Blind’s (2001) observation that adaptation costs may be particularly high for those firms with no

influence on the standardization process. Accordingly, the implantation of a standard in a host-

country environment can adversely affect foreign producers by increasing their compliance costs,

and hindering trade when these adaptation costs are substantial. In sum, adoption of the ISO 9000

standard in the host-nation environment involves two countervailing effects (a positive

information effect and a negative compliance-cost effect); thus, the net-effect depends upon

whether the trade-fostering elements outweigh the trade-hindering elements.

       Third, standards have also been noted to have common-language properties that facilitate

cross-firm communication. Blind (2001) points out that corresponding technical knowledge on

both ends of a country-pair is essential to enhance the efficiency of communication and promote

cross-border trade; i.e., the standard must be adopted in both the home and host nation in order to

establish a common-language. Furthermore, a number of scholars (Casper and Hancké 1999;

Dissanayaka et al. 2001; Clougherty and Grajek 2008) have argued that ISO 9000 involves such

properties, as the certificate can establish a means to communicate the nature of internal

production systems to buyers and provide a cross-organizational procedural language in business-

to-business dealings. Bénézech et al. (2001: 1396) summarize this point when stating that “the

ISO 9000 series can be viewed as a code, a language used by firms”. The standardized

                                                11
documentation flow and organizational procedures within ISO certified firms naturally lowers

information asymmetries between firms, which in turn leads to lower transaction and search costs

in vertical relations. Yet to fully realize the benefits of ISO 9000, both contracting parties should

have adopted (i.e., learned) it in the first place; hence, the appropriateness of the common-

language analogy. In short, the common-language properties of ISO 9000 can reduce the

communication frictions endemic to trade relations between firms from different nations by

allowing the ready communication of internal production systems.

       This common-language dynamic has elements in line with the literature strand

considering the role of networks in reducing the information costs associated with international

trade (e.g. Rauch 1999; Rauch and Trindade 2002). Rauch and Trindade (2002) note that via

matching buyers and sellers in characteristics space, networks may considerably impact trade

flows, since inadequate information about opportunities represents a substantial informal barrier

to international trade. To the extent that ISO 9000 promotes a like-minded community with lower

internal information and search costs, its role for trade resembles the role of ethnic Chinese

networks (Rauch and Trindade 2002) and the internet (Freund and Weinhold 2004). Accordingly,

our work partly follows through on Rauch’s (1999) observation that the network/search view of

international trade opens up space for greater consideration of the role played by contacts and

relationships in determining the geographic distribution of economic activity. In our case,

learning the common language of ISO 9000 could be viewed as an alternative to establishing

vertical relations based on long-term interactions and a reputation for trust.

       In sum, we consider the ability of ISO 9000 standards to impact international trade flows

via three principal channels. First, diffusion of ISO 9000 standards in the home-nation can

promote country-pair exports: an enhanced competitiveness effect. Second, diffusion of ISO 9000

in the host-nation can either promote or hinder country-pair exports: depending on whether the

                                                 12
information effect outweighs the compliance-cost effect. Third, combined diffusion of ISO 9000

in both the home and host nation can promote country-pair exports: a common-language effect.

In order to account for these different effects, we employ the number of ISO certificates relative

to population to capture the standard’s penetration in a nation, and then introduce these measures

for exporting and importing countries (ISO adoption for the home-nation, host-nation, and

interaction of home and host nations) into a country-pair export equation. The interaction term’s

identification of the common-language effect is very helpful, as otherwise common-language

properties would manifest via the individual home-nation and host-nation ISO variables.




4. Estimating the Trade Effects of ISO 9000


4.1. Model selection and estimation issues

       The standard empirical framework used to predict trade flows is a gravity equation, which

merely states that bilateral flows are proportional to the economic masses of the trading parties

and inversely proportional to the distance – or more generally trade barriers – between them. Its

attractiveness stems from a strong theoretical background and a long record of empirical studies

yielding robust results. Empirical studies employing versions of the gravity equation began with

Tinbergen (1962) and Linnemann’s (1966) seminal contributions; and the theoretical foundations

include Anderson (1979), Bergstrand (1985), Helpman and Krugman (1985), Deardorf (1998) –

and more recently Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).

       To analyze the problem at hand, we allow ISO 9000 diffusion in both home and host

nations to affect exports within a standard gravity equation set-up of the following fashion:




                                                13
ln Expijt   0   1 ln GDPit   2 ln GDPjt  1 ln POPit   2 ln POPjt 
               1 ln ISO9000 it   2 ln ISO9000 jt   1 ln Infrit   2 ln Infr jt                          (1)
              ln t ijt  t   ijt ,


where the subscripts i, j and t stand for home-nation, host-nation, and year respectively. First off,

the economic masses involved with a particular country-pair are captured by the GDP and the

population for both the home and host nation. We also add home and host ISO 9000 diffusion, as

well as a measure of home and host infrastructure development into the gravity equation.7 All of

these constructs are specific to a particular country, thus they involve multilateral effects. In

addition to these multilateral constructs, our gravity equation also explicitly accounts for bilateral

(i.e., country-pair specific) trade costs, which we measure as:

ln t ijt  1 ln Distanceij   2 FTAijt  3 lnISO9000 it  ln ISO9000 jt ,                                 (2)


where Distance reflects the geographic distance between the trading partners, FTA stands for the

presence of a Free Trade Agreement, and the potential complementarities of ISO 9000 are

captured by the interaction of home-nation and host-nation ISO diffusion.

           Accordingly, our baseline gravity regression equation follows the prescriptions given by

Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki (2000) concerning a robust and useful equation to elicit the impact of

standardization on trade: where GDP, population, geographical distance, and FTA presence all

represent essential constructs. Our gravity equation also explicitly controls for a few additional

factors. First, we control for the impact of any time-specific effects – e.g., world income trends –

in the data series with year dummies (λt). Second, we account for a potentially heteroscedastic

and autocorrelated error term – εijt – by using cluster-robust standard errors in the estimations:


7
    We control for the impact of the physical infrastructure held by trading partners via home and host nation
infrastructure indices, as physical infrastructure is likely to be positively correlated with soft infrastructure like ISO
9000. Thus, neglecting such drivers of trade might bias the ISO 9000 coefficient estimates upward.

                                                            14
where clusters are defined as country-pairs. We also follow Santos Silva and Tenreyro’s (2006)

recommendation to test for specific heteroscedasticity patterns in estimated gravity equations.8

While these properties describe well the estimation procedures for the baseline gravity equation

model, two other econometric/modeling issues should be considered in order to generate robust

causal inferences: 1) panel-data techniques; 2) multilateral resistance terms. These two issues

directly lead to several regression models that we will estimate in addition to the base gravity

equation.

           First, our base gravity equation does not explicitly account for an array of other factors

affecting trade which have been identified in the literature: e.g., currency unions, colonial history,

common language, common border, and ethnic networks. To the extent that these trade-drivers

do not vary over time, these factors can be controlled for by means of country-pair specific fixed-

effects (FE) estimations or by first-differencing (FD) estimations. Given the relatively short time

span of our sample, most of these factors are indeed time invariant. Therefore, using FE and FD –

or more generally panel-data estimation techniques – has an additional advantage of accounting

for trade related factors that are difficult to quantify or observe: e.g., institutional environment,

information costs, and cultural proximity. This is important, since omitted variables can result in

endogeneity problems and bias estimates (Wooldridge 2002: 61-63). For instance, one might

expect ISO 9000 diffusion to be supported by a nation’s well-functioning institutions, but

institutions are also likely to support trade (Anderson and Marcouiller 2002); hence, neglecting

institutions in a gravity equation may lead to an upward bias in the estimated ISO 9000

coefficients. For example, Baier and Bergstrand (2007) make great use of country-pair specific

8
    Consistent with what they found, our tests point to the fact that heteroscedasticity in the pooled OLS regressions
(i.e., without country-pair fixed effects) leads to inconsistent coefficient estimates in the log-linearized gravity
model. Yet in the fixed-effects regressions, the heteroscedasticity tests show that log-linearization does not invalidate
the consistency of our estimates.

                                                            15
effects in order to deal with FTA endogeneity when domestic policies are omitted variables. In

short, country-pair fixed effects and first-differencing control for many potential sources of

endogeneity by accounting for all observed and unobserved time invariant factors, thus it

behooves us to undertake such estimations.

           Second, we also move beyond FE and FD by estimating a gravity equation controlling for

“multilateral resistance terms”, as derived in Anderson and van Wincoop’s (2003) theoretical

underpinning for the gravity equation. As shown in their model, the trade flows between any two

countries are shaped by the bilateral trade costs tijt between every possible country-pair due to

general equilibrium effects. As a consequence, a proper gravity equation should be augmented by

multilateral resistance terms to capture these effects. The estimation of this theory-backed gravity

equation proved computationally burdensome, however, as it requires estimating and solving a

non-linear system of equations. One means to overcome this challenge is to introduce country-

and-time-specific effects (Anderson and van Wincoop 2003; Feenstra 2004).9 Although

computationally less involved, this method has the drawback that virtually all explanatory

variables (i.e., the multilateral constructs in our regression specification) will be collinear with

the country-and-time-specific effects; hence, the coefficient estimates for these explanatory

variables will not be identified. In particular, we would be unable to estimate the GDP, ISO 9000,

and infrastructure coefficients for home and host nations in our empirical context. In addition, the

introduction of country-and-time-specific effects does not allow for straightforward computation

of general equilibrium effects, as it would still require solving a non-linear system of equations.10




9
    In a panel data model, one has to allow the country-specific effects to vary over time in order to capture varying
multilateral price terms.
10
     We use this method merely as a robustness check for the common-language coefficient in our gravity equation.

                                                            16
       Baier and Bergstrand (2009) recently proposed a method to circumvent the above

problems by expanding the multilateral resistance terms via the use of a simple first-order log-

linear Taylor-series approximation. This approach allows for consistent OLS estimation of the

bilateral trade cost function tijt in a gravity equation since the theory-driven multilateral-resistance

terms enter the gravity equation linearly. Another advantage to this approach is that it readily

allows estimating both the partial effects and the total effects (i.e., the general equilibrium

effects) for the various bilateral trade-cost measures: tijt. As already noted, general equilibrium

effects would otherwise require estimating and solving a non-linear system of equations. Since

ISO 9000 manifests both bilaterally (the common-language effect) and multilaterally (the home

and host effects) in our gravity specification, the Baier and Bergstrand (2009) method is

particularly well suited for our empirical context. See the appendix for the construction of the

theory-driven multilateral-resistance terms for our gravity trade equation.

       It also bears reiterating that ISO 9000 may affect international trade flows via different

channels; hence, the three different ISO variables inserted into the gravity equation help identify

these different channels. A positive coefficient estimate for home-nation ISO diffusion can

indicate higher efficiency or better quality-signaling on the part of home exporters. A negative

(positive) coefficient estimate for host-nation ISO diffusion indicates that the compliance-cost

(information) effect is relatively strong. Finally, a positive coefficient estimate for the interaction

of home and host diffusion would indicate the presence of common-language properties

regarding ISO 9000 adoption. And as outlined above, we will estimate the proposed regression

model by six different means: a standard baseline OLS estimation, a country-pair fixed effects

estimation, a first-differencing estimation; and then three identical specifications (baseline OLS,

fixed effects and first differencing) where multilateral resistance terms estimations a la Baier and

Bergstrand (2009) are layered on.

                                                  17
4.2. Instrumenting for ISO 9000 Diffusion with ISO 14000

       While the six estimations noted above are conscious of the potential for endogeneity, it

behooves us to more directly address the endogeneity issue due to its potential significance. Baier

and Bergstrand’s (2007) review of the endogeneity problem in the context of gravity equations

highlights the general importance of endogeneity issues in empirical models of international

trade; yet as they point out, these efforts have largely concentrated on the endogeneity of income.

Simultaneity between GDP and trade flows could arise as a nation’s GDP is a function of its

exports via national income accounting. Empirical studies of trade, however, typically find an

insignificant endogeneity bias for GDP coefficients (Hummels and Levinsohn 1995; Frankel and

Wei 1997b). Frankel and Wei (1997a: 79) summarize this point well when they state “evidently,

the endogeneity of income makes little difference”. The potential endogeneity of ISO 9000

diffusion, on the other hand, poses a more serious problem for our analysis.

      The simultaneity issue is particularly germane to our context as standardization may indeed

determine trade, yet trade may also determine standardization. As pointed out in the literature,

higher trade levels indicate an economy’s openness and can thus stimulate adoption of

international standards (Casella 1996; Blind 2002). For instance, in an investigation of factors

determining standardization in twenty industrial sectors for seven countries, Blind (2002) reports

evidence supporting a positive relation between export-orientation (the ratio of exports to total

production) and standardization-intensity (the stock of national and international standards).

Recall also the work by Moenius (2004) supporting two-way causality between standards and

trade. In our particular context, ISO 9000 adoption has been posited to be a function of trade

volumes: for instance, Hanson (2005) notes that a virtual requirement for exporting to the EU is


                                                 18
the obtainment of a CE marking – a mark that is based on the ISO 9000 system. Consequently,

one might expect that reverse-causality would bias the coefficient estimate for home-nation

standardization upward. Generally, however, the direction of bias in our model is less clear due to

the inclusion of the interaction term that captures the common-language effect. In any case, if one

wants to elicit a robust relationship between ISO 9000 and trade, then one must account for

possible simultaneity. Yet, the few empirical studies considering the impact of standards on trade

do not tend to address the simultaneity issue.

        Beyond the potential for simultaneity to create endogeneity bias, reside two additional

common sources of endogeneity: omitted variables and measurement error (Wooldridge 2002:

51). The previously noted country-pair fixed effects, first-differencing, and multilateral resistance

estimations go a long way to addressing concerns owing to omitted variables; thus, we largely

follow here Baier and Bergstrand’s (2007, 2009) respective approaches to address endogeneity

issues via the strengths of a panel-data approach and via the inclusion of theoretically-motivated

exogenous multilateral resistance terms. With regard to measurement error as a source of

endogeneity, it bares noting that our key explanatory variables regarding ISO 9000 represent

continuous constructs and not the dichotomous constructs that are often more subject to

endogeneity. As Baier and Bergstrand (2007: 80) state “the best method for eliminating this bias

[measurement error] is construction of a continuous variable that would more accurately

measure”. Finally, endogeneity bias may arise from an oft neglected source; i.e., log-linearization

of the gravity equation with heteroscedasticity patterns in the error term (Santos Silva and

Tenreyro, 2006). We will test for heteroscedasticity in order to rule out this source of endogeneity

bias.

        While we carry these features – country-pair fixed effects and multilateral resistance

terms – forward for our current empirical analysis, we can go deeper now in treating potential

                                                 19
endogeneity by further addressing the issue of simultaneity between standards-intensity and trade

flows, as this appears to be the most-relevant potential source of endogeneity remaining in our

gravity trade equations. In particular, we will improve upon the important panel-data enabled and

multilateral-resistance terms based features of our analysis by layering on instrumental variable

(IV) techniques. Hence, the combination of these approaches allows us to thoroughly control for

endogeneity. While IV techniques have been previously employed in the trade literature to deal

with endogeneity (e.g., Magee 2003; Baier and Bergstrand 2002), the impediment of identifying

suitable instruments that are correlated with the explanatory variable but uncorrelated with the

unobservables that impact bilateral trade has largely held up this approach (Baier and Bergstrand

2007). Yet we are fortunate to have an available and suitable instrument that allows tackling the

simultaneity issue via the application of IV techniques in order to purify the ISO 9000 diffusion

variables of the stochastic disturbance term and converge on a true coefficient estimate. Namely,

we employ data on ISO 14000 diffusion to instrument for ISO 9000 diffusion.

        ISO 14000 is a voluntary environmental standard covering management tools and systems

aimed at monitoring and improving the environmental performance of a firm. What makes ISO

14000 such a good instrument for ISO 9000 are conditions of infrastructural convenience in

terms of the common elements between the two standards. In particular, the penetration of ISO

9000 in a nation is likely to be positively correlated with ISO 14000 penetration due to the

common presence of the appropriate institutions via which a firm can seek both ISO 9000 and

14000 qualification.11 In fact, there exists empirical evidence that the number of ISO 14000

certifications is very positively related to the number of ISO 9000 certifications, consequently

suggesting that the drivers behind the two have significant overlap (Corbett and Kirsch 2001;

Vastag 2004). Moreover, the penetration of ISO 14000 in a nation is likely to be driven by the
11
  As discussed in the second section, the ISO certification process is governed at the national-level—which makes it
dependent on the availability and quality of domestic institutions.

                                                        20
stringency of a country’s environmental policies rather than by trade orientation, since ISO 14000

principally helps firms conform to environmental standards at the point of production (i.e., it is

based on home-nation not foreign-nation pressure). Accordingly, it is unlikely that ISO 14000

adoption is correlated with the error term in the trade equation. In addition, Prakash and Potaski

(2006, 2007) find corroborating evidence in that the number of national ISO 9000 certificates

significantly impacts the number ISO 14000 certificates, but export-orientation does not impact

the number of ISO 14000 certificates in a nation. Hence, high levels of trade per se do not appear

to significantly affect ISO 14000 certifications, thus corroborating our prior that ISO 14000

represents a good instrument.




4.3. Discussion of the results

       Table 3 incorporates the econometric/modeling issues outlined above by reporting six

different regression specifications. Regression 1 reports the results from the baseline gravity

equation; Regression 2 the results employing country-pair specific fixed-effects; and Regression

3 the results employing first-differencing; Regression 4 the results from the baseline gravity

equation with multilateral-resistance terms; Regression 5 the results employing country-pair

specific fixed-effects with multilateral-resistance terms; Regression 6 the results employing first-

differencing with multilateral-resistance terms. The six different regression specifications allow

detecting whether our main findings are generally robust. Furthermore – and in keeping with our

efforts to layer IV techniques on top of panel-data features – Table 4 reports results where we

replicate the six regression equations from Table 3 while employing IV estimation techniques for

the three ISO variables: home-nation, host-nation, and home-host interaction.




                                                 21
           The results reported in Tables 3 and 4 are generally consistent with the pre-existing

empirical trade literature. The coefficient estimates for the main drivers behind the gravity forces

– home-nation and host-nation GDP – in the pooled OLS estimations (Regressions 1 and 4)

correspond well to the standard results in the literature (e.g. Frankel and Wei 1997b: Table 6.5a-

b; Baier and Bergstrand 2007): i.e., the elasticity of exports with respect to GDP (both home and

host) is close to 1.12 Additionally, the home and host GDP coefficient estimates in the FE and FD

panel estimations (Regressions 2, 3, 5 and 6) are higher than the coefficient estimates in the OLS

estimations—a result which also conforms with previous work (e.g. Carrère 2006; Baier and

Bergstrand 2007). Furthermore, the coefficient estimates for the population variables are positive

in the OLS estimations, and negative in the panel estimations. While the coefficient estimates for

population are generally expected to be positive, it is not uncommon to find the opposite sign in

empirical estimations of gravity equations (e.g. Frankel and Wei 1997b: Tables 6.3 and 6.5a-b).13

           The results regarding the infrastructure variables also conform to expectation, as the

coefficient estimates are positive and significant in the pooled OLS estimations (Regressions 1

and 4) in Tables 3 and 4. Moreover, the magnitude of these effects is quite significant, as the

elasticity of exports with respect to both home and host infrastructure varies between 0.10 and

0.25—comparable levels to the results reported in Carrère (2006). The infrastructure variables

are, however, generally not significant in the panel estimations. Also the impact of two bilateral


12
     Note that the population variables in a gravity equation influence the coefficients on the GDP variables and should
be interpreted together (see Frankel and Wei 1997c: pages 57-59). For instance, the home-nation GDP elasticity of
0.81 and the home-nation population elasticity of 0.37 in Regression 1 (Table 3) can be interpreted as home-nation
GDP elasticity of 1.18 along with a home-nation GDP per capita elasticity of -0.37. The two specifications (one with
GDP and GDP per capita, the other with GDP and population) are mathematically equivalent due to the use of logs.
13
     To be precise, Frankel and Wei (1997b) use the log of GDP per capita – not population variables – in their OLS
regressions. Consequently, a positive coefficient on the GDP per capita variable is equivalent to a negative
coefficient of the same magnitude on the population variable.

                                                            22
trade-cost measures—geographic distance and FTAs—are in line with recent trade literature

findings (e.g. Baier and Bergstrand 2007). First, the elasticity of exports with respect to distance

ranges between -1.20 and -1.33. Second, FTAs are estimated to increase exports by 15% to 61%

depending on the specification (only in Table 4’s Regression 5 and 6 is the FTA coefficient not

significant).

           Before turning to the interpretations of our variables of principal interest – the trade

effects of ISO 9000 penetration – we test for the endogeneity of international standardization.

Recall that we have argued that endogeneity is a crucial analytical issue that has often been

neglected in previous trade studies. We can formally test for the presence of endogeneity by

comparing the coefficient estimates from Table 3 (where the ISO variables act as their own

instruments) with the coefficient estimates from Table 4 (where ISO 14000 adoption levels are

used as instrumental variables for the ISO 9000 variables).14 Significant differences in the

coefficient estimates between Table 3 and 4 are discernable, and Hausman specification tests

reject [at the 1% confidence level for Regressions 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 and at the 10% confidence level

for Regression 4] the null hypothesis regarding the difference in coefficient estimates being non-

systematic. Accordingly, Hausman tests confirm our prior that endogeneity matters empirically in

the context of international standards and international trade.

           In line with the presence of endogeneity, a visual comparison of Table 3 and 4 for the

results concerning the three ISO variables indicates some significant differences concerning the


14
     The instrumental variables include home-nation adoption of ISO 14000, host-nation adoption of ISO 14000 and
the interaction of the two. F-tests support the strength of ISO 14000 adoptions as instrumental variables at the 1%
confidence level for all three ISO 9000 variables in all six regressions (see Table A1 in the Appendix). Note that we
use the same set of first-stage regressions for the pooled OLS, the FE and the FD specifications, since the inclusion
of fixed effects (or first-differencing) in the first stage significantly lowers the strength of our instruments based on
ISO 14000 adoptions.

                                                            23
impact of ISO 9000 diffusion on trade. First, the results in Table 3 suggest a robustly significant

positive impact for home-nation ISO 9000 on exports. Further, this positive push regarding

home-nation ISO diffusion holds in Table 4 when we more completely account for endogeneity

in ISO 9000 adoption. Second, the Table 3 results indicate that host-nation ISO 9000 diffusion

yields some positive impact on exports (i.e., significant ‘pull’ effects are present in Regressions 1

and 4), while the Table 4 results – where endogeneity is more fully accounted for – indicate a

negative or insignificant ‘pull’ on exports. Thus, the compliance-cost effect embedded in host-

nation ISO 9000 diffusion becomes stronger/more-evident once the endogeneity of international

standardization is taken into account. This result accords with the intuition that ISO 9000

diffusion is primarily driven by the trade orientation of an economy – e.g., trade oriented nations

tend to adopt ISO 9000 in order to conform to foreign buyer requirements or source more

efficiently from foreign suppliers. Third, the interaction of home-nation and host-nation

standardization is more robust in the IV regressions (Table 4) as compared to the non-IV

regressions (Table 3); though, it is important to underscore that this interaction effect is positive

when both employing and not employing the IV techniques—i.e., the common-language effect is

a relatively robust channel via which standardization impacts international trade.15

        We also test for a specific form of heteroscedasticity in the error term by using a Park-

type regression (Park 1966; Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006): where a test-coefficient value

different than 2 suggests that log-linearization of the gravity equation leads to endogeneity bias.

Each regression in Tables 3 and 4 reports the result for this test of heteroscedasticity. When

considering these results as a whole, it is first apparent that the panel regressions involve less

heteroscedasticity (since the test coefficient is closer to 2 in the panel estimations) as compared to


15
  The common-language result is also robust to including home- and host-nation-specific time dummies as
suggested by (Anderson and van Wincoop 2003) and Feenstra (2004). The full results of these regressions are
available upon request.

                                                       24
the pooled OLS regressions. Yet more importantly, only the first-differenced specifications

(Regressions 3 and 6) indicate a lack of heteroscedasticity (i.e., test coefficients that are not

statistically different from 2). Accordingly, the log-linearization that is commonly employed in

gravity equation analysis is generally less problematic in our panel specifications, but is even

more immune to this type of endogeneity bias in our FD specifications.

       In short, ISO 9000 diffusion appears to be subject to some endogeneity bias—a bias

which needs to be accounted for in order to understand the relationship between international

standardization and international trade. Accordingly, Regression 6 in Table 4 (first-differencing

with multilateral resistance terms and instrumentation) represents our preferred regression

specification, as it most fully addresses the various endogeneity concerns raised in the literature.

This particular specification involves instrumental variable techniques in order to generally deal

with endogeneity concerns, multilateral resistance terms to control for biases induced by general

equilibrium effects, and a first-differencing. The first-differencing is important because the

heteroscedasticity tests reported at the bottom of Tables 3 and 4 suggest that only the FD

specifications do not suffer from the endogeneity bias caused by log-linearization of the gravity

equation. Accordingly, the remaining interpretations of our findings are based on this preferred

specification due to the fact that it deals with endogeneity via multiple means.

       First, we find strong support for the common-language effect, as high levels of ISO 9000

adoption in both the home and host nation spur increased country-pair trade. While the ability of

standards to reduce communication frictions between trading partners has been appreciated by

many scholars (e.g., Casper and Hancké 1999; Bénézech et al. 2001; Blind 2001), it has been

difficult to empirically pin down these effects. Accordingly, common-language effects previously

manifested via the home and host standardization measures. Capturing the common-language



                                                  25
effect via the interaction of home and host ISO helps then disentangle these effects and suggests

that the common-language effect is a robust channel via which standardization increases trade.

        Second, we find support for the enhanced-competitiveness effect captured by home-nation

standardization. This result is consistent with the literature (e.g., Swann, Temple and Shurmer

1996; Blind 2001, 2004; Ganslandt and Markusen 2001) that finds home-nation standardization

to enhance the competitiveness of exports. Thus, the positive push for home-nation

standardization found in previous work is supported when we more fully control for simultaneity

between exports and standardization.

        Third, the positive (though insignificant) coefficient estimate for host-nation

standardization appears to indicate that negative compliance-cost effect – which is embedded in

host-nation standardization –seems to be relatively insignificant as compared to the positive

information effect. Still, this does not completely undermine the validity of the concerns by

Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki (2000) and others regarding the ability of international standards to

hinder trade between nations. According to our results, the trade-hindering elements can off-set –

and even outweigh – the trade-fostering elements of host-nation standardization when home-

nation ISO diffusion levels are significantly negative.16 As previously noted, international

standards have been generally found to promote trade more than national standards (Barrett and

Yang 2001; Blind 2001; Moenius 2004; Czubala, Shepherd and Wilson 2007; Shepherd 2007);

and moreover, ISO 9000 has generally been considered to be the standard least subject to

protectionist rationales (Blind 2004; Moenius 2006). Accordingly, if we are able to detect trade

dampening effects due to the adoption of ISO 9000, then it stands to reason that many other

standards – if not all – will also involve some trade-hindering elements. The next section looks


16
   Note that our explanatory variables are in logs; hence, ISO adoption – which we measure relative to population
size – can take negative values.

                                                         26
deeper into this question by examining the partial and total effects of ISO 9000 diffusion on

individual country-pair trade flows.




5. Fortress Europe: ISO 9000 as a Device to Form an EU Standardization Union?

           The empirical results highlight the fact that the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000

potentially involves some trade-hindering elements; in particular, ISO 9000 adoption in host-

nations can lead to the curtailment of imports from other nations. In light of the potential

presence of this trade-dampening effect, the obvious next question is which nations might

experience reduced exports due to the adoption of ISO standards in a host-nation environment?

Akin to the concerns addressed by Frankel and Wei (1997a) regarding the European integration

process being used to create a ‘Fortress Europe’, Hanson (2005) notes that the worldwide

diffusion of standards has been considered by some as a means by the EU to protect domestic

competitors and reduce imports.17 Gandal and Shy (2001) show that when conversion costs are

relatively high and network effects are relatively minimal, then nations can increase welfare by

creating a standardization union for the purpose of increasing trade for member countries at the

expense of decreased trade from non-member countries. Two additional points highlight the

potential for ISO 9000 to be employed by European nations as a barrier to market entry and a

tariff on international trade.

           First, ISO 9000 has been used in Europe as a standard against which to assess

performance in government procurements and in setting minimum quality requirements for

products that affect public safety. In particular, the 1992 Single Market Initiative initiated by the

then European Community involved a significant public safety argument obliging firms to attain

17
     It is healthy to point out that Frankel and Wei (1997a) generally find – like most other studies – the EU integration
process to be trade enhancing with respect to imports from non-EU nations (i.e., little trade-diversion takes place).

                                                             27
a uniquely designed CE Mark in order to gain access to certain European markets.18 Furthermore,

the majority of the conformity assessment modules necessary for the CE marking program were

based on the ISO 9000 series; i.e., the ISO 9000 quality control systems were the foundation for

the CE mark—see Hanson (2005) for more details. Thus, ISO 9000 certified firms find it easier

to obtain the CE mark and, as a consequence, to access the European market; though, the CE

mark does not make it easier to obtain ISO certification.

           Second, it bears pointing out that the effort toward worldwide diffusion of international

standards has been led by the EU and confirmed by the expansion of international institutions like

the International Organization for Standardization (Casella 1996). Hanson (2005) points out that

the EU has been far more unified in its participation in the International Organization for

Standardization than have other nations: for instance, the EU embraces the International

Organization for Standardization, receives one vote for every nation, and has strong

representation (usually chairing) in the technical committees where the standards are designed

and set; while the US is more interested in reciprocal recognition of national standards, receives

only one vote as it is one nation, and often finds its comments ignored in the standard-setting

process. It is no surprise then that standards developed by this process are considered by many to

serve European interests (Hanson 2005).

           Furthermore, quite a bit of policy-oriented literature exists concerning the impact of

standard-counts and technical-regulations on intra-EU and extra-EU trade-flows—results which

often conform to standardization-union properties by suggesting that EU standardization leads to

intra-EU trade-creation and trade-diversion for EU imports from non-EU nations. In terms of

standardization enhancing intra-EU trade: Brenton, Sheehy and Vancauteren (2001) find a

substantial increase for Polish and Hungarian exports to EU-15 nations in industries where
18
     Depending on the product category, the EC Mark had to be attained by some time between 1992 and 1995.

                                                        28
standards applied; and Vancauteren and Weiserbs (2005) support increased intra-EU trade from

1990 to 1998 due to European technical regulation harmonization. In terms of EU standardization

decreasing EU imports from non-EU nations: Moenius (2006) finds EU importer standards to

decrease agricultural imports from non-EU nations; Czubala, Sheperd and Wilson (2007) find

that both the counts of ISO-harmonized and non-ISO-harmonized standards reduce EU imports

from African nations, though ISO-harmonized standard counts are less trade restrictive; and

Spencer Henson et al. (2000) found developing nations very constrained in their ability to export

food to developed nations with standards being the highest barrier to enter the EU. Furthermore,

Gasiorek, Smith and Venables (1992) and Michalek et al. (2005) both found EU standardization

to increase trade between EU members but impede imports from outside the EU.

           In order to get a more complete picture of when additional home-nation and host-nation

ISO 9000 adoptions enhance or hinder trade, Figures 1 and 2 use the coefficient estimates for the

three ISO variables from Regression 6 in Table 4 to illustrate the partial and total effects on

exports of additional ISO 9000 diffusion.19 Figure 1 shows the elasticity of exports with respect

to home-nation adoptions at different levels of host-nation adoption. Figure 2 shows the elasticity

of exports with respect to host-nation adoptions at different levels of home-nation adoption.

While these partial effects are simple linear functions of ISO 9000 diffusion in the respective host

or home nation, the total effects depend on additional country-pair-year factors—see the

appendix for explanation of these factors.20 Thus, the total effects are illustrated by a cloud of

circles in both figures—with each circle representing one country-pair in a given year. Notice that

19
     The maximum and minimum levels of ISO 9000 on the horizontal axis in Figures 1 & 2 are chosen to reflect the
sample’s distribution. Note that the log values of ISO 9000 adoption are negative when the number of certificates is
less than 1 per million inhabitants in a given country.
20
     The estimation results from Regression 6 also allow differentiating between the partial and total effects for the
distance and FTA variables due to the inclusion of theoretically-motivated multilateral resistance terms (Baier and
Bergstrand 2009). However, we do not do so as these constructs do not constitute our main focus here.

                                                             29
the marginal impact of additional home-nation ISO 9000 diffusion (Figure 1) is positive and for

the most part significant; i.e., the impact of additional home standardization is positive for almost

all the relevant levels of host-nation adoption in our sample. Further, this positive home-nation

effect—both the partial and the total effect—becomes larger at higher levels of host-nation ISO

adoption.21

         When we consult Figure 2, however, the marginal impact of additional host-nation ISO

9000 adoption only becomes positive once home-nation diffusion levels are sufficiently large.

Namely, the point estimate for the partial effect turns positive at 0.31 certifications per million

inhabitants (log(0.31) = -1.16)—a fairly low threshold. Given the distribution of ISO penetration

levels in our sample for 2005 (Table 1), host-nation diffusion pulls-in trade from all nations (i.e.,

all nations benefit from worldwide diffusion of ISO standards), but pulls-in greater levels of trade

from ISO-rich nations. That said, some nations had ISO penetration levels in 1995 and 2000 that

were below this threshold, thus diffusion of ISO 9000 in their trading-partner nations represented

a threat to their exports at that time. Furthermore, when one considers the total effect (i.e.,

adjusting for general equilibrium effects), many country-pair types exist where trade is actually

hindered by host-nation certification: the multiple circles lying in the negative elasticity region of

Figure 2 give evidence to this result. Thus by allowing the common language effect of ISO 9000

to manifest in general equilibrium, we elicit results suggesting that host-nation certification can

hinder trade from exporter nations that have not significantly adopted ISO 9000; i.e., compliance-

cost effects dominate information effects when home-nation ISO levels fall below a critical

threshold. This trade-hindering result is statistically significant, as indicated by the 90%

confidence interval in Figure 2.



21
  To be precise, there are a few country-pair-year observations where the total effect is negative and statistically
significant.

                                                           30
           Table 5 illustrates which nations generally benefit and which generally suffer when ISO

9000 diffusion increases in the relevant trading-partner nations. Namely, the table presents

average export elasticities (for both home and host ISO diffusion) based on total effects for all

nations in the sample. The ordering of the nations in the table is by descending export elasticities

for host-nation ISO diffusion in order to clearly distinguish which nations generally gain exports

and which generally lose exports when ISO becomes more widespread throughout the world.

Before turning to analyzing the impact of host-nation diffusion on the exports of various nations,

it is important to first note that the results for home-nation adoption are generally robust and

consistent across all nations; i.e., the exports of all nations tend to uniformly benefit from home-

nation diffusion of ISO 9000 with the average elasticity of exports very close to 0.06 for almost

all nations. The US represents a notable exception in that it has an elasticity equal to 0.146, thus

the US tends to elicit relatively large increases in exports when it adopts ISO standards.

           When it comes, however, to the impact of host-nation ISO 9000 diffusion on exports, then

there exists wide variation across the different nations in our sample. For instance, Table 5

illustrates that for roughly half of the nations in our sample the average elasticity of exports with

respect to host-nation diffusion is negative.22 In other words, these nations generally find their

exports to decrease on average when the host-nations they trade with adopt ISO 9000. Moreover,

the nations experiencing negative export elasticities for host-nation ISO diffusion tend to be

either developing or transition nations. While some developing and transition nations do elicit a

positive pull to their exports when ISO 9000 is adopted in their trading-partner host-nations, it is

important to point out that this positive pull tends to be much lower than the positive pull

experienced by developed nations: which tend to have the largest average export elasticities for



22
     The number of nations below the threshold decreases with time, as worldwide certification levels increase.

                                                           31
host-nation ISO diffusion.23 In other words, developed nations generally find their exports to

increase the most when the host-nations they trade with adopt ISO 9000. In short, the export

gains of developing nations are not as large as the export gains of developed nations when ISO

9000 reaches higher levels of worldwide diffusion. These results are in line with the concerns by

many scholars (e.g., Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki 2000; Blind 2001; Czubala, Shepherd and

Wilson 2007) that firms from developing nations may be harmed by standardization, as they have

no influence over the standardization process and find the compliance costs to be substantially

high.

           The second point to note is that the nations which benefit the most from worldwide

diffusion of ISO 9000 tend to be European. For instance, among the thirty nations (roughly one

third of our sample) experiencing host-nation export-elasticities above 0.050 on average, twenty-

two are European and twenty are EU members. Furthermore, only eight non-European nations

(Singapore, Israel, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Japan, Canada, and Korea) have adopted

ISO 9000 at sufficiently high levels to equivalently gain from worldwide diffusion of

standardization. In other words, only eight non-European nations have essentially joined the

‘ISO’ club. Moreover, the US (at 150 certificates per million inhabitants and an average host-

nation diffusion elascticity of 0.040) fares only moderately well. Hence, increased ISO 9000

standardization in trading-partner nations tends, in general, to increase US exports to these

nations, but the exports of European nations experience a larger increase. These results are in line

with the idea that the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000 standards sponsored by the International

Organization for Standardization principally benefited European nations and gives some support




23
     South Africa represents a lone exception as it has the highest host-nation elasticity of 0.027, thus South Africa has
substantially gained from the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000.

                                                             32
to US-based critics who claimed that ISO 9000 certification represented a specific threat to many

export interests (Hanson 2005).

       In order to provide a more intuitive grasp on the economic significance of our findings

(based on the total effects from Table 4’s Regression 6), we can take some representative nations

(UK, Australia, US, Mexico and Guatemala) and consider what potentially happens to trade

between these nations due to an increase in their 2005 ISO adoption levels. For instance, when

Australia increases ISO 9000 adoptions by 10%, Australia’s exports to the UK, the US, Mexico

and Guatemala respectively change by 1.6%, 1.0%, 0.4% and -0.6%. These simulations illustrate

the above point regarding the impact of additional home-nation adoptions almost always being

positive regardless of the different host-nation adoption levels. However, when we consider the

impact on exports to Australia from the UK, the US, Mexico and Guatemala due to that same

10% increase in Australia’s standardization, then trade flows respectively change by 1.0%, 0.4% ,

-0.3% and -1.2%. These simulations illustrate a few of the above points concerning the impact of

worldwide diffusion of standardization: members of the ‘standardization union’ (e.g., the UK)

gain the most from the standardization process; nations falling just outside of the club (e.g., the

US) do not gain as much as club members; and many developing and transition nations (e.g.,

Mexico and Guatemala) tend to experience export losses.

       Finally, our results allow formulating some conclusions regarding the effects of ISO 9000

diffusion on global trade as a whole. Table 6 presents summary statistics for the ISO export

elasticities across all the country-pairs in our sample. It is clear that diffusion of ISO 9000 in both

home-nations and host-nations leads to increased trade on average; i.e., total effects are generally

positive. Thus while there are winners and losers from the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000,

global trade as a whole seems to benefit from the spread of the ISO 9000 standard.



                                                  33
       In sum, our findings suggest that the proliferation of ISO 9000 spurs global trade. Yet, it

is the trade between ISO-rich nations which is enhanced the most by ISO 9000, while other types

of trade-flows can actually be hampered by worldwide diffusion of ISO standards. It is the

nations with the lowest levels of ISO penetration which find ISO 9000 diffusion in the rest of the

world to be a de facto barrier to their exports. In terms of evaluating the ‘fortress Europe’

hypothesis, our results indicate that European nations (the supposed ‘standardization union’

members) are among the nations which benefit the most from worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000.

The US and a number of developing and transition nations also tend to generally benefit from

ISO 9000 adoptions, though to a lesser extent than the twenty-three European nations and the

eight additional nations which essentially form the ISO club. Indeed, increased adoption within

the standardization union strengthens intra-union trade, enhances union exports to the outside

world, and protects the union from imports from most of the developing and transition nations—

which lag behind in terms of ISO adoptions. Accordingly, the above results illustrate that

international standards can become de facto trade barriers for some nations even though they are

not necessarily de jure trade barriers and do in fact increase global trade as a whole.




6. Conclusion

       Motivated by the need to better understand the implications of worldwide diffusion of

standardization on trade, this paper empirically assesses the link between international standards

and international trade. Empirical scholarship on the standards/trade relationship has been held up

by three particular methodological challenges: measurement problems, varied effects, and

endogeneity concerns. By investigating the impact of ISO 9000 – by far the most widely

implanted international standard – on trade between 91 nations from 1995 to 2005, we are able to

surmount some of these methodological challenges that have encumbered previous scholarship.

                                                 34
First, we consider the penetration of ISO 9000 in a specific national environment, thus employing

a continuous standardization measure as opposed to the commonly-used inventory approach to

capture standardization. Second, we allow ISO 9000 to manifest via multiple channels: an

enhanced-competitiveness effect captured by home-nation standardization; a combined

information/compliance-cost effect captured by host-nation standardization; and a common-

language effect captured by the interaction of home and host standardization. Third, we employ

panel data techniques (first-differencing and fixed-effects), multilateral resistance terms (a la

Baier and Bergstrand 2009), and instrumental variable (IV) techniques in order to control for ISO

9000’s potential endogeneity.

       The empirical results from our gravity trade equations yield three main findings

concerning the standards/trade relationship. First, we find strong support for the common-

language aspect of ISO 9000, as combining high certification levels in both home and host

nations robustly promotes trade. In other words, the positive effects of additional adoptions in

one nation are enhanced by higher ISO 9000 levels in the corresponding partner nation from a

country-pair. Thus, ISO 9000 appears to lower information asymmetries between firms hailing

from different nations and allows more efficient organization of vertical relations in a bilateral

trade relationship. Second, the enhanced-competitiveness effect captured by home-nation

standardization also finds strong support. This finding corroborates the previous literature on the

standards/trade relationship which generally found the quality-signaling elements of

standardization to involve a robust positive push with respect to home-nation exports. Yet unlike

this study, the previous literature did not comprehensively tackle endogeneity. Third, we find the

compliance-cost effect – which is embedded along with an information effect in host-nation

standardization – to be relatively strong in the estimations employing instrumental variable

techniques. This result provides some backing to the concerns of many scholars’ that host-nation

                                                 35
standardization can increase adaptation costs for home exporter firms and reduce exports to a

particular host-nation.

       The natural next question concerns which types of nations tend to benefit and which tend

to lose from the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000 standardization. When we compare the

empirical results with actual ISO 9000 adoption levels, we find some support for a “Fortress

Europe”. First, the exports of European nations increase the most when other nations adopt ISO

9000, while the US benefits a bit less from worldwide diffusion of standardization. Furthermore,

all of the nations which find exports to decrease when host-nations adopt ISO 9000 are

developing or transition nations. Thus, these nations find the trade-dampening compliance-cost

effects to outweigh the trade-promoting information effects when it comes to host-nation

standardization. Since the European nations have the highest levels of ISO penetration, it is

exports to European nations from nations with low adoption levels that are most threatened by

standardization. This result is consistent with the concerns by Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki (2000),

Shepherd (2007) and others regarding firms in developing nations lacking the necessary

information, technology, managerial capacity and finances to adopt production processes quickly

in order to meet developed-world standards. Thus, the “Fortress Europe” hypothesis finds some

empirical support here, as the worldwide diffusion of ISO 9000 appears to involve some

characteristics consistent with the fundamentals – enhanced intra-union trade and union exports

at the expense of imports from outside the union – of a standardization union.

       In sum, the empirical results strongly support the common language aspects of ISO 9000,

the robustness of the enhanced-competitiveness effect due to home-nation standardization, and

also exhibit evidence that ISO 9000 involves trade-hindering elements via host-nation adoption

raising the compliance costs of exporters from other nations. In particular, diffusion of ISO 9000

represents a de facto trade barrier for the developing and transition nations that lag behind in

                                                 36
terms of adoption, whereas ISO-rich nations (mostly European) reap the majority of the benefits

from worldwide standardization. It bears stating that ISO 9000 is the quintessential international

standard: by far the most successful implantation of any international standard, and generally

considered to be the standard least subject to trade-dampening effects. Therefore, if we find ISO

9000 – the most international of standards – to have protectionist elements, then virtually all

standards in existence will seemingly involve some trade-hindering effects. Thus, our findings

are in line with the observation by Maskus, Wilson and Otsuki (2000: 6) that no standards

analogue exists to the claim that free trade in goods is globally optimal.




                                                 37
References


Anderson, Shannon W., J. Daniel Daly, and Marilyn F. Johnson, (1995). “The Value of
   Management Control Systems: Evidence on the Market Reaction to ISO 9000 Quality
   Assurance Certificates,” University of Michigan Business School Working Paper 9501-16.

Anderson, Shannon W., J. Daniel Daly, and Marilyn F. Johnson, (1999). “Why Firms seek ISO
   9000 Certification: Regulatory Compliance or Competitive Advantage?” Production and
   Operations Management, vol. 8, pp. 28-43.

Anderson, James E., (1979). “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American
   Economic Review, vol. 69, pp. 106-116.

Anderson, James E, and Douglas Marcouiller, (2002). “Insecurity and the Pattern of Trade: An
   empirical Investigation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84, pp. 342-252.

Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop, (2003). “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
   Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, vol. 93, pp. 170-192.

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, (2002). “On the Endogeneity of International Trade
   Flows and Free Trade Agreements,” mimeo.

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, (2007). “Do Free Trade Agreements Actually Increase
   Members’ International Trade?” Journal of International Economics, vol. 71, pp. 72-95.

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, (2009). “Bonus vetus OLS: A simple method for
   approximating international trade-cost effects using the gravity equation,” Journal of
   International Economics, vol. 77, pp. 77-85.

Baldwin, Richard, (2000). “Regulatory Protectionism, Developing Nations and a Two-tier World
   Trade System,” CEPR Discussion Paper 2574.

Barrett, Christopher B., and Yi-Nung Yang, (2001). “Rational incompatibility with international
   product standards,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 54, pp. 171-191.




                                               38
Bénézech, Danièle, Gilles Lambert, Blandine Lanoux, Christophe Lerch, and Jocelyne Loos-
   Baroin, (2001). “Completion of knowledge codification: an illustration through the ISO 9000
   standards implementation process,” Research Policy, vol. 30, pp. 1395-1407.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., (1985). “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some
   Microeconomic Foundations and Empirical Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
   vol. 67, pp. 474-481.

Blind, Knut, (2001). “The Impact of Innovations and Standards on Trade of Measurement and
   Testing Products: Empirical Results of Switzerland’s Bilateral Trade Flows with Germany,
   France and the UK,” Information Economics and Policy, vol. 13, pp. 439-460.

Blind, Knut, (2002). “Driving Forces for Standardization at Development Organizations,”
   Applied Economics, vol. 34, pp. 1985-1998.

Blind, Knut, (2004). The Economics of Standards: Theory, Evidence, Policy, Northampton, MA:
   Edward Elgar.

Boom, Anette, (1995). “Asymmetric International Minimum Quality Standards and Vertical
   Differentiation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, vol. 43, pp. 101-119.

Brenton, Paul, John Sheehy, and Marc Vancauteren, (2001). “Technical Barriers to Trade in the
   European Union: Importance for Accession Countries,” Journal of Common Market Studies,
   vol. 39, pp. 265-284.

Casella, Alessandra, (1996). “Free Trade and Evolving Standards,” in (Bhagwati Jagdish and
   Robert Hudec, eds.), Fair Trade and Harmonization: Prerequisites for Free Trade?, Vol. 1,
   pp. 119-156, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Carrère, Cèline, (2006). “Revisiting the Effects of Regional Trade Agreements on Trade Flows
   with Proper Specification of the Gravity Model,” European Economic Review, vol. 50, pp.
   223-247.

Casper, Steve, and Bob Hancké, (1999). “Global Quality Norms with National Production
   Regimes: ISO 9000 Standards in the French and German Car Industries,” Organization
   Studies, vol. 20, pp. 961-985.

                                               39
Clougherty, Joseph A., and Michal Grajek, (2008). “The Impact of ISO 9000 Diffusion on Trade
   and FDI: A New Institutional Analysis,” Journal of International Business Studies, vol. 39,
   pp. 613-633.

Corbett, Charles J. and David A. Kirsch, (2001). “International Diffusion of ISO 14000
   Certification,” Production and Operations Management, vol. 10, pp. 327-342.

Czubala, Witold, Ben Shepherd, and John S. Wilson, (2007). “Help or Hindrance?: The Impact of
   Harmonized Standards on African Exports,” World Bank – Policy Research Working Paper
   4400.

Deardorff, Alan V., (1998). “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a
   Neoclassical World?” in (Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed.), The regionalization of the world economy,
   pp. 7-32, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Deardorff, Alan V., and Robert M. Stern, (1998). Measurement of Nontariff Barriers, Ann Arbor:
   University of Michigan Press.

Delmas, Magali A., (2002). “The diffusion of environmental management standards in Europe
   and in the United States,” Policy Sciences, vol. 35, pp. 91-119.

Dissanayaka, Sunil M., Mohan M. Kumarsawamy, Khalid Karim, and Marton Marosszeky,
   (2001). “Evaluating Outcomes from ISO 9000-certified Quality Systems of Hong Kong
   Constructors,” Total Quality Management, vol. 12, pp. 29-40.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, (2002). “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”
   Econometrica, vol. 70, pp. 1741-1779.

Feenstra, Robert, (2004). Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Shang-Jin Wei, (1997a) “Estimated Effects of Trading Blocs,” in
   (Frankel, Jeffrey A., ed.), Regional Trading Blocks in the World Economic System, pp. 77-
   113, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.




                                               40
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Shang-Jin Wei, (1997b). “Extensions of the Empirical Analysis,” in
   (Frankel, Jeffrey A., ed.), Regional Trading Blocks in the World Economic System, pp. 115-
   148, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Shang-Jin Wei, (1997c). “The Gravity Model of Bilateral Trade,” in
   (Frankel, Jeffrey A., ed.), Regional Trading Blocks in the World Economic System, pp. 49-76,
   Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Freund, Caroline L., and Diana Weinhold, (2004). “The effect of the Internet on international
   trade,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 62, pp. 171-189.

Gandal, Neil, and Oz Shy, (2001). “Standardization policy and international trade,” Journal of
   International Economics, vol. 53, pp. 363-383.

Ganslandt, Mattias, and James R. Markusen, (2001). “National Standards and International
   Trade,” Research Institute of Industrial Economics Working Paper 547.

Gasiorek, Michael, Alasdair Smith and Anthony J. Venables, (1992). “1992: Trade and Welfare –
   A General Equilibrium Model” in (L.A. Winters, ed.), Trade Flows and Trade Policy after
   1992, pp. 35-62, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Guler, Isin, Guillén, Mauro, F. and Macpherson, John Muir, (2002). “Global Competition,
   Institutions, and the Diffusion of ISO 9000 Quality Certificates,” Administrative Science
   Quarterly, vol. 47, pp. 207-232.

Hanson, David, (2005). CE Marking, Product Standards and World Trade, Northampton, MA:
   Edward Elgar.

Harrigan, James, (1993). “OECD Imports and Trade Barriers in 1983,” Journal of International
   Economics, vol. 35, pp. 91-111.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman, (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press.




                                               41
Henson, Spencer, Rupert Loader, Alan Swinbank, Maury Bredahl, and Nicole Lux, (2000).
   “Impact of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures on Developing Countries,” Reading, UK:
   Center for Food Economics Research.

Hudson, John, and Philip Jones, (2003). “International Trade in ‘Quality Goods’: Signalling
   Problems for Developing Countries,” Journal of International Development, vol. 15, pp. 999-
   1013.

Hummels, David, and James Levinsohn, (1995). “Monopolistic Competition and International
   Trade: Reconsidering the Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110, pp. 799-836.

ISO, The ISO Survey of ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 Certificates, Eleventh cycle – 2001, (2002).
   Geneva: ISO Central Secretariat.

ISO, (2005). ISO/TC 176 Business Plan N847, mimeo.

ISO, The ISO Survey – 2005, (2006). Geneva: ISO Central Secretariat.

Laird, Sam, and Alexander Yeats, (1990). Quantitative Methods for Trade-Barrier Analysis, New
   York, NY: New York University Press.

Lee, Jong-Wha, and Phillip Swagel, (1997). “Trade barriers and trade flows across countries and
   industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 79, pp. 372-382.

Linnemann, Hans, (1966). An Econometric Study of International Trade Flows, Amsterdam:
   North-Holland.

Magee, Chris, (2003). “Endogenous Preferential Trade Agreements: An Empirical Analysis,”
   Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, vol. 2(1), article 15.

Maskus, Keith E., John S. Wilson, and Tsunehiro Otsuki, (2000). “Quantifying the Impact of
   Technical Barriers to Trade: A Framework for Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research
   Working Paper 2512.

Maskus, Keith E., Tsunehiro Otsuki, and John S. Wilson, (2004). “The Costs of Complying with
   Foreign Product Standards for Firms in Developing Countries: An Econometric Study,”
   Institute of Behavioral Science Working Paper 2004-0004.
                                               42
Matutes, Carmen, and Pierre Regibeau, (1996). “A Selective Review of the Economics of
   Standardization, Entry Deterrence, Technological Progress and International Competition,”
   European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 12, pp. 183-209.

Michalek, Jan, Jan Hagemejer, Victoria Roshal, Jacek Rothert, Alfred Tovias, Agnieszka
   Pugacewicz, and Mark Vancauteren, (2005). “Comparative analysis of importance of
   technicial barriers to trade (TBT) for Central and Eastern European Countries and
   Mediterranean Partner Countries exports to the EU,” FEMISE Research Programme –
   FEMISE Research No. 22-03.

Moenius, Johannes, (2004). “Information versus Product Adaptation: The Role of Standards in
   Trade,” mimeo. Northwestern University.

Moenius, Johannes, (2006). “International Standardization as a Strategic Tool: Do National
   Standards Hinder or Promote Trade in Electrical Products,” mimeo IEC – Geneva,
   Switzerland.

Park, R. E., (1966). “Estimation with Heteroscedastic Error Terms,” Econometrica, vol. 34, pp.
   888.

Prakash, Aseem, and Matthew Potoski, (2006). “Racing to the Bottom? Trade, Environmental
   Governance, and ISO 14001,” American Journal of Political Science, vol. 50, pp. 350-364.

Prakash, Aseem, and Matthew Potoski, (2007). “Investing Up: FDI and the Cross-Country
   Diffusion of ISO 14001 Management Systems,” International Studies Quarterly, vol. 51, pp.
   723-744.

Preeg, Ernest H., (1998). From Here to Free Trade, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Rauch, James E., (1999). “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of
   International Economics, vol. 48, pp. 7-35.

Rauch, James E., and Victor Trindade, (2002). “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International
   Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84, pp. 116-130.




                                                 43
Rose, Andrew X., (2004). “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?” The American
   Economic Review, vol. 94, pp. 98-114.

Shepherd, Ben, (2007). “Product Standards, Harmonization, and Trade: Evidence from the
   Extensive Margin,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4390.

Santos Silva, J.M.C., and Silvana Tenreyro, (2006). “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, vol. 88, pp. 641-658.

Swann, Peter, Paul Temple, and Mark Shurmer, (1996). “Standards and Trade Performance: The
   UK Experience,” Economic Journal, vol. 106, pp. 1297-1313.

Terlaak, Ann, and Andrew A. King, (2006). “The effect of certification with the ISO 9000 quality
   management standard: A signaling approach,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
   Organization, vol. 60, pp. 579-602.

Terziovski, Milé, Damien Power, and Amrik S. Sohal, (2003). “The longitudinal effects of the
   ISO 9000 certification process on business performance,” Production, Manufacturing and
   Logistics, vol. 146, pp. 580-595.

Tinbergen, Jan, (1962). Shaping the World Economy, New York: The Twentieth Century Fund.

Trefler, Daniel, (1993). “Trade liberalization and the theory of endogenous protection: an
   econometric study of U.S. import policy,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, pp. 138-
   160.

Vancauteren, Marc, and Daniel Weiserbs, (2005). “Intra-European trade of Manufacturing
   Goods: an Extension of the Gravity Model,” Université Catholique de Louvain – Discussion
   Paper 26.

Vastag, Gyula, (2004). “Revisiting ISO 14000 Diffusion: A New ‘Look’ at the Drivers of
   Certification,” Production and Operations Management, vol. 13, pp. 260-267.

Wooldridge Jeffrey M., (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
   Cambridge and London: the MIT Press.



                                                44
Table 1
List of countries in our sample and number of ISO 9000 certifications

                  ISO 9000 certifications                          ISO 9000 certifications
Country/Region                                  Country/Region
                  per mln inhab.     count                         per mln inhab.     count
Italy                     1672.65     98028      Denmark                  225.26     1219
Switzerland               1669.20     12413      Malaysia                 222.04     5695
Hungary                   1533.15     15464      Lithuania                173.39      591
Singapore                 1447.10      6282      Mauritius                163.28      202
Czech Republic            1245.25     12743      Turkey                   151.67    10929
Israel                    1106.07      7657      United States            149.31    44270
Spain                     1093.27     47445      Bahrain                  149.01      107
Slovenia                  1057.24      2114      Iceland                  148.27       43
Australia                  829.57     16922      Uruguay                  144.90      478
UK                         757.36     45612      Argentina                143.42     5556
Malta                      750.93       302      China                    110.21   143823
Cyprus                     700.71       530      Colombia                 109.62     4926
Netherlands                561.34      9160      Oman                     106.90      267
Portugal                   551.78      5820      Chile                     69.04     1124
Sweden                     525.82      4744      Belarus                   67.41      658
New Zealand                525.17      2170      South Africa              66.54     3119
Hong Kong                  506.37      3449      Jordan                    54.33      293
Ireland                    494.34      2055      Thailand                  51.30     3231
Germany                    482.81     39816      Trinidad & Tob.           49.10       64
Belgium                    459.12      4810      Brazil                    45.69     8533
Japan                      420.75     53771      Iran                      44.74     3090
Austria                    409.19      3368      Barbados                  41.11       11
Canada                     386.98     12503      Tunisia                   37.99      380
Slovakia                   380.73      2050      Russia                    34.11     4883
Finland                    365.03      1914      Costa Rica                31.66      136
Estonia                    364.01       489      St. Lucia                 30.34        4
France                     356.50     24441      Mexico                    28.04     2890
Luxembourg                 324.06       147      Panama                    25.07       80
Norway                     305.19      1410      Paraguay                  24.92      146
Greece                     293.23      3255      India                     22.52    24660
Korea                      290.59     14033      Kazakhstan                21.19      320
Bulgaria                   286.95      2220      Indonesia                 18.45     4068
Croatia                    286.72      1273      Egypt                     18.22     1326
Romania                    281.87      6097      Philippines               16.73     1414
Poland                     254.65      9718      Venezuela                 16.48      437
Latvia                     244.29       561      Belize                    13.71        3
Notes: The ISO certifications as of December 2005
Sources: ISO (2006) and World Bank’s WDI



                                                 45
Table 1 (cont.)
List of countries in our sample and number of ISO 9000 certifications

                  ISO 9000 certifications                        ISO 9000 certifications
Country/Region                                 Country/Region
                  per mln inhab.     count                       per mln inhab.     count
Morocco                     13.40       403      Bangladesh               3.72       570
Pakistan                    12.93      2013      Senegal                  3.48        40
Botswana                    12.53        22      Honduras                 3.37        22
Sri Lanka                   12.46       244      Guatemala                2.44        30
Guyana                      12.17         8      Dominican Rep            2.43        22
Bolivia                     11.44       104      Zambia                   1.92        21
Namibia                     11.39        22      Sudan                    0.89        32
Ecuador                     10.80       140      Cameroon                 0.79        13
Zimbabwe                     9.91       129      Malawi                   0.68         8
Peru                         7.11       193
Notes: The ISO certifications as of December 2005
Sources: ISO (2006) and World Bank’s WDI




                                                46
Table 2
Variable description and summary statistics

Variable     Definition and Source                   Obs.    Mean     Std. dev.   Min     Max
Expijt       Exports from country i to country j     17085   7.559    49.04       0.000   2399
             in billions of 2000 US$ (UN’s
             Comtrade)
GDPit        GDP of country i in billions of 2000    17085   356.45   1073.10     0.57    9760
             US$ (World Bank’s WDI)
GDPjt        GDP of country j in billions of 2000    17085   345.42   1038.42     0.57    9760
             US$ (World Bank’s WDI)
POPit        Population of country i in millions     17085   58.67    173.83      0.14    1263
             (World Bank’s WDI)
POPjt        Population of country j in millions     17085   57.18    167.16      0.14    1263
             (World Bank’s WDI)
ISO9000it    Number of ISO 9000 certifications       17085   214.97   327.74      0.008   1672.7
             in country i per mln. inhabitants
             (ISO 2002, 2006)
ISO9000jt    Number of ISO 9000 certifications       17085   202.89   323.61      0.008   1672.7
             in country j per mln. inhabitants
             (ISO 2002, 2006)
Infrit       Index of country i's infrastructure     17085   0.622    0.697       0.006   5.40
             (World Bank’s WDI)
Infrjt       Index of country j's infrastructure     17085   0.610    0.709       0.006   5.40
             (World Bank’s WDI)
Distanceij   Great-circle distance between           17085   4639.9   2890.6      62.3    12351.2
             country i and country j (Rose 2004)
FTAijt       Existence of free trade agreement       17085   0.215    0.411       0       1
             between home and host nation
             (Bergstrand’s Database on
             Economic Integration Agreements)
ISO14000it   Number of ISO 14000 certifications      16938   22.25    48.67       0.001   408.1
             in country i per mln. inhabitants
             (ISO 2002, 2006)
ISO14000jt   Number of ISO 14000 certifications      16917   21.39    48.09       0.001   408.1
             in country i per mln. inhabitants
             (ISO 2002, 2006)




                                                    47
Table 3
Gravity equation for exports: OLS Estimation results

Dependent variable: ln Exportsijt
Independent variables                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
       Base gravity:
Home-Nation GDPit                   0.81***     1.79***      1.79***      1.09***      1.82***      1.82***
                                    (0.03)      (0.16)       (0.17)       (0.03)       (0.16)       (0.17)
Host-Nation GDPjt                   0.80***     1.83***      1.87***      0.93***      1.85***      1.90***
                                    (0.03)      (0.13)       (0.14)       (0.03)       (0.13)       (0.14)
Home-Nation POPit                   0.37***     -1.42***     -1.16***     0.21***      -1.36***     -1.14***
                                    (0.03)      (0.29)       (0.31)       (0.03)       (0.28)       (0.30)
Host-Nation POPjt                   0.14***     -0.84***     -0.93***     0.02         -0.80***     -0.93***
                                    (0.03)      (0.29)       (0.29)       (0.03)       (0.27)       (0.28)
       ISO 9000:
Home-Nation ISO9000it               0.21***     0.07***      0.05***      0.17***      0.08***      0.06***
                                    (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.02)
Host-Nation ISO9000jt               0.03*       0.01         0.00         0.04***      0.02         0.01
                                    (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.01)
ISO9000it * ISO9000jt               0.01**      0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00         0.01*
                                    (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.004)
     Other controls:
Home-Nation Infrit                  0.15***     0.02         0.04         0.25***      0.03         0.04
                                    (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.025)
Host-Nation Infrjt                  0.15***     -0.02        -0.04        0.20***      -0.02        -0.04
                                    (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.02)
Distanceijt                         -1.21***                              -1.33***
                                    (0.03)                                (0.03)
FTAijt                              0.28***     0.18***      0.20***      0.61***      0.17***      0.15***
                                    (0.06)      (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.06)
Year dummies                        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Country-pair specific effects       -           FE           FD           -            FE           FD
Multilateral resistance terms       -           -            -            Yes          Yes          Yes
Heteroscedasticity testa            1.65***     2.13***      1.99         1.62***      2.13***      1.99
Observations                        17085       16101        9750         17085        16101        9750
Notes: All variables except dummy variables are in logarithms.
***
    denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level; cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses.
a
  The significance level in the heteroscedasticity test reflects statistical difference from 2 (and not 0).




                                                           48
Table 4
Gravity equation for exports: IV Estimation results

Dependent variable: ln Exportsijt
Independent variables                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
       Base gravity:
Home-Nation GDPit                   0.78***     1.83***      1.69***      1.06***      1.99***      1.83***
                                    (0.07)      (0.17)       (0.18)       (0.08)       (0.17)       (0.18)
Host-Nation GDPjt                   0.93***     1.82***      1.87***      0.94***      1.95***      1.99***
                                    (0.06)      (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.06)       (0.14)       (0.14)
Home-Nation POPit                   0.39***     -1.01***     -0.72**      0.23***      -1.38***     -1.17***
                                    (0.06)      (0.31)       (0.33)       (0.07)       (0.32)       (0.34)
Host-Nation POPjt                   0.02        -1.02***     -0.84***     0.01         -1.27***     -1.17***
                                    (0.06)      (0.30)       (0.30)       (0.06)       (0.29)       (0.30)
       ISO 9000:
Home-Nation ISO9000it               0.20***     0.10***      0.08**       0.23***      0.10**       0.11***
                                    (0.06)      (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.07)       (0.04)       (0.04)
Host-Nation ISO9000jt               -0.15***    -0.00        0.002        0.05         0.0002       0.04
                                    (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.01)       (0.04)
ISO9000it * ISO9000jt               0.03***     0.003        0.01***      0.02*        0.05***      0.04***
                                    (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.01)       (0.04)       (0.01)
     Other controls:
Home-Nation Infrit                  0.10**      -0.03        -0.00        0.23***      0.01         0.02
                                    (0.05)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.03)
Host-Nation Infrjt                  0.20***     -0.02        -0.06*       0.21***      0.01         -0.049
                                    (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.033)
Distanceijt                         -1.20***                              -1.31***
                                    (0.03)                                (0.03)
FTAijt                              0.23***     0.16***      0.16***      0.58***      0.05         0.04
                                    (0.06)      (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.06)
Year dummies                        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Country-pair specific effects       -           FE           FD           -            FE           FD
Multilateral resistance terms       -           -            -            Yes          Yes          Yes
Heteroscedasticity testa            1.64***     2.12***      2.09         1.62***      2.13***      2.09
Observations                        19771       16098        9716         16771        16098        9716
Notes: All variables except dummy variables are in logarithms.
***
    denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level; cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses.
a
  The significance level in the heteroscedasticity test reflects statistical difference from 2 (and not 0).




                                                           49
Table 5
Average export elasticities with respect to ISO 9000 for all nations in the sample (based on
results from Regression 6 in Table 4)

Country/Region       Export Elasticity w.r.t.:        Country/Region      Export Elasticity w.r.t.:
                  Home-           Host-                                Home-           Host-
                  Nation          Nation                               Nation          Nation
                  Diffusion       Diffusion                            Diffusion       Diffusion
U.K.              0.074           0.130               Croatia          0.053           0.017
Switzerland       0.056           0.128               Mauritius        0.053           0.015
Australia         0.058           0.126               Estonia          0.053           0.012
Singapore         0.053           0.125               Poland           0.055           0.008
Ireland           0.053           0.114               Turkey           0.056           0.005
New Zealand       0.053           0.111               Uruguay          0.054           0.003
Netherlands       0.058           0.109               Oman             0.054           0.002
Israel            0.054           0.106               Romania          0.054           0.000
Italy             0.068           0.102               Barbados         0.045           0.000
Sweden            0.056           0.091               Argentina        0.057           -0.002
Belgium           0.056           0.090               Brazil           0.061           -0.011
Austria           0.055           0.089               Trinidad&Tob.    0.054           -0.014
Denmark           0.055           0.087               Lithuania        0.054           -0.015
Germany           0.078           0.087               St. Lucia        0.054           -0.016
Hong Kong         0.055           0.087               Thailand         0.055           -0.019
Slovenia          0.053           0.086               Bulgaria         0.054           -0.022
Norway            0.055           0.086               China            0.068           -0.023
Hungary           0.053           0.086               Latvia           0.054           -0.023
Finland           0.054           0.083               Jordan           0.054           -0.027
Spain             0.061           0.079               Colombia         0.055           -0.031
Luxembourg        0.053           0.079               Chile            0.055           -0.034
Malta             0.052           0.078               Mexico           0.060           -0.037
France            0.071           0.076               Tunisia          0.054           -0.038
Czech Republic    0.053           0.074               Venezuela        0.055           -0.041
Canada            0.062           0.071               Namibia          0.054           -0.046
Cyprus            0.053           0.063               Costa Rica       0.054           -0.048
Portugal          0.054           0.063               Panama           0.054           -0.052
Japan             0.108           0.056               Philippines      0.055           -0.054
Greece            0.055           0.051               Belize           0.054           -0.057
Korea             0.060           0.051               Zimbabwe         0.054           -0.063
Malaysia          0.054           0.044               India            0.059           -0.065
Iceland           0.053           0.043               Guyana           0.054           -0.065
United States     0.146           0.040               Indonesia        0.056           -0.068
Slovakia          0.053           0.036               Egypt            0.055           -0.070
South Africa      0.055           0.027               Russia           0.057           -0.081
Bahrain           0.053           0.022               Belarus          0.054           -0.081


                                                 50
Table 5 (cont.)
Average export elasticities with respect to ISO 9000 for all nations in the sample (based on
results from Regression 6 in Table 4)

Country/Region       Export Elasticity w.r.t.:            Country/Region      Export Elasticity w.r.t.:
                  Home-           Host-                                    Home-           Host-
                  Nation          Nation                                   Nation          Nation
                  Diffusion       Diffusion                                Diffusion       Diffusion
Botswana          0.054           -0.083                  Honduras         0.055           -0.137
Paraguay          0.054           -0.085                  Zambia           0.055           -0.139
Sri Lanka         0.054           -0.088                  Senegal          0.055           -0.141
Morocco           0.055           -0.093                  Kazakhstan       0.055           -0.144
Iran              0.055           -0.093                  Guatemala        0.055           -0.148
Ecuador           0.055           -0.094                  Cameroon         0.055           -0.171
Peru              0.055           -0.095                  Malawi           0.055           -0.184
Bolivia           0.055           -0.110                  Bangladesh       0.056           -0.193
Pakistan          0.055           -0.111                  Sudan            0.056           -0.207
Dominican Rep     0.055           -0.122




Table 6
Summary statistics of export elasticities with respect to ISO 9000 across all country-pairs in the
sample (based on results from Regression 6 in Table 4)

                                    Obs.         Mean      Std. dev.     Min         Max
Home-Nation       Partial effect   9671          0.270      0.081      -0.0002       0.392
Diffusion         Total effect     9671          0.075      0.079       -0.192       0.247
Host-Nation       Partial effect   9692          0.219      0.073       -0.063       0.329
Diffusion         Total effect     9692          0.024      0.071       -0.255       0.183




                                                     51
Figure 1
Elasticity of exports with respect to home-nation diffusion (based on results from Regression 6 in
Table 4)   .5
           .4
           .3
           .2
           .1
  Elasticity
           0
           -.1
           -.2
           -.3
           -.4
           -.5




                 -5    -3              -1              1            3              5              7
                                             log(host-nation ISO 9000)

                            Partial Effect                        Total Effect
                            Partial Effect: 90% Lower Bound       Total Effect: 90% Lower Bound
                            Partial Effect: 90% Upper Bound       Total Effect: 90% Upper Bound




                                                     52
Figure 2
Elasticity of exports with respect to host-nation diffusion (based on results from Regression 6 in
Table 4)   .5
           .4
           .3
           .2
           .1
  Elasticity
           0
           -.1
           -.2
           -.3
           -.4
           -.5




                 -5    -3              -1              1           3              5              7
                                             log(home-nation ISO 9000)

                            Partial Effect                       Total Effect
                            Partial Effect: 90% Lower Bound      Total Effect: 90% Lower Bound
                            Partial Effect: 90% Upper Bound      Total Effect: 90% Upper Bound




                                                     53
Appendix

       In order to fully factor the role of ISO 9000 in international trade we introduce the theory-
driven multilateral resistance (MR) terms in our gravity model (1) – (2) following Baier and
Bergstrand (2009). In particular, we define:

MRISO9000 ijt    kt lnISO9000 it  lnISO9000 kt     mt lnISO9000 mt  lnISO9000 jt 
                       k                                              m
                                                                                                     (3)
                        kt mt lnISO9000 mt  lnISO9000 kt ,
                        k   m


                GDPit
where  it            is the fraction of country i’s GDP in the world GDP, and where m, k and n
                GDPnt
                 n

allow for convenient expression. The MR terms for the distance and the FTA variables are
defined analogously. These three MR terms (distance, FTA presence, and common-language) are
included in regression 3 (table 3 and table 4) and their coefficients are restricted to respectively
equal  1 , 2 , and  3 ; i.e., they have identical but oppositely-signed coefficient-estimates as
compared to the coefficient estimates for the three bilateral trade cost measures defined in
equation (2).

       With the entry of these new variables in to regression 3, the coefficients estimates on the
bilateral trade cost measures (distance, FTA and ISO 9000 common-language) can thus be
interpreted as pure partial effects. We calculate the total effects as follows:

    ln Expijt                                                MRISOijt
                       ˆ1  ˆ3 ln ISO9000 jt   ˆ3                         ,                  (4)
 lnISO9000 it                                             lnISO9000 it 

    ln Expijt                                                 MRISOijt
                       ˆ 2  ˆ3 ln ISO9000 it   ˆ3                        .                  (5)
 ln ISO9000 jt                                            ln ISO9000 jt 

The total effects calculated in this fashion are shown in tables 5 and 6, as well as in figures 1 and
2. We do not compute the total effects for distance and FTA presence, as these constructs are not
the main focus of this paper. They could, however, be calculated analogously.




                                                              54
Table A1. First-stage estimation results
                  Equation:       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                              Home-         Host-        ISO9000it Home-           Host-        ISO9000it
        Dependent variable: Nation          Nation       *            Nation       Nation       *
                              ISO9000it ISO9000jt ISO9000jt ISO9000it ISO9000jt ISO9000jt
Home-Nation GDPit             0.795*** -0.038** 1.097*** 0.837*** -0.012                        -1.047***
                              (0.019)       (0.015)      (0.103)      (0.019)      (0.015)      (0.103)
Host-Nation GDPjt             -0.044*** 0.884*** 1.611*** -0.020                   0.900*** -1.005***
                              (0.014)       (0.021)      (0.104)      (0.014)      (0.020)      (0.095)
Home-Nation POPit             -0.643*** 0.042**          -0.618*** -0.668*** 0.022              1.314***
                              (0.021)       (0.017)      (0.111)      (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.113)
Host-Nation POPjt             0.037**       -0.718*** -1.130*** 0.015              -0.735*** 1.101***
                              (0.016)       (0.023)      (0.114)      (0.016)      (0.023)      (0.105)
Home-Nation Infrit            0.580*** 0.009             2.059*** 0.572*** -0.002               -0.145
                              (0.021)       (0.016)      (0.112)      (0.021)      (0.016)      (0.116)
Host-Nation Infrjt            0.005         0.487*** 1.680*** -0.006               0.476*** -0.199*
                              (0.014)       (0.024)      (0.118)      (0.014)      (0.024)      (0.109)
Distanceijt                   -0.032** -0.027*           -0.508*** -0.206*** -0.120*** 0.181**
                              (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.082)      (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.071)
FTAijt                        0.093*** 0.138*** 2.163*** -0.264*** -0.148*** 3.118***
                              (0.028)       (0.029)      (0.170)      (0.029)      (0.030)      (0.146)
Home-Nation ISO14000it        0.200*** 0.023*** 1.238*** 0.192*** 0.021*** -0.082*
                              (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.044)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.043)
Host-Nation ISO14000jt        0.017**       0.231*** 1.289*** 0.012*               0.228*** -0.094**
                              (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.043)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.041)
ISO14000it * ISO14000jt       -0.009*** -0.013*** 0.498*** 0.003                   0.007*** 0.388***
                              (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.010)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.012)
Year dummies                  Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Country-pair fixed effects -                -            -            -            -            -
Multilateral resistance       -             -            -            Yes          Yes          Yes
terms
Observations                  16771         16771        16771        16771        16771        16771
F-statistics                  272.17*** 326.63*** 1638.3*** 252.15*** 330.70*** 386.09***
Notes: All variables except dummy variables are in logarithms.
***
    denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level; cluster-robust standard errors in
parentheses.




                                                     55
