NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SKILL PREMIUM AND TRADE PUZZLES:
A SOLUTION LINKING PRODUCTION AND PREFERENCES
Justin Caron
Thibault Fally
James R. Markusen
Working Paper 18131
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18131

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We thank Peter Egger, Lionel Fontanie, Gordon Hanson, Wolfgang Keller, Keith Maskus, Tobias
Seidel and seminar participants at the Paris School of Economics, ETH Zurich, UC San Diego and
the University of Colorado-Boulder for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Justin Caron, Thibault Fally, and James R. Markusen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Skill Premium and Trade Puzzles: a Solution Linking Production and Preferences
Justin Caron, Thibault Fally, and James R. Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 18131
June 2012
JEL No. F10,F14
ABSTRACT
International trade theory is a general-equilibrium discipline, yet most of the standard portfolio of
research focuses on the production side of general equilibrium. In addition, we do not have a good
understanding of the relationship between characteristics of goods in production and characteristics
of preferences. This paper conducts an empirical investigation into the relationship between a good's
factor intensity in production and its income elasticity of demand in consumption. In particular, we
find a strong and significant positive relationship between skilled-labor intensity in production and
income elasticity of demand for several types of preferences, with and without accounting for trade
costs and differences in prices. Counter-factual simulations yield a number of results. We can explain
about half of “missing trade”, and show an important role for per-capita income in understanding trade/GDP
ratios, the choice of trading partners, and the composition of trade. Furthermore, an equal rise in productivity
in all sectors in all countries leads to a rising skill premium in all countries, with particularly large
increases in developing countries.

Justin Caron
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
caronj@ethz.ch
Thibault Fally
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
256 UCB
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0256
USA
Thibault.Fally@colorado.edu

James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu

1

Introduction

International trade theory is a general-equilibrium discipline. Yet it is probably fair to suggest that most of the standard portfolio of research focuses on the production side of general
equilibrium. Price elasticities of demand do play a role in oligopoly models and, of course, a
preference for diversity is important in all models, not just monopolistic competition. Income
elasticities of demand are, however, generally assumed to be either one (homothetic preferences) or zero (so-called quasi-homothetic preferences used in oligopoly models). The emphasis
on non-homothetic preferences and the role of non-unitary income elasticities of demand that
were so crucial in the work of Linder (1961) for example, largely disappeared from trade theory
over the last few decades.
Beyond a lack of focus on the demand side of general equilibrium, we have sharply limited
set of theoretical and empirical results on possible relationships between the demand and supply
sides of general equilibrium; that is, not much is understood about whether certain characteristics of goods in production are correlated with other characteristics of preferences and demand.
The purpose and focus of our paper is to explore such a relationship empirically. In particular,
we explore a systematic relationship between factor intensities of goods in production and their
corresponding income elasticities of demand in consumption. If such a relationship does exist,
this can contribute to understanding a number of empirical puzzles in trade as suggested by
Markusen (2011). These puzzles include: i) the mystery of the missing trade, ii) a home bias in
consumption, iii) larger trade volumes among rich countries, and iv) a growing skill premium
with rising per-capita income.
We provide a discussion of alternative representations of non-homothetic preferences and
equations for the share of total expenditures across goods: (1) the linear expenditure system, derived from Stone-Geary preferences, (2) Deaton and Muellbauer’s almost ideal demand
system (AIDS), and (3) what we will term “constant relative income elasticity” (CRIE) preferences, recently used in Fieler (2011). While we present estimated income elasticities for all
three, we focus on the latter in the presentation of our benchmark model. We carefully account
for supply-side effects, which could potentially bias estimates of income elasticities. If rich
countries tend to have a comparative advantage in particular industries, consumption in these
industries might be larger (goods available at lower prices) and estimates of income elasticities
in these industries might be upward-biased if we do not control for such patterns of comparative
advantage. We provide a two-step estimation strategy by first estimating gravity equations in
each industry and then using the estimated parameters to structurally control for supply-side
effects in a second step.1 While the estimation of models with non-homothetic preferences has
1

As a robustness check, we use actual prices data from the International Comparison Program (ICP).

2

been considered as challenging in the past, our method is actually quite simple to implement as
it does not rely on actual price data. Our two-step empirical strategy is inspired from Redding
and Venables (2004) and would be suitable for alternative standard frameworks.2
Our data is from the GTAP7 data set. It comprises 94 countries with a wide range of income
levels, 56 broad sectors including manufacturing and services, and 5 factors of production:
skilled labor, unskilled labor, capital, land, and other natural resources. This is an excellent
harmonized data set for our purposes, since it includes production, expenditure and trade data,
and input-output tables. However, the broad categories of goods and services make it not very
suitable for discussing issues related to product quality and within-industry heterogeneity.
Our results show that the income elasticity of demand varies largely across industries.
Moreover, income elasticities of demand are significantly related in both economic and statistical
terms to the skill intensity of a sector, with a correlation well over 60%. Accounting for trade
costs and supply-side characteristics reduces this estimated correlation but it remains larger
than 40% and highly statistically significant. The relationship to capital intensity is positive
but much weaker in economic terms and not statistically significant, consistent with Reimer
and Hertel (2010), while the relationship to natural-resource intensity is negative.
The results of the estimation are then used to assess the role of non-homotheticity in explaining emrpirical trade puzzles mentioned above and examine counter-factuals on simulations
of the estimated general-equilibrium system of equations and inequalities. In addition to the
income-elasticity / factor-intensity relationship, results include the following.
First, we can explain at least one third of the “missing trade” puzzle in the HeckscherOhlin-Vanek framework. A systematic relationship between income elasticity of demand and
skill intensity in production generates a strong correlation between consumption patterns and
specialization in production. The correlation between supply and demand is 86% in the data.
While trade costs can explain about a fourth of this correlation, non-homotheticity is even more
important quantitatively. In terms of factor content, similar results show that non-homothetic
preferences can explain a large fraction of “missing trade” in factor services. By combining
non-homothetic preferences with trade costs, the variance of predicted factor content of trade
is reduced by more than 80% compared to the standard Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek framework.
Second, per-capita income helps us understand the choice of trading partners, in particular
the higher share of rich countries’ trade with rich-country partners. In our framework, percapita income contributes to understanding the composition of consumption across industries
which itself has large effects on trade. On aggregate, this implies an important role for per2

Our model is based on Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (forthcoming) combined with non-homothetic
preferences such as in Fieler (2011). Our empirical strategy would also be consistent with alternative frameworks
based on Dixit-Stiglitz-Krugman model, as in Redding and Venables (2004), or Chaney (2008).

3

capita income in understanding observed trade-to-GDP ratios.
Finally, we conduct general-equilibrium simulations3 in which we raise the productivity of
all countries by 1% and 10%. As speculated on in Markusen (2011), this shifts demand toward
higher income-elasticity goods, which are on average skilled-labor intensive. The counter-factual
generates a rising skill premium (wage inequality) in all countries, but particularly in developing
countries.
Literature
Early papers exploring the factor-intensity / income-elasticity relationship are Markusen (1986),
Hunter and Markusen (1989), Hunter (1991), and Bergstrand (1990). A particular focus of this
literature is on the volume of trade in aggregate and among sets of countries, and its relationship
to a world of identical and homothetic preferences as generally assumed in traditional trade
theory. A general conclusion of this research was that non-homotheticity reduces trade volumes
among countries with different endowments and per-capita income levels, though trade among
high-income countries can increase. Matsuyama (2000) uses a competitive Ricardian model to
arrive at a similar prediction.
There has been a renewed interest in the role of preferences in explaining trade volumes recently, including Reimer and Hertel (2010), Fieler (2011), Bernasconi (2009), Martinez-Larzoso
and Vollmer (2010), Simonovska (2010), and Cassing and Nishioka (2011).
Previous papers have emphasized the role of consumption patterns in explaining part of
the “missing trade” puzzle but our results present several contributions. In a recent paper,
Cassing and Nishioka (2011) show that allowing for richer consumption patterns play a more
important role than allowing for heterogeneous production techniques. They do not however
specifically estimate non-homothetic preferences to examine how much of the missing trade
puzzle can actually be attributed to non-homotheticity. Both Cassing and Nishioka (2010)
and Reimer and Hertel (2010) put an emphasis on capital intensity, which is positively but
not strongly correlated with income elasticity of demand, but do not differentiate skilled vs.
unskilled labor and thus underestimate the role of identical and non-homothetic preferences in
explaining missing factor content trade.4
Closest to our paper is Fieler (2011). She estimates demand- and supply-side characteristics
by combining a similar preference structure and gravity equations. However, she only uses
3

Our GAMS program simulates bilateral trade, consumption and factor reward in general equilibrium for all
countries and sectors available in our estimation sample. We also provide an analytical approximation of the
skill-premium-to-productivity elasticity expressed as a simple function of income elasticities and skill intensities.
4
Among other papers, most of the attention has been put on the home bias or the border effect (e.g. Trefler,
1995). Here, we directly estimate the border effect, or equivalently a home bias in consumption, in the first-step
gravity equation for each industry and control for it to compare homothetic and non-homothetic preferences.

4

aggregate trade flows between countries in her estimation and does not examine patterns of
consumption and trade across industries. Moreover, the specific structure of her model implies
that countries with higher average productivity have a comparative advantage in the production
of goods where the elasticity of trade flows to trade costs is higher (low-theta goods). On the
contrary, our estimation strategy allows and controls for any pattern of comparative advantage5 .
We emphasize the role for non-homothetic preferences compared to homothetic preferences
while keeping the same structure of comparative advantage and trade-cost elasticities on the
supply side.
To our knowledge, our paper is the first to investigate a demand-side explanation for the
rising skill-premium. Previous research has emphasized the role of skill-biased technological
change (Autor et al, 1998), outsourcing and competition from low-wage countries (Feenstra
and Hanson, 1999). We find that, quantitatively, productivity growth combined with nonhomothetic preferences has a comparable if not larger impact on the relative demand for skilled
labor.
There are also certainly some topic areas where per-capita income plays a key role. One is
a large and growing literature on product quality where per-capita income clearly matters: if a
consumer is to buy one unit of a good, consumers with higher incomes buy higher quality goods.
In addition, the distribution of income within a country matters, and a fairly general result is
that higher inequality leads to a higher aggregate demand for high-quality products. We view
this literature as important and most welcome. Note that within-industry reallocations would
only reinforce the mechanisms described in our model. If high-quality goods are associated
with both higher income elasticities and stronger skill intensity, the same mechanisms would
apply for within-industry reallocations as for the between-industry reallocations described in
our paper. Concerning within-country inequalities, we find very similar results – if not stronger
– when taking into account and use data on different deciles and quintiles of within-country
income distributions.

2

Theoretical framework

2.1

Model set-up

Demand
There are several industries, indexed by k. Each industry corresponds to a continuum of
product varieties indexed by jk ∈ [0, 1]. Preferences take the form:
5

See footnote 3 in Section 2.1 of our paper for more details.

5

U=

X

σk −1
σk

α1,k Qk

k

where α1,k is a constant (for each industry k) and Qk is a CES aggregate:
Z 1

Qk =

jk =0

q(jk )

ηk −1
ηk

k
 η η−1

djk

k

Preferences are identical across countries, but non-homothetic as long as σk varies across
industries. Homotheticity requires σk = σ in which case we are back to traditional CES
preferences.
These preferences are used in Fieler (2011), with early analyses and applications found in
Hanoch (1975) and Chao et al (1982). To the best of our knowledge, there is no common name
attached to these preferences, so we will refer to them as constant relative income elasticity
(CRIE) tastes. As shown in Fieler (2011) and below, the ratio of income elasticities of demand
between goods i and j is given by σi /σj , which is constant.6
R



1

The CES price index of goods from industry k in country n is Pnk = 01 pnk (jk )1−ηk djk 1−ηk
Given this price index, individual expenditures (Pnk Qnk ) in country n for goods in industry k
equal:
1−σk
k
xnk = λ−σ
n α2,k (Pnk )

(1)

where λn is the lagrangian associated with the budget countraint of individuals in country
)σk . The lagrangian λn is determined by the budget constraint: total
n, and α2,k = (α1,k σkσ−1
k
expenses must equal total income. In general there is no analytical expression for λn .
The income elasticity of demand for goods industry k in country n equals:
P

xnk0
k0 σk0 xnk0

εnk = σk . P

k0

(2)

In particular, income elasticity for good 1 relative to income elasticity for good 2 equals the
ratio σσ12 and is constant across countries. Note that CRIE preferences precludes any inferior
good: the income elasticity of demand is always positive for any good.
6

A noteworthy difference with Fieler (2010) is in the terminology. While her elasticity of substitution (στ )
vary according to the “type” of good τ , our elasticities vary depending on the industry k. This difference is
motivated by out empirical objectives. Fieler (2011) uses aggregate data while we examine disaggregated trade
and expenditure data by industry. Since we are interested in differences in income elasticities across sectors,
we treat instead each “type” as a sector. Instead of τ we denote sectors by k. Another small difference is that
Fieler (2011) implicitly assumes that σk is equal to the elasticity of substitution ηk between varieties of the
same sector, but this restriction is not needed here.

6

Another important feature of income elasticities is that they decrease with income. A larger
income induces a larger fraction of expenditures in high-σk industries, Hence, the consumptionweighted average of σk is larger (denominator in expression 2 above) which yields lower income
elasticities.
Production
We assume that factors of production are perfectly mobile across sectors but immobile across
countries. We denote by wf n the price of factor f in country n.
We assume a Cobb-Douglas production function for each sector with constant returns to
scale. Factor intensities are denoted by βf k and vary across industries but are assumed to
be common across countries. Total factor productivity zik (jk ) varies by country, industry and
variety.
As common in the trade literature, we assume iceberg transport costs dnik > 1 from country
i to country n in sector k. The unit cost of supplying variety jk to country n from country i
equals:
dnik Y
(wf i )βf k
pnik (jk ) =
zik (jk ) f
There is perfect competition for the supply of each variety jk . Hence, the price of variety
jk in country n in industry k equals:
pnk (jk ) = min{pnik (jk )}
i

We follow Eaton and Kortum (2002) and related papers and assume that productivity is a
random variable with a Frechet distribution. This setting generates gravity within each sector.
Productivity is independently drawn in each country i and industry k, with a cumulative
distribution:
h
i
Fik (z) = exp −(z/zik )−θk
where zik is a productivity shifter reflecting average TFP of country i in sector k. As in Eaton
and Kortum (2002), θk is related to the inverse of productivity dispersion across varieties within
each sector k. Note that we also assume θk > ηk − 1 to insure a well-defined CES price index
within each industry (Eaton and Kortum, 2002).
We allow the dispersion parameter θk to vary across industries. In keeping with Costinot,
Donaldson and Komunjer (2010), we also allow the shift parameter zik to vary across exporters
θk
and industries. This relaxes a key assumption made by Fieler (2011) that zik
is constant
across industries, allowing more flexibility on the supply side and controlling for Ricardian

7

comparative advantage forces.7
Endowments
Each country is populated by a number Li of individuals. The total supply of factor f is fixed
in each country and denoted by Fif .
As a first approximation, each person is endowed by Fif /Li units of factor Ff i . This implies
that there is no within-country income inequality. We relax this assumption in section (5.4)
and examine how within-country income inequalities affect our estimates.

2.2

Equilibrium

A list of notations and variables is available in the appendix.
Equilibrium is defined by the following equations. On the demand side, total expenditures
Xnk of country n for sector k simply equals population Ln times individual expenditures as
shown in (1). This gives:
Xnk = Ln (λn )−σk α2,k (Pnk )1−σk

(3)

where λn is the lagrangian associated with the budget constraint. To determine λn , we thus
need to take the budget constraint into account:
Ln en =

X

Xnk

(4)

k

On the supply side, each industry mimics an Eaton and Kortum (2002) economy. In particular, given the Frechet distribution, we obtain a gravity equation for each industry. We folllow
Eaton and Kortum (2002) notations, with the addition of industry subscripts. By denoting
Xnik the value of trade from country i to country n, we obtain a gravity equation:
Xnik =

Sik (dnik )−θk
Xnk
Φnk

(5)

Here, Sik , which we call the “supplier fixed effect” is inversely related to the cost of production
in country i and industry k. It depends on the total factor productivity parameter zik , factor
prices and factor intensities:
θk
By assuming that Ti = zik
is constant across industries within each country i, Fieler (2011) imposes more
productive countries to have a comparative advantage in the production of high-θ goods. In other words, since
θ governs the elasticity of trade to trade costs, Fieler (2011) thus imposes rich countries to have a comparative
advantage in goods that can be more easily traded. We do not rely on this assumption.
7

8

θk
Sik = zik

Y

(wf i )βf k

−θk

(6)

f

The parameter θk is inversely related to the dispersion of productivity within sectors, which
means that differences in productivity and factor prices across countries have a stronger impact
on trade flows in sectors with higher θk . In turn, we define Φnk as the sum of exporter fixed
effects deflated by trade costs. Φnk plays the same role as the “multilateral trade resistance
index” as in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003):
Φnk =

X

Sik (dnik )−θk

(7)

i

The Φnk is actually cosely related to the price index, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002). We
have:
− 1
Pnk = α3,k (Φnk ) θk
(8)
h 

i

1

ηk −1
k
and α3,k = Γ θk +1−η
(Γ denotes the gamma function)
θk
Finally, two other market clearing conditions are required to pin down factor prices and
income. Given the Cobb-Douglas production function, total income from a particular factor
equals the sum of total production weighted by the factor intensity coefficient βf k . With factor
supply Ff i and factor price wf i for factor f in country i, factor market clearing implies:

Ff i wf i =

X

βf k Xnik

(9)

n,k

In turn, per-capita income is determined by:
Li ei =

X

Ff i wf i

(10)

f

By Walras’ Law, trade is balanced at equilibrium.

2.3
2.3.1

Implications: the role of non-homothetic preferences
Trade patterns

While preferences are identical across countries, large differences in income per capita can result
in large differences in consumption patterns when preferences are non-homothetic. In this
section, we illustrate how non-homotheticity affects trade patterns when there is a systematic
relationship between preference parameters and characteristics of the supply side, e.g. intensity
in skilled labor. This is supported by our empirical analysis, showing in particular that there is a

9

positive correlation across sectors between skill intensity (parameter βf k ) and income elasticity
(proportional to σk ).
Let’s first consider the case with no trade cost (assuming dnik = 1). In this case, the share
of consumption corresponding to imports from i in industry k is the same for all importers
(country n): XXnik
= PSikS . Moreover, prices are the same in all countries. Summing over all
nk
j jk
industries, total import penetration by country i in country n is:
Sik
Xni X
=
P
Xn
j Sjk
k

k
α4,k λ−σ
n
P
−σk0
k0 α4,k0 λn

!

!

(11)

P

where Xn = Ln en is total expenditures in country n, Xni = k Xnik is total bilateral trade
from country i to n, and α4,k is an industry constant incorporating common prices. The first
term in parentheses is the share of imports from i in consumption of k – in other words this
term reflects the comparative advantage of country i in sector k. The second is the share of
industry k in final consumption of country n.
Aggregate import penetration by country i in country n obviously depends on industry
composition of both supply and demand, but the latter has generally been neglected by previous work. If preferences are homothetic, σk = σ is common across industries and we obtain
that import penetration is the same across all importers n (for a given exporter i). When
preferences are non-homothetic and σk varies across industries, exporters with a comparative
advantage in high-σ industries have a relatively larger penetration in rich countries (low λn ),
while exporters with a comparative advantage in low-σ industries have a relatively larger penetration in poor countries (high λn ). As we will show empirically, rich countries are those that
have a comparative advantage in high-σ industries and that it can quantitatively explain large
differences in trade volumes across country pairs depending on each partner’s income.
Note that trade costs can potentially provide an alternative expanation of why import
penetration varies across markets. On the supply side, proximity reduces unit costs. On the
demand side, consumption might be biased towards goods produced locally if their price is
lower (e.g. Saudi Arabia consuming more petroleum). The latter argument requires that the
elasticity of substitution be larger than one. These effects of trade costs reinforce the patterns
described above. In our framework, a general expression for import penetration of exporter i
in market n yields:


Xni X
=
Xn
k
where Φnk =

P

j

σk −1
θk

!
k

Sik d−θ
nik


Φnk

k
α5,k λ−σ
n Φnk



σk0 −1
θk0
nk0

−σk0
Φ
k0 α5,k0 λn

P






(12)

−θk
1−σk
Sjk dnjk
by definition (equation 7) and α5,k = α2,k α3,k
is an industry constant.

10

In the empirical section, we thus need to carefully examine the distinct contribution of trade
costs and non-homotheticity.
2.3.2

Missing factor content of trade

One reason why comparative advantage may be related to consumption patterns is that the
income elasticity of demand is correlated with the intensity in skillled labor. Such a correlation
can also shed light on the “missing trade” puzzle, as we describe now.
Standard Heckscher-Ohlin models assume homothetic preferences. This assumption implies
that, under free trade, consumption shares over different industries are the same across all
countries. We show in this section that accounting for non-homothetic preferences can yield
very different predictions in terms of factor content of trade. In particular, it can potentially
explain why poor countries trade so little with rich countries even if their endowments differ
largely. The intuition is simple. When the income elasticity of demand is correlated with skill
intensity, consumption by rich countries is biased towards skill-intensive industries. If richer
countries have larger endowments in skilled labor relative to unskilled labor, it implies that rich
countries have stronger taste for goods that are more likely to be produced by rich countries. A
similar intuition applies to capital if the income elasticity of demand is correlated with capital
intensity and if richer countries are relatively more endowed in capital.
These intuitions can be simply illustrated in our framework. We define factor content
of trade Tf n as the value of factor f required to produce exports minus imports: Tf n =

P
P
P
i6=n Xink . After simple reformulations, we can decompose Tf n in two
k βf k
i6=n Xnik −
terms:
Tf n = sn

X



Ȳk βf k

k

|

=

X
Xnk
Ynk
Ȳk βf k
− 1 − sn
−1
sn Ȳk
sn Ȳk
k




{z

}

TfHOV
n

|

−

P

{z



(13)
}

TfCB
n

(14)
P

where Ynk = i Xink denotes the value of production of country n in sector k, Ȳk = n Ynk
denotes the value of world’s production in sector k, and sn denotes the share of country n in
world’s GDP. Note that we define factor content in terms of factor reward instead of quantities
(number of workers or machines).8
8

Standard HOV estimation assumes factor price equalization. Under this assumption, both approaches are
equivalent. When FPE is violated, for instance when factor productivity differ across countries, predicted factor
content has to be adjusted for such differences if written in terms of factor units (e.g. number of workers of
machines). No adjustment is necessary if we focus on values, i.e. factor supply times factor prices. This approach
greatly simplifies the exposition of the main intuitions and better illustrate the contribution of non-homothetic
preferences compared to homothetic preferences without providing too much details on factor prices.

11

In the bracket terms, the ratio sXnnk
equals the share of consumption for k in country n
Ȳk
relative to the share of consumption for k in the world. The ratio sYnnk
equals the share of
Ȳk
production in sector k in country n relative to the share of production in sector k in the world.
Homothetic preferences and free trade would imply that the second term in brackets is null:
Xnk
− 1 = 0. Hence, when preferences are homothetic, the expression above can be simplified
sn Ȳk
and yields:
X
Tf n = TfHOV
= w f n F f n − sn
wf i Ff i
(15)
n
i

Under factor price equalization, wf n is the same across countries, and the above expression
corresponds to the standard prediction of factor content trade in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek
model. This equations states that the content of factor f in exports of a country n should equal
the total value of the supply of factor f in this country minus the value of the world’s supply
of this factor adjusted by the share sn of country n in world GDP.
− 1 differs from
Equation (15) is violated when preferences are not homothetic and sXnnk
Ȳk
zero. Equation (15) needs to be corrected by a consumption term TfCB
n (where “CB” stands
Xnk
for consumption bias). In particular, if relative consumption sn Ȳk is positively correlated with
HOV
and predicted factor trade is smaller. It
, then TfCB
production sYnnk
n is correlted with Tf n
Ȳk
can explain why trade in factor content is smaller than predicted by models with homothetic
preferences. In the empirical section, we verify that these two terms sXnnk
and sYnnk
are indeed
Ȳk
Ȳk
CB
strongly corrrelated across countries and industries and that Tf n is correlated with TfHOV
n
across countries and factors.
The consumption bias in the extended predicted factor content of trade expression above
can be reexpressed as:
X
X
βf k Ȳk
(16)
TfCB
βf k Xnk − sn
n =
k

k

where the right-hand-side reflects a difference between the factor content of country n’s consumption and the average world’s consumption. For skilled labor, we show in the empirical
section that TfCB
n is strongly correlated with income.
Again, trade costs might also explain similar correlations between supply and demand,
across industries and in terms of factor content. In the empirical section, we disentangle the
effect of each (trade costs vs. fitted non-homothetic demand) and show that non-homotheticity
plays an important role.
2.3.3

Skill premium

The correlation betwen skill intensity and income elasticity not only affects trade patterns and
trade volumes, but also has important implications for the skill premium. In particular, it can

12

generates a positive effect of productivity growth on the skill premium. The intuition is simple.
As productivity increases, people become richer, they consume more goods from income-elastic
industries which, as we show, are more intensive in skilled labor.9 This yields an increase in
the demand for skilled labor relative to unskilled labor and thus increases the relative wage of
skilled workers.
On the contrary, with homothetic preferences, uniform productivity growth across countries
is neutral in terms of skill premium (and trade patterns). Also note that international trade
is not key here. The same effect still holds in a closed economy. For a closed economy, with
only skilled and unskilled labor, we can derive the elasticity of the skill premium spn (wage of
skilled workers divided by the wage of unskilled workers) to TFP increase d log zn :
1 X H
d log spn
=
(shnk − shLnk )εnk
d log zn
1 + ξn k

(17)

P βHk Xnk
is the share
where εnk is the income elasticity in sector k, country n, and shH
nk ≡
X
β
k0 Hk0 nk0
L
of sector k in the total employed of skilled labor in country n (and shnk refers to to the share
of unskilled workers in sector k), and ξn is defined in the appendix.
We can see that this term is positive if income elasticity εnk is correlated with the demand
L
for skilled labor vs. unskilled labor (term in shH
nk − shnk ). Hence TFP growths generates a
growth of the skill premium.
The term ξn reflects a feedback effect of the skill premium increase on the composition
of consumption. When the skill premium increases, the relative price of skill-intensive goods
increases, the relative demand for skill intensive goods tends to decrease and thus the relative
demand for skilled workers tends to decrease. We can expect this feedback to be small compared
to the direct effect and: ξn ≈ 0. This provides an approximation of the elasticity of skill
premium to technology:
d log spn X H
≈ (shnk − shLnk )εnk
(18)
d log zn
k

Generally, this equation also provides a good approximation of the skill premium increase
even if skilled and unskilled labor are not the only factors of production. We will show later
how this approximation compared to simulated skill premium increases as a response to a TFP
increase.
In this expression, the effect of technology on the skill premium is larger for larger income
elasticities (ceteris paribus). As income elasticities decrease with income (or productivity), we
might expect this expression to yield smaller values for richer countries.
9

Assuming that the evolution of income is not driven by an accumulation of skills, which can of course
mitigate the increase in the skill premium.

13

Although income elasticities are larger for poorer countries, the expression above does not
necessarily decrease with income. The second derivative of expression (18) w.r.t to productivity
is:
P
P
H
L
2
2
X
d2 log spn
k (shnk − shnk )εnk
k xnk (εnk −1)
L
(19)
+
−
(shH
≈
−
P
P
nk +shnk )εnk
H
L
d log zn2
k xnk
k (shnk − shnk )εnk
k
The first term corresponds to the decrease in income elasticity with income (which is referred
to as the “within” effect in Section 4.3), whereas the other two terms corresponds to changes
L
in the weights shH
nk − shnk (“between” effect). The between effect is negative if there is more
scope for reallocation of skilled workers than unskilled workers across sectors.10

3

Estimation

The goal of this section is two-fold. We first estimate income elasticities of demand and then
test for positive correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity.

3.1

Estimation of income elasticities: identification

Demand by industry (in value) is determined as in Equation (3) or equivalently Equation (1)
for individual expenditures. In log, this gives:
log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α2,k + (1 − σk ). log Pnk

(20)

where α2,k is a preference parameter to be considered as an industry fixed effect. In addition,
demand should satisfy the budget constraint, which pins down λn . The larger is income, the
smaller is λn .
If there is no trade cost (dnik = 1), the price index Pnk is the same across countries and
cannot be distinguished from an industry fixed effect. If richer countries’ consumption is larger
in a particular sector relative to other sectors, this sector can be associated with a larger
elasticity σk .
When trade is not free (dnik > 1), the price index Pnk plays a key role in controlling for
supply-side characteristics. As richer countries have a comparative advantage in skill intensive
industries, the price index is relatively lower in these industries. Conversely, poor countries
10

Formally, the between effect is negative if and only if the variance of income elasticity weighted by skilled
labor is larger than the variance of income elasticity weighted by unskilled labor:
X
X
X
2 X L
2
shH
shH
>
shnk εnk −
shL
nk εnk −
nk0 εnk0
nk0 εnk0
k

k0

k

14

k0

have a comparative advantage in unskilled labor intensive industries and thus have a lower
price index in these industries relative to other industires. As the elasticity of substitution between industries is larger than one, these differences in price indices in turn affect consumption
patterns. If we do not control for Pnk , we might conclude by mistake that skill intensive sector
have larger income elasticity.
Hence we put a particular care into correcting for supply-side effects through Pnk . We
proceed in two steps. The main goal of the first step is to obtain a proxy for log Pnk . According
to the equilibrium condition (8) on the price index, log Pnk depends linearly on log Φnk which can
be identified using gravity equations. Then, with an estimate of the price index (or equivalently
Φnk ), we can estimate the demand equation (20) above.
As a robustness check, we estimate the demand equation using actual price data instead or
in addition to using log Φnk (Section 5).
Step 1: Gravity equation estimation and identification of Φnk
By taking the log of trade flows in Equation (5), we get:
log Xnik = log Sik − θk log dnik + log Xnk − log Φnk
We estimate this equation by including importer and exporter fixed effects and approximating
transport costs dnik by a series of variables. We do not have data on transport costs by industry
and country pairs. We specify that transport costs depend on physical distance, border effect,
common language, colonial link and contiguity, as usual in the gravity equation literature:
log dnik = δDist,k log Distni − δContig,k .Contiguityni − δLang,k .CommonLangni
− δColony,k .ColonialLinkni − δHomeBias,k .In=i
Parameters δvar,k capture the elasticity of trade costs w.r.t. each trade cost variable var.11 It
is indexed by sector k: we allow the effect of distance, contiguity, common language, etc. to
differ across industries.
Incorporating the expression for trade costs into trade flows, we obtain:
log Xnik = F Xik + F Mnk − βDist,k log Distni + βContig,k .Contiguityni
+ βLang,k .CommonLangni + βColony,k .ColonialLinkni + βHomeBias,k .In=i
11

Note that dnik also captures a potential home bias in preferences. A home bias would be equivalent to
multiplying dnik by a scalar larger than one whenever trade occurs between two different countries, which is
equivalent to the border effect in this framework.

15

where F Mnk refers to importer fixed effects and F Xik to exporter fixed effects, and βvar,k =
θk δvar,k for each trade cost variable var. Note that i refers to the exporter and n to the importer
(following Eaton and Kortum 2002 notations). Since all coefficients to be estimated are sector
specific, we estimate this gravity equation separately for each sector.
According to the model, importer and exporter fixed effects contain valuable information
and correspond to F Mnk = log Xnk − log Φnk and F Xik = log Sik . A first way to estimate
Φnk would be to use importer fixed effects. However, since we use Φnk as a means to capture
supply-side characteristics, it is arguably better to use supply-side variables to estimate Φnk .12
We follow a strategy developed by Redding and Venables (2004)13 . Following Equation (7)
defining Φnk , we use the estimate of Sik and θk log dnik (using all transport cost proxies and
their coefficients) to construct a structural estimate of Φnk :
b
Φ
nk =

X



exp Fd
X ik − βbDist,k log Distni + βbContig,k .Contiguityni

i

+ βbLang,k .CommonLangni + βbColony,k .ColonialLinkni + βbHomeBias,k .In=i



b
This constructed Φ
nk varies across industries and countries in an intuitive way. It is the sum
of all potential exporters’ fixed effect (reflecting unit costs of production) deflated by distance
and other trade cost variables. When country n is close to an exporter that has a comparative
advantage in industry k, i.e. an exporter associated with a large exporter fixed effect F Xik
b
(large Sik ), our constructed Φ
nk is relatively larger for this country n reflecting a lower price
b
index of goods from industry k in counry n. Note that Φ
nk also accounts for domestic supply
in each industry k (when i = n).
Such a method would fit various structural frameworks. If our model were based on DixitStiglitz-Krugman framwork instead of Eaton-Kortum, price indices by importer and industry
could be obtained in the same way. This would also account for the range of available varieties
when it is endogenous and would also fit a model such as Chaney (2008) that yield a gravity
equation in trade flows by industry.

Step 2: Demand system estimation and identification of σk
1

We now have an estimate of Φnk but the price index is proportional to (Φnk ) θk , not Φnk , and
θk is more difficult to estimate. θk corresponds to the elasticity of trade flows to trade costs
and thus appears in the gravity equation. However it cannot be directly identified from δvar,k .
For instance, the coefficient in the gravity equation associated with distance is the product of
12
13

An alternative method using importer fixed effects yields very similar estimations of Φnk .
See also Fally, Paillacar and Terra (2010).

16

θk and δDist,k .
We pursue four different approaches: 1) we callibrate θk using estimates from the literature;
2) we do not impose any restriction on θk ; 3) we assume that θk = θ is constant across sectors
and estimate θ; 4) in order to better illustrate the role of trade costs, we also estimate demand
elasticities by assuming that there is no trade cost.
In all cases the estimated equation is subject to the budget constraint to identify λn . For
any country n, we impose:
X
x̂nk = en
k

where en is observed expenditure per capita.
D1) In a first specification, we take a strong stand on θk and assume that it equals 4. This
imposes a strong link between income elasticities of demand and price elasticities. Alternatively, we take a value of 8 (specification D1’). The first choice is close to Simonovska
and Waugh (2010) estimates of 4.12 and 4.03. Donaldson (2008), Eaton, Kortum and
Kramarz (2010), Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (forthcoming) provide alternative
estimates that range between 3.6 and 5.2. The second choice (θ = 8) is in line with Eaton
b
and Kortum (2002) estimate of 8.28. Given our estimate of Φ
nk and the parameter θ̂, the
final demand system to be estimated is:
log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α5,k + (σk − 1).

b
log Φ
nk

θ̂

+ εnk

where α5,k is an sector fixed effect.
D2) In an other specification, we take an opposite approach and do not impose any constraint
b , the final demand system to
on the price elasticity of demand. Given our estimate of Φ
nk
be estimated is:
b +ε
log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α5,k + µk . log Φ
nk
nk

where α5,k is an sector fixed effect, and µk is a sector specific coefficient (to be estimated)
capturing a combination of σk and θk . µk is identified given how expenditure depends on
price levels proxied by Φ.
D3) As an alternative approach, we assume that θk = θ is constant across countries (as in the
first specification) but we do not impose any value. Instead, we use this restriction to

17

b , the final demand system to be estimated is:
identify θ. Given Φ
nk

log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α5,k +

(σk − 1)
b +ε
. log Φ
nk
nk
θ

where α5,k is an sector fixed effect.
D4) As a benchmark, we also estimate a demand system assuming that there is no trade cost
and prices are the same across all countries. The final demand system to be estimated is
then:
log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α4,k + εnk
where α4,k is an sector fixed effect capturing prices indices.
In all cases, given the inclusion of industry fixed effects, λn can be identified only up to a
constant. To see this, we can multiply λk by a common multiplier λ0 and multiply the industry
fixed effect αk by (λ0 )σk . Using λk λ0 instead of λk and αk (λ0 )σk instead of αk in the demand
system generates the same demand and the same expenditures by industry. We thus normalize
λU SA = 1 for the US.
A similar issue arises for the identification of σk in specifications D2 and D4. In these
cases, σk can be estimated only up to a common multiplier. By multiplying σk by a common
1
multiplier σ 0 and replacing λn by λnσ0 , we obtain the same demand by industry and the same
total expenditures (maintaining the normalization of the lagrangian to unity for the US).
This is not an issue if we focus on the income elasticity of demand which equals the ratio
of σk to the weighted average of σk0 across sectors (weighted by consumption). For instance,
in the no-trade-cost specification (D4), we can verify that relative σ’s can be pinned down by
the formula:
σk
log xnk − log xn0 k
=
0
σk
log xnk0 − log xn0 k0
for any pair of countries (n, n0 ) and any pair of industries (k, k 0 ). Ratios σσk0 and fitted consumpk
tion shares are then sufficient to derive income elasticities of demand in line with Equation (2).
The above demand systems are estimated using constrained non-linear least squares.14 Bootstrapped standard errors for the estimates of σk , income elasticities and other variables are
obtained by resampling the set of regions.
14

We minimize the sum of squared errors on log consumption, weighted by world consumption by industry in
order to avoid putting too much weight on a few small sectors. Very close results are obtained by minimizing
unweighted sums of error squares in logs or alternatively in consumption shares (see robustness section 5). The
optimization procedure is implemented in GAMS and solved using the Conopt3 NLP solver.

18

3.2

Data

Our empirical analysis is almost entirely based on the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP)
version 7 dataset (Narayanan and Walmsley, 2008). GTAP contains consistent and reconciled
production, consumption, endowment and trade data for 57 sectors of the economy, 5 production factors, and 94 countries in 2004. The set of sectors covers both manufacturing and
services and the set of countries covers a wide range of per-capita income levels. The list of
countries can be found in the appendix.
To estimate gravity equations (21) by industry, we use gross bilateral trade flows from GTAP
measured including import tariffs, export subsidies and transport cost (c.i.f.). Demand systems
are estimated over all 94 available countries using final demand values based on the aggregation
of sectoral private and public expenditures. Some sectors in GTAP are used primarily as
intermediates and correspond to extremely low consumption shares of final demand. 6 sectors
for which less than 5% of output goes to final demand (coal, oil, gas, ferous metals, metals n.e.c.
and minerals n.e.c.) are assumed to be used exclusively as intermediates and are dropped from
the demand estimations. We also drop “dwellings” from our analysis.15 We are left with 50
sectors (see Table 2 for the list of sectors).
Factor usage data, by sector, are directly available in GTAP and cover capital, skilled
and unskilled labor, land and other natural resources. There are some limitations however
concerning the skill decomposition of labor. While the GTAP dataset provides skilled vs.
unskilled labor usage for all countries, part of this information is extrapolated from a subset
of European countries and 6 non-European countries (US, Canada, Australia, Japan, Taiwan
and South Korea).16 Also, skilled labor is defined on an occupational basis for some of these
countries (e.g. US). In most of our analysis, we measure factor intensities by the average factor
intensities across all countries, but our results carry on if we simply based our factor intensity
measures on the subset of countries mentioned above, as shown in section 5.3.
Finally, bilateral variables on physical distance, common language, colonial link and contiguity are obtained from CEPII.17

3.3

Demand system estimation results

Results from the gravity equation (step 1) are very standard and more detailed results are
presented in the appendix section. In brief, there is significant variation in distance and border
effect coefficients across industries. As usually found in the gravity equation literature, the
15

This sector is associated with large measurement errors in consumption and factor intensities.
See: https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/download/4183.pdf
17
See: http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm
16

19

coefficient for distance is on average close to -1, while the border effect is large. Coefficients for
other trade cost proxies are significant for most industries.
We now focus on the final demand estimation (step 2). Parameters to be estimated are λn ,
σk and the industry fixed effects αk . Summary statistics are reported in Table 1.
With an R2 equal to 0.57, the specification with no trade costs (D4) already fits the data
well. The weighted R218 equals 0.90. The inclusion of trade costs in specifications (D1)-(D3)
b
significantly improves the fit, as the coefficients associated with Φ
nk are jointly significant. In
the unconstrained-θk specification (D2), we can simply test whether coefficients associated with
b
Φ
nk are jointly null which yields a F-stat of 16.07 and clearly rejects this hypothesis.

Table 1: NLLS estimation of demand: regression statistics
(D1)
θ=4

(D4)
No trade
cost

(D2)
Unconstrainted
θk

(D3)
Common θ

(D1’)
θ=8

1

0.881

0.838

0.978

0.924

2.76
4.62

/
19.60

/
8.63

1.49
5.05

4.47
4.07

Correlation log λn with
log per capita income

-0.985

-0.999

-0.986

-0.986

-0.986

θ (calibrated or estimated)
Average coeff for Φnk
R2
weighted R2
Observations

4
0.507
0.731
0.914
4700

/
/
0.568
0.903
4700

/
0.532
0.607
0.918
4700

1.17
0.518
0.596
0.915
4700

8
0.486
0.609
0.914
4700

Specification:
Correlation σk with D1
specification (θ = 4)
Weighted av. of σk
F-stat: σk = σ

Notes: NLLS regressions: step 2 of the estimation procedure described in the text. Weighted by industry size
(world’s expenditure by industry). Bootstrapped standard errors and F-test (100 draws).

Imposing homotheticity (i.e. common σk = σ across industries) yields a R2 = 0.52 (and
a weighted-R2 = 0.882).19 This is significantly lower. The F-stat associated with imposing
common σk across industries shows that homotheticity is clearly rejected in all specifications
D1 to D4 (third row of Table 1).
The estimated σk can be used to compute income elasticity estimates according to equation 2, using fitted median-income-country expenditure shares as weights.20 In our preferred
18

with variance and average weighted by world production by industry
Allowing for trade costs with homothetic preferences increases the R2 to 0.58, which is still lower than the
R2 for non-homothetic preferences without trade costs (D4).
20
With CRIE preferences, the ratio of income elasticities between two sectors does not depend on the choice
19

20

Table 2: Estimated income elasticity by sectors
GTAP code
Sector name
Income elast.
Std error
Skill intensity
gro
Cereal grains nec
0.362∗
0.040
0.135
pdr
Paddy rice
0.490∗
0.150
0.061
oap
Animal products nec
0.498∗
0.067
0.132
osd
Oil seeds
0.588∗
0.158
0.119
frs
Forestry
0.596∗
0.115
0.118
vf
Vegetables, fruit, nuts
0.601∗
0.102
0.095
ctl
Bovine cattle, sheep and goats, horses
0.621∗
0.078
0.164
pcr
Processed rice
0.654∗
0.126
0.130
vol
Vegetable oils and fats
0.696∗
0.066
0.217
fsh
Fishing
0.712∗
0.092
0.124
Petroleum, coal products
0.740∗
0.047
0.313
pc
Sugar cane, sugar beet
0.777
0.206
0.091
cb
sgr
Sugar
0.8∗
0.142
0.221
bt
Beverages and tobacco products
0.802∗
0.031
0.297
tex
Textiles
0.847∗
0.055
0.231
wht
Wheat
0.854
0.139
0.117
ely
Electricity
0.923∗
0.036
0.372
ofd
Food products nec
0.944∗
0.036
0.268
nmm
Mineral products nec
0.944
0.072
0.281
cns
Construction
0.963∗
0.023
0.294
wtp
Water transport
0.963
0.087
0.299
cmt
Bovine meat products
0.972
0.068
0.238
ocr
Crops nec
0.974
0.108
0.115
mil
Dairy products
0.990
0.046
0.248
lum
Wood products
1.001
0.085
0.248
atp
Air transport
1.028
0.047
0.313
crp
Chemical, rubber, plastic products
1.039
0.051
0.356
otp
Transport nec
1.046
0.052
0.296
omt
Meat products nec
1.051
0.075
0.233
fmp
Metal products
1.065
0.053
0.297
otn
Transport equipment nec
1.107
0.057
0.343
ome
Machinery and equipment nec
1.111
0.030
0.372
osg
Public Administration and Services
1.112∗
0.019
0.503
ppp
Paper products, publishing
1.115
0.039
0.340
trd
Trade
1.119
0.036
0.308
wtr
Water
1.123
0.048
0.378
lea
Leather products
1.126
0.041
0.212
mvh
Motor vehicles and parts
1.135
0.030
0.341
wap
Wearing apparel
1.138
0.050
0.247
cmn
Communication
1.161∗
0.049
0.485
ros
Recreational and other services
1.164∗
0.042
0.475
omf
Manufactures nec
1.210∗
0.037
0.279
ele
Electronic equipment
1.280∗
0.050
0.358
ofi
Financial services nec
1.292∗
0.054
0.546
0.039
0.504
obs
Business services nec
1.327∗
pfb
Plant-based fibers
1.363
0.171
0.167
rmk
Raw milk
1.367∗
0.077
0.152
isr
Insurance
1.378∗
0.046
0.533
wol
Wool, silk-worm cocoons
1.543∗
0.167
0.089
gdt
Gas manufacture, distribution
2.209∗
0.160
0.362
Notes: Income elasticities evaluated using median country expenditure shares; NLLS estimations (specification
imposing θ = 4); bootstrapped standard errors; ∗ denotes 5% significance; total skill intensities.

21

Paddy rice
Processed rice
Cereal grains nec
Sugar cane, sugar beet
Animal products nec
Forestry
Cattle, sheep, goats, horses
Fishing
Sugar
Vegetable oils and fats
Vegetables, fruit, nuts
Crops nec
Wool, silk-worm cocoons
Petroleum, coal products
Beverages and tobacco
Textiles
Oil seeds
Water transport
Electricity
Food products nec
Mineral products nec
Air transport
Bovine meat products
Wheat
Wood products
Construction
Transport nec
Leather products
Transport equipment nec
Chemical, rubber, plastic
Water
Meat products nec
Machinery and equipment nec
Wearing apparel
Dairy products
Metal products
Manufactures nec
Electronic equipment
Trade
Motor vehicles and parts
Recreational and other srv
Public spending
Communication
Raw milk
Paper products, publishing
Plant-based fibers
Financial services nec
Business services nec
Insurance
Gas manufacture, distribution

No trade costs
Unconstrained Theta
Common Theta
Theta fixed at 4

0

.5

1
1.5
Estimated Income elasticities

2

Figure 1: Income elasticity estimates across specifications
specification (D1), estimates range from 0.36 for Cereal grains to 2.21 for gas manufacture and
distribution with a clear dominance of agricultural sectors at the low end and service sectors
at the high end. 30 out of 50 estimates are significantly different than 1 (at 95 %) as shown in
Table 2.
The distribution of estimated income elasticities is quite similar across specifications. In
particular, the choice of θ does not affect estimates of σk and income elasticities. As shown in
Table 1 (first row), the correlation between estimated σk in other specifications and estimated
σk in specification D1 (θ = 4) is always above 80%. This is also the correlation between income
elasticities among specifications since income elasticities are proportional to σk . Sectors where
income elasticities vary the most across specifications are the smallest ones in terms of final
demand (see Figure 1).
For robustness, these are compared with estimates using more standard demand systems in
section 5 and are found to be well correlated.
of the reference country.

22

3.4

Correlation with factor intensities

We now investigate the relationship between income elasticities and factor intensities across
sectors. Altough the implications of such a relationship will be best illustrated in section 4,
we first demonstrate its significance through simple correlations. Table 3 reports correlation
coefficients between skill intensities and income elasticities (or, equivalently, the σ’s) estimated
under different assumptions about trade costs and factor intensity.21
Our measures of factor intensity correspond to the ratio of skilled labor, capital or natural
resource (including land) to total labor input. They are computed including the factor usage
embedded in the intermediate sectors used in each sector’s production.22 As shown in section 5,
our results are robust to different measures of factor intensities. Our results are also robust
to different demand specifications. Table 3 reports estimations with CRIE preferences, while
alternative demand systerms are examined in section 5.

Table 3: Correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity
Dependent varriable:
Specification
Skill intensity

(1)
θ=4

(2)
θ=4

0.526
[0.123]∗∗

0.508
[0.115]∗∗

Income elasticity
(3)
(4)
(5)
No trade No trade Unconstrainted
cost
cost
Theta

(6)
Common
Theta

0.692
[0.103]∗∗

0.555
[0.113]∗∗

0.617
[0.098]∗∗

50

50

0.673
[0.100]∗∗

Capital intensity

0.002
[0.153]

0.024
[0.126]

Natural resources int.

-0.152
[0.102]

-0.139
[0.076]∗

Observations (sectors)

50

50

50

50

Notes: Dependent variable: income elasticity by sector evaluated at median-country income; beta coefficients;
robust standard errors in brackets; ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 1%.

We find that skill intensity is positively and significantly correlated with income elasticity,
natural resources intensity is negatively correlated, and capital intensity exhibits a small weakly
21

Table 3 displays heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. As the dependent variable, income elasticity,
is itself estimated, we alternatively use a feasible generalized least squares (FGLS) regression in which the
bootstrapped standard errors from the NLLS estimations of income elasticities are used to construct weights
(see Lewis and Linzer (2005)). The resulting standard errors are slightly smaller: for example, the estimate in
column 1 is 0.116 instead of 0.123. The similarity between estimates suggests that the bias caused by the use
of an estimated dependent variable is small.
22
Total factor usage is computed using a Leontiev inversion of country-specific input-output tables as provided
by GTAP

23

positive correlation. As expected, the correlation with skill intensity diminishes if we account
for trade costs and control for differences in price indexes. This is illustrated in Figure 2 and
also seen by comparing column (1) versus (3) in Table 3. This correlation remains however
particularly large and above 50% in most specifications.
Part of this large correlation can be explained by the composition of consumption into
services vs. manufacturing industries, with the former being generally associated with a larger
income elasticity. However, even after excluding service industries, the correlation is above 40%
in all specifications.
It is interesting to see that capital intensity would otherwise be positively correlated with
income elasticity, as found by Reimer and Hertel (2010), but this correlation is not as large as
for skill intensity (less than 10% in most specifications) and not robust to controlling for skill
intensity as shown in columns (2) and (4) of Table 3.

Estimated income elasticity
.5
1
1.5

2

gdt

wol
rmk
pfb
omf
lea

osg

ocr

pdr

b_t
p_c

vol

pcr ctl
oap
gro

0

No Trade Costs
With Trade Costs − Theta = 4
0

.2

.4

.6

Skill intensity
Note : Income elasticities evaluated at median country expenditure shares

Figure 2: Income elasticity and skill intensity correlation.
These results show a large correlations between per capita income and consumption patterns
depending on skill intensity. We emphasize the demand side. One may be worried, however,
that these results are driven by differences in skill endowment across countries rather than
differences in per capita income. In GTAP data, the fraction of skilled labor is indeed correlated
at 88% with per capita income. In order to check the robustness of our results with respect to
differences in education, we re-estimated income elasticities for subsets of countries with smaller
variations in skilled labor endowment (and still large variations in per capita income). If we
restrict the set of countries to those within the inter-quartile range in skilled-labor endowments
24

(eliminating countries with extreme quartiles in skill endowment), the correlation between
estimated income elasticities and skill intensity remains very high for the main specifications
(above 40%) while the correlation between per capita income and education is sensibly lower
(60% instead of 88%). A more extreme exercise is to select specific groups of countries where
the correlation between income and education becomes zero by construction. In these cases we
find again very large correlations between skill intensity and (re-estimated) income elasticity,
showing that our main results are not driven by differences in education across countries.

4
4.1

Implications for trade, skill premium and welfare
Consumption patterns and missing trade

Sector-level correlation between income elasticities and factor intensities can help explain a
part of the observed country-level correlation between relative specializations in consumption,
Ynk
, and production, sXnnk
. The higher this correlation the smaller the predicted trade. As
Ȳk
sn Ȳk
argued in sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, correlations between supply and demand affects trade both
in terms of volume and factor content.
We are first interested in the correlation between country’s specializations in demand and
production across countries and industries. We compare a combination of cases with and
without non-homothetic demand and with and without trade costs. In the first row of Table 4,
we calculate the correlation between sYnnk
and sXnnk
. The first term reflects production relative
Ȳk
Ȳk
to world’s production of goods k multiplied by country n’s share of world GDP. We use actual
data on production to compute this term. The second term reflects country n’s consumption
relative to world’s production of goods k scaled by country n’s share of world GDP. In columns
(1) to (4), we use fitted demand X̂nk from our second-stage estimations and in column (5) we
use actual consumption Xnk .
In column (1), we impose homothetic preferences (i.e. common σk = σ across industries)
and assume that there is no trade cost. These two assumptions are made in standard HeckscherOhlin models. In this case, the correlation is obviously zero since consumption patterns should
be the same across all countries. In column (2), we allow for trade costs. Trade costs generate
a positive correlation between consumption and production when the elasticity of consumption
(by industry) to price indices is larger than unity. The correlation that we obtain is 19% (across
countries and industries) and significantly positive at 1%. Though, this correlation obtained
with fitted homothetic demand is much lower than the 86% correlation observed in the data
(column 5).
Allowing for non-homotheticity significantly increases this correlation between supply and
25

Table 4: Correlation between supply and demand
Preferences:
Correcting for trade costs:

(1)
(2)
Homothetic
No
Yes

(3)
(4)
Non-homothetic
No
Yes

(5)
Data

Dimension

Correlation between supply
and demand

0

0.19

0.33

0.49

0.86

nxk

HOV
Correlation between Tnf
CB
and Consumption bias Tnf

0

0.78

0.59

0.92

0.99

nxf

Normalized by country size

0

0.79

0.86

0.90

0.93

nxf

Corrected HOV slope test

0.38

0.54

0.44

0.65

1

nxf

1

0.39

0.69

0.18

0.04

nxf

Variance test:

V ar(TfHOV
−TfCB
n
n )
V ar(TfHOV
)
n

demand. Even if we assume no trade cost and common prices across countries, and even if
preferences are still assumed to be identical across countries, allowing for non-homotheticity in
preferences can generate larger correlation between supply and demand. As shown in column
(3), by using fitted demand from the no-trade-cost specification (D4) we obtain a correlation
of 33%. In column (4), we further account for trade costs and differences in price indices across
countries and we find a correlation of 49% (specification D1 imposing θk = 4).23 This is closer
to the 86% correlation observed in the data.
In terms of factor content, such correlations between consumption and supply should generate smaller factor content trade, as argued in section 2.3.2. Predicted factor content of trade
(PFCT) can be expressed as the difference between standard Heckscher-Ohlin PFCT, denoted
HOV
CB
Tnf
, and a consumption bias term denoted Tnf
which is null in the special case where prefHOV
erences are homothetic and trade costs are null (see equation 13). Again we calculate Tnf
CB
using actual production data and Tnf
using either fitted demand (columns 1 to 4) or actual
consumption (column 5).24
The second row of Table 4 shows that trade costs can already explain a large correlation
between consumption and supply factor content even if preferences are assumed to be homothetic (column 2). This correlation is 78% across countries and factors (against 0% if we assume
23

Similar and even larger correlations are found for alternative specifications.
Here we measure factor content by assuming a common matrix for all countries, i.e. the same coefficients
βnk . Note that all variables are in values (e.g. wages instead of number of workers) which mitigates cross-country
differences related to differences in factor prices.
24

26

no trade cost). This is consistent with Davis and Weinstein (2001) who also attribute an important part of the missing trade puzzle to trade costs. In column (3), we find that allowing
for non-homotheticity but assuming zero trade cost can generate a 59% correlation between
HOV
and the consumption bias. Allowing for both non-homotheticity and the
HOV PFCT Tnf
presence of trade costs further increases the correlation to 92%, which is closer to the very large
correlation observed in the data (99%!). One may be worried however that these correlations
CB
HOV
are driven by a few large countries such as the US and China. After
and Tnf
between Tnf
scaling down these variables and dividing by country size, the observed correlation in the data is
slightly lower (93% as shown in column 5 of the third row). After rescaling, our results exhibit
an even more important role for non-homotheticity. Allowing for non-homothetic preferences in
a zero-trade-cost framework (column 3) yields a larger correlation between supply and demand
than allowing for trade costs with homothetic preferences (column 2).
CB
HOV
− Tnf
In the fourth row of Table 4, we regress measured factor content of trade on Tnf
CB
is computed using fitted demand. Similar results are found whether it is rescaled or
where Tnf
not. By construction, the regression coefficient equals one when we compute the consumption
CB
bias Tnf
using actual data (column 5). In the first case (column 1), we impose homothetic
HOV
. In this case, the
demand and zero trade costs, which means that the regressor is simply Tnf
coefficient is 0.38, which means that measured factor content trade (FCT) is only a third of the
predicted FCT that is not corrected for differences in consumption patterns. In column (2),
the coefficient is larger (0.54) which means that allowing for trade costs already closes the gap
between predicted and measured FCT. Allowing for non-homothetic preferences also improve
the coefficient (column 3 and 4) with of course an even smaller gap between predicted and
measure FCT when we also account for trade costs.
Finally, an alternative way to quantify the contribution of non-homothetic preferences to
the missing trade puzzle is to examine the variance of predicted trade in terms of factor content
V ar(TfHOV
−TfCB
n
n )
(“variance test”). In the last row, we compute:
. When preferences are assumed
V ar(TfHOV
)
n
to be homothetic and trade costs are null, this ratio equals one since the fitted consumption bias
term is zero (first column). When trade costs are added, it considerably reduces the variance of
predicted factor content trade as we could expect. As can be seen, the variance is reduced by
two thirds just by accounting for trade costs. However, one can see that adding non-homothetic
preferences further reduces the variance by half (the ratio drops from 0.39 to 0.18).
Correlations and regressions across countries and factors can be also examined factor by
factor. We find that the use of skilled labor is key in explaining why non-homothetic preferences play such an important role. In Figure 3, we plot a measure of skilled-labor content of

27

Average skilled labor content of Consumption
.15
.2
.25

True
Fitted with trade costs − homothetic
Fitted with trade costs − non−homothetic
USA
DEU
FRA
GBR
ITAJPN
MEX

BRA
RUSTUR
CHN
PAK PHL
IDN
EGY
BGD IND

IRN
THA

NGA VNM
ETH

.1

MMR

4

6

8
Log Per−capita expenditure

10

12

Figure 3: Skilled-labor content of consumption and per capita income
consumption against per capita income (in log) where the former is defined as:
P

k

βf k Xnk
k Xnk

P

(21)

We can either use actual consumption or fitted consumption with different assumptions. With
homothetic preferences and no trade costs, final demand for industry k in country n is proportional to world consumption in industry k, and expression 21 should be the same for all
countries. When we allow for trade costs, rich countries tend to spend more in skilled-labor
intensive industries, even if preferences are homothetic, because goods are relatively cheaper
in these industries. We show however in Figure 3 that a better fit is obtained with both trade
costs and non-homothetic preferences.

4.2

Trade patterns

Can non-homothetic preferences explain why there is so small volumes of North-South trade
in comparison to North-North trade?25 Results from the previous section shed light on the
role of non-homothetic preferences in explaining net trade and its factor content. In particular,
our results are related to industry compositions of demand and production. Given that a large
fraction of trade is intra-sectoral, it is legitimate to ask whether non-homotheticity can also
play a role (quantitatively) in explaining patterns of gross trade volumes.
25

see Fieler (2011), Waugh (2010) among others.

28

As argued in section 2.3.1, non-homotheticity can potentially explain differences in import
penetration across markets depending on the importer’s income and the exporter’s structure
of comparative advantage. In particular, if a country has a comparative advantage in highincome-elastic industries (high-σk ), such a country is more likely to export to rich importers
than developing countries.
This argument can be illustrated using equation 11 on import penetration in the simple
case with no trade cost. Using this formula, we can examine how import penetration by poor
exporting countries depends on the importer’s level of income. To be more precise, we compute
import penetration from devloping countries in market n:
!

XnSouth /Xn =

X
k



α̂ λ̂−σ̂k 
YkSouth
 P 4,k n
−σ̂k0
YkSouth + YkN orth
k0 α̂4,k0 λ̂n

where YkSouth refers to total production in industry k by developing countries (annual per capital
income less than $10K), YkN orth to total production by developed countries, and where α̂k , λ̂n
and σ̂k are estimated coefficients from the final demand equation (specification D4 assuming
no trade cost).
Since income elasticity (or equivalently σk ) is highly correlated with skill intensity and
since developing countries have a comparative advantage in unskilled-labor-intensive tasks (the
Y South
correlation coefficient between skill intensity and Y Southk +Y N orth is -0.8), we can expect developing
k
k
countries to have a smaller penetration in richer countries which consume more goods from
skill-intensive industries. Note also that import penetration does not depend on the importer’s
income if preferences are homothetic and trade costs are absent.
In Figure 4, we plot XnSouth /Xn as a function of the importer’s average income per capita
(in log). As shown in this figure, differences in consumption patterns across industries can
generate large differences in import penetration between rich and poor countries. Given our
estimated demand parameters, in a situation with no trade cost, import penetration by developing countries can vary from 50% in markets with the lowest per capital income (e.g. Ethiopia)
to only 20% in the richest markets (e.g. Luxembourg). Symmetrically, import penetration by
developed countries varies from 50% in the poorest markets to 80% in the richest.
Conversely, we can investigate what fraction of exports goes towards rich importers. Since
developing countries tend to have a comparative advantage in unskilled-labor-intensive industries, we can expect poorer countries to have a smaller share of exports towards developed
countries.
These results solely reflects changes in consumption patterns and do not account for trade
costs. As developed countries are closer to other developed countries and vice versa, trade costs

29

.8

SVN

IRL USA

LUX

EST
ARG

Import penetration
.4
.6

NICCHN
LAO
KHM
ETH
ETH
KHM
LAO
NICCHN
ARG
EST

.2

SVN

IRL USA

LUX

0

by poor exporting countries
by rich exporting countries
4

6
8
10
Importer per capita income (in log)

12

Note: No-trade-cost specification

Figure 4: Import penetration by developing countries depending on importer’s income
can also contribute to such a correlation between import penetration by developing countries
and importers’ income. An interesting question is whether these trade costs are sufficient to
quantitatively replicates trends in observed patterns.
Using estimates from both steps of our estimations, we can construct predicted trade flows
c
Xnik (from country i to country n in sector k) using the gravity equation 5:
c =
X
nik

d
Sbik (dnik
)−θk c
Xnk
b
Φ
nk

d
b
where Sbik , (dnik
)−θk and Φ
nk are constructed using estimates from the gravity equation (see
c is fitted demand from the final step of
step 1 of the estimation procedure) and where X
nk
the demand estimation. We can compare fitted demand with non-homothetic preferences with
fitted demand imposing homotheticity (i.e. common σk = σ across industries). Accounting for
trade costs in both cases, we can examine for each country: i) the share of trade (import +
exports) with rich partners; ii) the ratio of trade over GDP.
Figure 5 plots the share of trade with rich partners (annual per capita income above $10K)
in manufacturing industries against per capita income (in log). As we can see, homothetic
preferences with trade costs can already generate a positive correlation since richer countries
are more likely to be closer to rich countries and trade with them. Not surprisingly, however,
non-homothetic preferences magnify this correlation. In particular, we can observe substantial

30

1
.8

MEX
MEX
SVN
SVN

CHN
CHN

.6

ETH
ETH

MYS

UGA
KHM
KHM

LUX
LUX

EST
EST

USA
USA
JPN
AUS

MYS
BRA

NIC
NIC

JPN
AUS

LAO
ARG

UGA

.4

ARG

LAO

.2

Share of exports to high per-capita income countries

CAN CHE
CAN CHE
IRL
IRL

4

6

8

10

12

Log per-capita Expenditure

Fitted with trade costs - non-homothetic demand
Fitted with trade costs - homothetic demand

Fit
Fit

Figure 5: Share of trade with rich partners (imports and exports)
differences in predicted shares for the poorest countries.
Since rich countries are also the largest markets in terms of GDP26 , a country’s level of
openness (trade/GDP) is likely to depend largely on whether such a country has a large penetration in the richest markets. Figure 6 plots the ratio of trade over GDP agains per capita
income (in log). We find indeed that the predicted ratio of Trade/GDP is slightly smaller for
developing countries when we allow for non-homotheticity in preferences. Conversly, this ratio
is larger for rich countries since they have a larger market penetration in other rich markets.
Note that these results are solely driven by differences in consumption patterns across
countries. We take the same trade cost and supply-side estimates in the homothetic and nonhomothetic cases. Hence, unlike Fieler (2011), these results are not driven by an implicit
correlation between trade cost elasticities and comparative advantage. Moreover, we find no
significant correlation between income elasticities and the elasticity of trade to distance (the
correlation for manufacturing industries is smaller than 10% in all specifications and not statistically significant), which means that richer countries do not have stronger preferences for
goods that can be more easily traded.
26

Developed countries account for 80% of total GDP in our sample of 94 countries.

31

.8

EST

Trade to GDP ratio
.2
.4
.6

EST
MYS

LUX

SVN
KHM
KHM

LAO

SVN

LAO

MYS

CHE
IRL
CAN CHE

LUX

IRL
CAN

ETH
UGA
UGA

ARG
ARG
CHN

MEX
MEX

AUS

BRA
BRA

AUS

USA
JPNUSA
JPN

0

ETH

NIC
NIC

4

6

8
Log per-capita Expenditure

10

Fitted with trade costs - non-homothetic demand
Fitted with trade costs - homothetic demand

12
Fit
Fit

Figure 6: Fitted Trade/GDP ratio across countries

4.3

Productivity growth and the skill premium

As argued in Section 2.3.3, non-homothetic preferences can also shed light on why the skill
premium has been increasing for a large number of countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007,
for empirical evidence on the skill premium increase). When preferences are homothetic, an
homogenous increase in productivity in all countries should neither affect the patterns of trade
nor the relative demand for skilled labor. However, when preferences are non-homothetic
and when the income elasticity of demand is positively correlated with the skill intensity of
production, an increase in productivity makes consumer richer which in turn induces a relative
increase in consumption in skill-intensive industries (high-income elastic industries) and thus
raises the relative demand for skilled labor.
This is a new demand-driven explanation contrasting with previous studies that have focused on the supply side. In this section, we examine how much skill premium increase our
model can quantitatively generate. Two approaches are used: i) we simulate a 1% increase
in productivity (TFP) in all countries27 and examine how it affects the skill premium in open
or closed economies; ii) we use the approximation provided in equation (18) to investigate
differences across countries.
We use estimated parameters to simulate and solve the economy in general equilibrium.
Both demand-side and supply-side parameters are taken from our estimations (gravity equation
27

The same elasticities are obtained by simulating a 10% increase in TFP.

32

.3

and final demand estimation, specification D1). Note that, in our simulated general-equilibrium
model, factor prices and income adjust and slightly differ from oberved values, but not by much.
Equilibrium conditions are equations (3) to (10) described in section 2.2. Details are provided
in the appendix section.

Elasticity of skill premium to technology
.1
.15
.2
.25

GEO
MOZ
IND
ALBPAN
PHL
ZMB
COL
VNM
PAKBOL
GTM
KAZROU
UKR
UGA
ARM
ETH
BLR CRI
TZA KGZ SEN PRYMARPER
NIC
NGA
CHN ECU ARG
URY
IDN
BGR MEX
LKA
AZE
LTU
RUS
MWI
POL HUN
BGD
EGY
BRA CHL HRV
KHM
THA
TUN
LVACZE
ZWE
IRN VEN
ZAF SVK
BWA
MDG
TUR
LAO
EST MLT
MMR

NZL
CYP
IRL

MYS
MUS

LUX
AUS
FIN
SVN
KOR
FRA
GRC
PRT
DNK
AUT
DEU
ESP
NLD
TWN
NOR
BEL
CAN
GBR
CHE
SWE
ITA
USA
JPN

.05

HKG
SGP

4

6

8
Log per-capita Expenditure

10

12

Figure 7: Elasticity of skill premium to TFP
Figure 7 illustrates the elasticity of the skill premium to technology when we simulate a 1%
TFP increase in all countries. Our simulations show that this effect is large and stronger for
poor countries. For instance, the elasticity of the skill premium to productivity is about 0.25
for China. With an annual productivity growth of about 8%, this yields an increase of the skill
premium of 20% every decade. For South American countries, the elasticity is also above 0.2.
With a 5% growth rate in productivity, this would yield a 10% increase in the skill premium
every decade. Such a magnitude is large and could explain a big part of the observed increase
in the skill premium.28 For India, our model could explain about half of the skill premium
28

South American countries seem to have experienced large increases in the skill premium: 68% for Mexico
between 1987 and 1993 (Cragg and Epelbaum, 1996), 20% in Argentina between 1992 and 1998 (Gasparini,

33

Elasticity - closed economy
.1
.2
.3

.4

increase in he 90’s.29 Even for richer countries, the effect on the skill premium is not negligible.
For the US, this could explain about 10% of the skill premium increase during the 80’s; this
magnitude is comparable to the estimated effect of outsourcing on the skill premium in the US
in the 80’s.30
The main argument on the role of non-homothetic preferences does not involve trade. It also
applies to closed economies. In addition to the open-economy simulations, we also simulate a
1% increase in production for all countries in our sample, assuming infinite trade barriers before
and after the productivity increase. Interestingly, our simulated skill-premium elasticities are
very close to the results obtained in an open-economy framework. This is illustrated in Figure 8,
with the open-economy elasticity on the horizontal axis and the closed-economy elasticity on
the vertical axis. Simulated elasticities are all close to the diagonal line, with apparently no
systematic deviations.

0

Closed economy - simulation
.1

.15

Closed economy - approximation

.2
Elasticity - open economy

.25

.3

Figure 8: Open-economy vs. closed-economy simulation and approximation
In a closed-economy framework, it is also possible to approximate the skill-premium elasticity to TFP with expression (18). Using our estimates for income elasticities (εnk ) as well
2004), 16% for Colombia between 1986 and 1998 (Attanasio et al, 2004). Given the growth rates during the
corresponding periods, our model could explain increases of nearly 20%, 4% and 16% respectively for Mexico,
Argentina and Colombia.
29
According to Kijima (2006), the skill premium increased by 13% between 1987 and 1999, while the growth
rate was about 2.2% on average, and our predicted elasticity of skill premium to productivity is larger than
0.25, thus predicting a 6.6% skill premium increase.
30
In a conservative estimate, Feenstra and Hanson (1999) show that outsourcing can explain about 15% of
the skill premium increase.

34

L
as labor shares (shH
nk and shnk ) we can obtain an alternative quantitative prediction of the
skill-premium elasticity. These values are also plotted on figure 8 (red triangles). As it can be
seen, there is a very high correlation between approximated skill-premium elasticity in closed
economy with both simulated elasticities in closed and open economy.
By regressing the closed-economy approximations on the closed-economy simulated elasticities, we find a coefficient of 0.741. This coefficient is smaller than one because of generalequilibrium feedback: an increase in the skill premium yields an increase in the relative price of
high-income elastic goods which negatively affects relative consumption and the relative income
of skilled workers. This feedback effect is embodied in ξn (See equation 17 and appendix section): this effect ξn is however broadly the same for all countries n. In fact, after multiplying
1
, we obtain an extremely
our approximated elasticity by 0.741 as an approximation for 1+ξ
n
good approximation of the simulated elasticity in closed economy (R-square of 96.5%).
Our formula from equation (18) also provide a good approximation of the open-economy
simulated elasticity. In a regression of the simulated skill premium increase in open economy
on the skill premium increase approximation suggested by equation (18), we also obtain a
coefficient of 0.74 with an R-square of 87.1%.31 Hence, our approximation is relevant and can
be safely used to examine differences in the skill-premium elasticity across countries.
Why is this effect larger for poor countries? As we have shown in section 2.3.3, the effect
on the skill premium strongly depends on the income elasticity of demand. These elasticities
decrease with income, which could explain why the effect on the skill premium may be smaller
for richer countries. While this mechanism plays a role, other effects are also present. To
illustrate this, we split the above skill-premium elasticity into i) an average effect; ii) a term
reflecting changes in income elasticity (within effect), iii) a term reflecting difference in labor
allocation across sectors (between effect); iv) and a covariance term:
H
k (shnk

P

X

− shLnk )εnk =

¯ H − sh
¯ L )ε̄k +
(sh
k
k

X

L
(∆shH
nk − ∆shnk )ε̄k

X

k

k

|

¯ H − sh
¯ L )∆εnk +
(sh
k
k

{z

}

|

Average
X
L
+
(∆shH
nk − ∆shnk )∆εnk

k

{z

W ithin

}

|

{z

}

Between

k

|

{z

}

Covariance
H

¯ denotes the average of shH across countries n;32 ε̄k denotes the average of εnk across
where sh
k
nk
H
¯H
countries n; ∆shnk denotes the difference between shH
nk and its average shk ; ∆εnk denotes the
31

In this case, the coefficient is 0.746 with a standard error about 0.02 (open-economy simulation) against
0.01 for the closed-economy simulation. The constant is not significantly different from zero in both cases.
32
shH
nk is defined as the share of sector k in skilled labor employment in country n, see Section 2.3.3.

35

Difference to average effect
-.05
0
.05

.1

difference between εnk and its average ε̄k . From this decomposition (Figure 9), both the within
and between effects seem equally important in explaining differences across countries. While
the within-effect is clearly decreasing with income, as expected, the between effect has an
inverted-U shape and is highest for middle-low income countries such as China.

-.1

Within
4

6

Between

Covariance

8
Log per-capita Expenditure

10

12

Figure 9: Within and between decomposition of the effect on the skill premium

5

Robustness

We explore the robustness of our results in a variety of dimensions. To save space, all results on
the sensitivity of the correlation between skill intensity and income elasticity, our main variable
of interest, are summarized in table 5.

5.1

Price data

In section 3, income elasticities are estimated by controlling for supply-side characteristics
using a proxy price index Pnk which is constructed from the estimated Φnk (from the gravity
equations). Possible mis-estimation of this unobserved variable might raise concerns that our
income elasticity estimates are biased. To test for this, we use actual price data from the
2005 International Comparison Program (ICP) (World Bank 2005), an extensive dataset which
includes price indices for a wide range of products and countries. Despite mapping issues, we

36

are able to match ICP price indices to 38 of the 50 sectors and 88 out of 94 countries included
in our analysis.
The idea here is not to test wether the estimated Pnk perfectly match the actual prices
indices, as there are many reasons for them not to. Indeed, a regression of the log of the ICP
price index on log Pnk including both country and sector fixed effects reveals a significant but
weak correlation (beta correlation coefficient = 0.072, p-value < 0.001).
Rather, we are interested in knowing if the inclusion of ICP price data in demand estimations
leads to significantly different income elasticity estimates.
A simple reduced-form log regression of final demand Xnk on both price indices (not shown),
with both region and sector fixed effects, reveals that the constructed Pnk have a stronger
explanatory power than the ICP index (beta correlation coefficient of 0.343 versus 0.051, both
p-values < 0.01).
Including the ICP price index in the estimation of CRIE demand parameters in a specification similar to (D2) confirms that its predictive power is less than that of the constructed
Pnk . Indeed, resulting income elasticity estimates are closer to those obtained by ignoring
prices entirely (D3). Table 5 displays our correlation of interest when income elasticities are
estimated using ICP prices (column 2) and using both indices (column 3). We clearly find that
controlling for supply-side characteristics with our proxy price index Pnk has a greater impact
on demand estimates. Thus, without being a definite test of the validity of our price index
proxy, the comparison with external price data suggests that potential mis-estimation of the
Φnk would tend to bias our correlation estimates downwards, if anything.
Table 5: Skilled labor to income elasticity correlation - Robustness across specifications
Demand system:

CRIE

Dependent variable:
Prices:
Region(s):
All
With robust data
USA
EU
Japan
Observations

Log
expenditure

LES

AIDS

Expenditure
shares

Expenditure
shares

Expenditure
shares

Phi (θ = 4)

ICP

Both

-

-

-

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.526
0.469
0.390
0.529
0.489
50

0.693
0.645
0.497
0.564
0.642
38

0.552
0.487
0.333
0.442
0.536
38

0.819
0.766
0.629
0.703
0.760
50

0.668
0.614
0.394
0.580
0.748
50

0.858
0.805
0.630
0.719
0.829
50

Notes : all income elasticities calculated using median country expenditure shares. All correlations are significant
at the 1% significance level.

37

5.2

Alternative demand systems

In order to test how our CRIE income elasticity estimates stack up against other demand
systems, we compare them with estimates - generated using the same dataset - from two wellknown alternative demand systems which also exhibit non-homothetic behaviour: the linear
expenditure system (LES) and the ”Almost Ideal Demand System” (AIDS). LES is derived
from Stone-Geary preferences and is essentially an origin-displaced Cobb-Douglas function.
AIDS, first introduced by Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), is not derived from any particular
utility function, but has been widely used for its aggregation properties and its simplicity.
Under the assumption of identical relative prices across regions, these demand systems can be
shown to yield the following relationship between sectoral consumption shares and per-capita
expenditures:
LES : Pxnkx
k

nk

= αk + γk e−1
n

AIDS : Pxnkx
k

P

nk

= αk + γk log en
P

Note that the budget constraint imposes k αk = 1 and k γk = 0 in both cases. In each
case, this relationship is estimated by sector by minimizing errors in expenditure shares (nonlinear least squares subject to the budget constraint). For the sake of the comparison, we
also reestimate CREI preferences by minimizing errors in expenditure shares (whereas our
benchmark estimates minimize errors in log expenditures). The resulting estimates of αk and
γk are then used to compute income elasticities εnk with LES and AIDS:
−1
LES : εnk = αk (γk + αk e−1
n )

AIDS : εnk = 1 + γk (αk + γk log en )−1

Figure 10 plots the distribution of these income elasticities against the CRIE estimates.
All estimates are evaluated at the median country per-capita expenditure level. Clearly, CRIE
estimates are in line with both of these alternative demand systems. Spearman coefficients of
rank correlation with CRIE estimates are 0.88 for LES and 0.85 for AIDS. Most importantly,
columns (5) and (6) of Table 5 confirm that the result of strong correlation between income
elasticities and skill intensity is robust across all three demand systems.
Figure 10 also reveals the weakness of the LES demand system : income elasticites are
very sensitive to income and converge rapidly to unity as income increases. Thus, even when
evaluated at the median country income (as in Figure 10), income elasticities exhibit small
deviations to one. AIDS performs better and yields a larger variability which is closer to that
generated by CRIE.

38

Paddy rice
Processed rice
Cereal grains nec
Sugar cane, sugar beet
Animal products nec
Forestry
Cattle, sheep, goats, horses
Fishing
Sugar
Vegetable oils and fats
Vegetables, fruit, nuts
Crops nec
Wool, silk-worm cocoons
Petroleum, coal products
Beverages and tobacco
Textiles
Oil seeds
Water transport
Electricity
Food products nec
Mineral products nec
Air transport
Bovine meat products
Wheat
Wood products
Construction
Transport nec
Leather products
Transport equipment nec
Chemical, rubber, plastic
Water
Meat products nec
Machinery and equipment nec
Wearing apparel
Dairy products
Metal products
Manufactures nec
Electronic equipment
Trade
Motor vehicles and parts
Recreational and other srv
Public spending
Communication
Raw milk
Paper products, publishing
Plant-based fibers
Financial services nec
Business services nec
Insurance
Gas manufacture, distribution

CRIE - No Transport cost
CRIE - Theta 4
AIDS
LES

0

.5

1
1.5
Estimated Income elasticities

2

Figure 10: Comparison of distribution of income elasticities across demand systems

5.3

Measurement of skill intensity

All results from the previous sections are estimated using sectoral skill intensity indices which
are computed as an average over all countries. We now test whether the main correlations are
robust to using skill intensity measured on the subset of countries with the most reliable data
(see Section 3.2). Table 5 displays the correlation of income elasticities to skill intensity using
different regional subsets of the GTAP data : all GTAP regions, the reliable regions, the US,
Europe (EU) and Japan. Altough, the correlation seems to generally be smaller for the USA
than for the EU and Japan, it remains large and significant for all regions.

5.4

Within-country income distribution

Compared to a hypothetical situation where income is homogenous within each country, withincountry income inequalities can reduce the observed variations in consumption patterns between
countries. For instance, income inequalities could explain why it is possible to find luxurious

39

cars in Africa (as other high-income elastic goods), while this type of goods is clearly not
purchased by any individual with the average income of an African country.
Empirically, income inequalities create a downward bias in the dispersion of estimated
income elasticities if we fail to take these inequalities into account (i.e. it biases our estimated
income elasticities towards unity). Conversely, accouting for within-country inequalities should
reinforce the differences in estimated income elasticities across sectors: it would be otherwise
difficult to explain the large differences in observed consumption patterns across countries.
To confirm this intuition and test the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of withincountry inequalities, we rely as in Fieler (2011) on World Bank data describing the share of
total income held by different percentiles of the population. Available data covers 7 income
classes (the first two and last two deciles, as well as the 3 middle quintiles) and 89 of the 94
countries in our sample.
The estimation procedure in section 3 is modified to allow for 7 representative consumers
in each country (each representing one population quintile or decile). As expected, resulting
income elasticity estimates exhibit larger variations across sectors, although the differences
are very small : the mean absolute deviations from one increases from 0.225 to 0.23833 . The
correlation between the two series is 0.995.
Correspondingly, the correlation of these income elasticity estimates with skill intensity
increases slightly (from 0.488 to 0.534). Thus, accounting for within-country dispersion in
incomes increases the estimated effect of non-homotheticity and makes our results stronger.
However, given the small magnitude of the bias, we are comfortable with using the estimates
from section 3 for counterfactual analyses.

5.5

Intermediate goods

Estimation with intermediate goods The model above does not explicitly account for intermediate goods. In all the above, we estimate the gravity equation using gross trade flows
and we estimate the demand equation using final consumption. This approach is however consistent with a model that does account for intermediate goods under some similarity conditions
between final and intermediate goods within each industry.
With intermediate goods, we need to differentiate final demand Dnk from total absorption
Xnk which also includes demand for goods used as intermediates. While the data allows us to
separately observe final demand from intermediates goods by industry and destination country,
we can only observe trade flows by industry, pooling final goods and intermediate goods together. Hence, it is not possible to separately identify a country’s productivity for final goods
33

comparing estimates generated with the comparable set of 89 countries

40

vs. intermediate goods within the same industry. However, if we assume that goods within
the same industry are produced with similar technics (i.e. same average productivity draw and
same use of inputs), we obtain a common supply term Sik for both final goods and intermediate
goods. If we further assume that trade costs vary by industry but do not depent on the type
of goods within an industry, then we obtain again a gravity equation as in equation 5:
Xnik =

Sik (dnik )−θk
Xnk
Φnk

where Xnk now refers to total absorption and not only final demand. Again, the supplier effect
Sik reflects the cost of producing in industry k in country i. This equation can also be estimated
as in equation (21), with importer and exporter fixed effects to account for Sik and Xnk . As in
the model without intermediate goods, we can retrieve the price index (Φnk to be more precise)
by using exporter fixed effects and gravity coefficients.
In terms of final demand, equation 3 is verified by Dnk instead of Xnk . If xnk (individual
consumptin) now denotes final consumption per capita (Dnk /Ln ), we find that xnk verifies the
same demand equations are satisfied and that these equations can be estimated in the same
way. Hence this justifies why we use information on final demand to estimate the final demand
equation (2nd step) while we use total trade flows to estimate gravity equations (1st step).
Counter-factuals with intermediate goods. While our estimation strategy is consistent
with a model that incorporates intermediate goods, general equilibrium simulations (as in
Section 4.3) need to be amended to account for the use of intermediate goods and inter-industry
linkages. With intermediate goods, the effect of productivity growth on the skill premium can
be larger or smaller depending on the specification.
First, the effect of productivity shocks on production is magnified in a model with intermediate goods. This is can be simply formalized as in the input-output literature as a multiplier
effect (see Fally 2012): the longer the production chain, the larger is the effect of productivity
on output. This effect also mechanically magnifies the effect of productivity growth on the skill
premium.
If we assume that the productivity shock only affect the productivity of factors instead of
all inputs (factors plus intermediate goods), the multiplier effect is then neutralized. If we
further assume that output in each sector is a Cobb-Douglas production function in factors
and intemediate goods from other sectors (see appendix section for details), we can generalize
equation (18) and show that the elasticity of the skill premium to productivity (in a closed
economy) is now:
∂ log spn X H
≈ (shnk − shLnk )εtot
nk
∂ log zn
k
41

where zn is an overall productivity shifter and where εtot
nk (which stands for “total” income
elasticities) is defined as a weighted average of income elasticity of demand in upstream sectors:
εtot
nk

P

=

k0

P

γk0 k Dnk0 εnk0
k0 γk0 k Dnk0

with Dnk0 denoting the final consumption of good k 0 and γk0 k denoting the coefficient of the
Leontief inverse matrix.34 In other words, the effect of productivity also depends on the skill
intensities of other industries required to produce intermediate goods. As the variance of “total”
income elasticities across sectors is smaller than for usual income elasticities of demand, the
overall effect of productivity on the skill premium should be smaller in this case.35

6

Summary and conclusions

We begin the paper with an assertion that a large proportion of both theoretical and empirical
research on international trade focuses on the production side of general equilibrium. The
purpose of the paper is then to demonstrate that an examination of the role of demand can
contribute to explaining a number of persistent puzzles long debated by trade economists. In
particular, we are interested in the relationship between certain systematic characteristics of
demand and characteristics of goods and services in production.
Most general-equilibrium models of trade assume identical and homothetic preferences
across countries. But this assumption seems sharply contradicted by any household budget
study we are aware of. While preferences surely differ across households within countries and
at a broad aggregate level across countries, it is very clear from budget studies that there
is a systematic dependence of expenditures shares across goods and services as a function of
per-capita income. This is our starting point: we assume that preferences are identical but
non-homothetic across countries. In this case, goods and services differ in their income elasticities of demand or alternatively budget expenditure shares are closely related to per-capita
income.
The first empirical task is to estimate a non-homothetic preference model and then back
out income elasticities of demand. Both economically and statistically, we find large deviations
of these elasticities from the unitary values implied by homothetic preferences. The next step
in this analysis is to relate these income elasticities of demand to factor intensities of goods in
Coefficients of matrix (I −M )−1 where M denotes the matrix of direct input-output requirement coefficients.
Note however that intemediate goods required to produce skill-intensive goods tend to be skill-intensive as
well, and therefore these “total” elasticities of demand do not differ greatly from the usual income elasticities.
In fact, the correlation between “total” elasticities and skill intensity is even stronger and increases to 70.0%.
34

35

42

production. Here we find a high, positive correlation (higher than 40 percent) between a good’s
income elasticity of demand and it’s skilled-labor intensity in production. This correlation is
robust to the inclusion of trade costs and other factors. The percentage of a country’s labor
force that is skilled is, in turn, highly correlated (about 88 percent) with per-capita income. In
addition to this correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity and because of it, we
find a significant correlation between demand and supply across goods and services within a
country. Again, this controls for trade costs and is not largely driven by these costs.
We then illustrate several implications by these differences in income elasticities. Our first
results assess the contribution of non-homothetic preferences (and their relationship to factor
intensities) to the “missing trade” puzzle. Our finding is that we can explain about one third
or more of missing trade. This is driven by the supply-demand correlation within countries
which is absent with homothetic preferences. Here, we find countries relatively specialized in
consuming the same goods that they are specialized in producing.
A second set of results relate to trade patterns and trading partners. Our estimation demonstrated that high-income countries have a comparative advantage in high-income-elasticity
goods and services, because these goods are skilled-labor intensive and because the high-income
countries are skilled-labor abundant. This suggests that rich countries are more like to export
to other rich countries and we verify that this is the case. Since rich countries are also the
largest markets in terms of GDP, a country’s level of trade/GDP is likely to depend largely
on whether such a country has a large penetration into the richest markets. But the largest
penetrations into rich markets are by other rich countries as just note. We demonstrate that
richer countries have higher trade to GDP ratios, and that this relationship is stronger under
non-homothetic demand.
A final set of results shed light on a heated debate from the 1990s: the growing gap between
skilled and unskilled wages, where the two main hypotheses both focused on the supply side
of the economy. One was a Stolper-Samuelson argument coming from increased import penetration by unskilled-labor-abundant low-income countries into high-income ones, and the other
focused on skill-biased technical change. Our simulations show that a uniform Hicks-neutral
productivity improvement, equal across all sectors and all countries, leads to an increase in
the skill premium in all countries. The mechanism is straightforward: higher per-capita income shifts demand toward high-income-elasticity goods, which are skilled-labor intensive. This
drives up the relative wage of skilled labor in general equilibrium.

43

Appendix
Notations
Xnk : Total expenditures of country n for sector k
xnk : Individual expenditures in country n for sector k
Xnik : Value of trade FROM country i TO country n in sector k (inverting n and i is
counter-intuitive but follows Eaton and Kortum, 2002)
en : Income in country n
Li : Population in country i
Ff n : Exogenous supply of factor f in country n.
wf n : Price of factor f in country n
zik : TFP in country i in sector k.
Sik : variable reflecting average unit costs (power −θ) in sector k in country i (taking
factor prices into account).
βf k : share of factor f in total cost in sector k (assuming a Cobb-Douglas production
function)
σk : Parameters from preferences reflecting relative income elasticity.
ηk : Elasticity of substitution between varieties within industry k.
θk : Technology parameter inversely related to productivity dispersion in sector k.
Pnk : CES price index in country n for goods from sector k
λn : Lagrangian multiplier for the budget constraint for consumers in country n.
dnik : “Iceberg” transport costs between n and i in sector k.

Proof of equations (17) and (18)
Equation 18 is an approximation for a closed economy by neglecting feedback effects of the skill
premium increase on relative prices. By taking nominal income as the numeraire (thus being
constant), this amount to state that changes in prices are driven by changes in productivity.

44

As we focus on one economy, we drop country subscripts. We examine the effect of a
homogenous productivity (TFP) increase across alll sectors: ẑk = ẑ. Hence:
p̂k ≈ −ẑ
where v̂ = dv
refers to the relative change for any variable v.
v
Taking first differences in demand, we obtain:
x̂k = −σk λ̂ + (1 − σk )p̂k = −σk λ̂ + (σk − 1)ẑ
We need to solve for the change in the budget constraint lagrangian λ. We therefore take
the first difference of the budget constraint. Normalizing nominal income to a constant, the
following condition must be satisfied:
X

x̂k xk = 0

k

Inserting demand into the budget constraint, we obtain an expression for the change in lagrangian:
P
(σk − 1)xk
λ̂ = kP
ẑ
k σ k xk
After incorporating the solution for λ into the change in demand, we obtain:
x̂k = ẑ −

σk

!

!

(σk0 − 1)xk0
σ k 0 xk 0
+ (σk − 1) = ẑ P k
−1
P
k0 σk0 xk0
k 0 σ k 0 xk 0

P

k0

Using equation (2) for the income elasticity: εk =

σk
P

P

k0

x
k0 k0
,
σk0 xk0

P

we obtain:

x̂k = ẑ(εk − 1)
We can see in this expression that an improvement in productivity has a similar effect as an
increase in income (keeping prices constant as a first approximation). In particular, demands
increases more for income-elastic goods.
Having the change in demand for goods, we can now examine the change in the relative
demand for skilled labor. We take the first difference of demand for skilled and unskilled labor.
In terms of skilled wages:
P
x̂k βk xk X
ĥ = Pk
=
x̂k shH
(22)
k
β
x
k k k
k

45

In terms of unskilled wages:
P

x̂k (1 − βk )xk X
=
x̂k shLk
(1
−
β
)x
k k
k
k

ŵ = Pk

(23)

Looking for an expression for the increase in skill premium, ŝ = ĥ − ŵ, we get:
ŝ = ẑ

L
(shH
k − shk )(εk − 1) = ẑ

L
(shH
k − shk )εk − ẑ

X

X

X

k

k

k

L
(shH
k − shk ) = ẑ

X

L
(shH
k − shk )εk

k

Hence the elasticity of the skill premium to the TFP improvement is:
ŝ X H
= (shk − shLk )εk
ẑ
k

General formula
Let’s now prove equation (17). We continue taking nominal income as the numeraire. This
imposes that average wage increase weighted by the corresponding:
(

X

xk βk )ĥ + (

X

xk (1 − βk ))ŵ = 0

k

k

Turning to prices, we now consider the effect of factor prices on goods prices. Taking first
differences, we get:
p̂k = −ẑ + βk ĥ + (1 − βk )ŵ
Given the constrained relationship between skilled and unskilled wages, we obtain:
p̂k = −ẑ + ∆βk ŝ
P
x β
k0 nk0 k0
P

where ∆βk = βk −
and reflects the skill intensity of sector k compared to average
x
k0 nk0
skill intensity. As in the proof of equation (18), we combine this expression with demand and
the budget constraint. We obtain the lagrangian:
P

λ̂ =

!

(σk − 1)xk
ẑ −
P
k σ k xk

k

P

!

σk ∆βk xk
ŝ
P
k σk xk

k

Reincorporating the lagrangian into the demand equation, we obtain:
"

P

xˆk = (εnk − 1)ẑ − (σk − 1)∆βk − σk

46

#

σk0 ∆βk0 xk0
ŝ
P
k 0 σ k 0 xk 0

k0

L
Denoting ak the term into bracket above, we obtain ξn by weighted ak by shH
k − shk and
rearranging and adding the country subscript:

(

P

P

xnk βk σk )( k xnk )
ξn = P
P
( k xnk βk )( k xnk (1 − βk ))
k

"P

k

xnk βk ∆βk (σk − 1)
−
P
k xnk βk σk

P

k

xnk ∆βk (σk − 1)
P
k xnk σk

#

Gravity equation estimates
Table 6 below presents the results of the gravity equation estimations (equation 21). The
first column shows the average estimated coefficient across industries while the second column
shows the standard deviation of the coefficient estimate across industries. These standard errors
reflect the variations of the coefficients across industries but do not reflect measurement errors:
all coefficient estimates are significant at the 1% level for most industries.

Table 6: Coefficients from the gravity equation estimations

Variable:

Mean of
estimated coeffs
across industries

SD of
estimated coeffs
across industries

-0.941
4.545
0.518
0.378
0.171

0.504
1.982
0.488
0.305
0.444

Distance (log)
Home bias
Contiguity
Common lang.
Colonial link
Exporter FE
Importer FE
Nb. of industries

Yes
Yes
50

Notes: Poisson regressions; dependent variable: trade flows; step 1 of
the estimation procedure described in the text. The coefficient above are
estimated separately for each industry.

Simulation equations
We have in hand data or estimates for the following variables that can be taken as exogenous:36
36

Concerning factor prices we assume that they equal one in the data, which implicitely rescale endowments;
this does not matter anyway because the change in factor prices should correspond to the change in factor
demand assuming that factor endowment is exogenous and constant.

47

Ln
σk
µk
αk
Fif
zik
τnik

from GTAP
estimated in the last stage
estimated in the last stage
estimated in the last stage
P
estimated as the value spent on factors in the data n,k βk,f Xnik
estimated in the grativy equations as Sik (taken at the power1/θ)
estimated in the gravity equations (taken at the power1/θ)

Our demand-parameter estimates are obtained from specification D1 assuming θ = 4. All
other variables are simulation outcomes. We need to solve for: λn , en , Xnk , Xnik , wnf and Sik .
Each equation is associated with the corresponding variable for the mixed-complementarity
solver in GAMS:
Bilateral pricing (associated withXnik ) :
Trade (associated withpnik ) :
Price index (associated withXnk ) :

τnik Tik−1

βf k
≥ pnik
f (wf i )
−θ
pnik
Xnik = P p−θ Xnk
j njk
P
 1
−θ − θ
≥ Pnk
j pnjk
Xnk = Ln (λn )−σk α6,k (Pnk )1−σk

Q

Total demand by sector (coupled withPnk ) :
P
Budget constraint (associated withλn ) :
Ln en = k Xnk
P
Factor market clearing (associated withwf i ) : Ff i wf i = n,k βf k Xnik
P
Per capita income (associated withen ) :
Li ei = f Ff i wf i

References
[1] Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop (2003), “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
the Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, vol. 93(1), pages 170-192, March
[2] Attanasio, O., Goldberg P., and N. Pavcnik (2004), “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality
in Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics 74, 331-366.
[3] Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality:
Have Computers Changed The Labor Market?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT
Press, vol. 113(4), pages 1169-1213, November.
[4] Bergstrand, Jeffrey H (1990) “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, the Linder Hypothesis and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-industry Trade,” Economic Journal, Royal
Economic Society, vol. 100(403), pages 1216-29, December

48

[5] Bernasconi, Claudia (2011), “Income Similarity and Bilateral Trade Flows”, University of
Zurich working paper.
[6] Cassing, James and Shuichiro Nishioka (2009), “Nonhomothetic Tastes and Missing Trade
in Factor Services”, working paper
[7] Chaney, Thomas (2008), “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade,” American Economic Review, vol. 98(4), pages 1707-21, September.
[8] Chao, Hung-po, Sehun Kim and Alan S. Manne (1982), “Computation of Equilibria for
Nonlinear Economies: Two Experimental Models”, Journal of Policy Modeling 4(1), 23-43.
[9] Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson and Ivana Komunjer (forthcoming) “What Goods Do
Countries Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas”, Review of Economic
Studies, forthcoming.
[10] Cragg, M.I. and M. Epelbaum (1996): “Why has wage dispersion grown in Mexico? Is it the
incidence of reforms or the growing demand for skills?” Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 51, pp. 99-116.
[11] Davis, Donald R. And David E. Weinstein (2001), “An Account of Global Factor Trade”,
American Economic Review 91, 1423-1453.
[12] Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[13] Donaldson (2008), “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure”, working paper.
[14] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography, and Trade”, Econometrica 70, 1741-1779.
[15] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz (2011), “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence From French Firms,” Econometrica, Econometric Society, vol.
79(5), pages 1453-1498, 09.
[16] Fally, Thibault (2012), “On the Fragmentation of Production in the US”, mimeo.
[17] Fally, Thibault, Rodrigo Paillacar and Cristina Terra (2010), “Economic geography and
wages in Brazil: Evidence from micro-data,” Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier,
vol. 91(1), pages 155-168, January

49

[18] Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1999), “The Impact Of Outsourcing And
High-Technology Capital On Wages: Estimates For The United States, 1979-1990,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 114(3), pages 907-940, August.
[19] Fieler, Ana Cecilia (2011), “Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explanation”, forthcoming in Econometrica.
[20] Gasparini, L. (2004), “Argentina’s Distributional Failure. The Role of Integration and
Public Policies”, IADB Working Paper.
[21] Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik (2007), “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 45(1), pages 39-82,
March.
[22] Hanoch, G. (1975), “Production and Demand Models with Direct or Indirect Implicit Additivity,” Econometrica, 43(3):395-419.
[23] Hunter, Linda (1991), “The Contribution of Non-homothetic Preferences to Trade”, Journal
of International Economics 30, 345-358.
[24] Hunter, Linda and James R. Markusen (1988), “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of
Trade,” in Robert Feenstra (editor), Empirical Methods for International Economics, Cambridge: MIT Press 89-109.
[25] Kijama, Y. (2006), “Why did wage inequality increase? Evidence from urban India 198399,” Journal of Development Economics 81, 97-117.
[26] Lewis, J. and D.Linzer (2005), “Estimating Regression Models in which the Dependent
Variable is based on Estimates,” Political Analysis 13(4): 345-364.
[27] Linder, Staffan B. (1961), An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Stockholm: Almqvist
and Wiksell.
[28] Markusen, James R. (1986), “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach.”
American Economic Review 76, 1002-1011.
[29] Markusen, James R. (2010), “Putting Per-Capita Income Back into Trade Theory,” NBER
Working Papers 15903.
[30] Martinez-Zarzoso, Inmaculada and Sebastian Vollmer (2010), “Bilateral Trade Flows and
Income-Distribution Similarity”, working paper.

50

[31] Matsuyama, Kiminori (2000), “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under NonHomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and NorthSouth Trade”, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1093-2000.
[32] Narayanan, Badri G. and Terrie L. Walmsley, Editors (2008), Global Trade, Assistance, and
Production: The GTAP 7 Data Base, Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University.
[33] Redding, S. and A.J.Venables (2004). “Economic geography and international inequality,”
Journal of International Economics 62(1): 53-82.
[34] Reimer, Jeffery J. And Thomas W. Hertel (2010), “Nonhomothetic Preferences and International Trade”, Review of International Economics 18, 408-425.
[35] Simonovska, Ina (2010), “Income Differences and Prices of Tradeables”, working paper.
[36] Simonovska, Ina and Michael Waugh (2010), “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and
Evidence”, working paper
[37] Trefler, Daniel (1995), “The Case of Missing Trade and Other Mysteries”, American Economic Review 85, 1029-1046.
[38] Waugh, Michael (2010), “International Trade and Income Differences”, American Economic
Review, 100(5): 2093-2124.

51

