                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES STRENGTHENING SELF-DEFENSE LAW DETER CRIME OR ESCALATE
               VIOLENCE? EVIDENCE FROM CASTLE DOCTRINE

                                           Cheng Cheng
                                           Mark Hoekstra

                                        Working Paper 18134
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18134


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We would like to thank Scott Cunningham, Steve Puller, Joanna Lahey, Erdal Tekin, Chandler McClellan,
and Jonathan Meer for providing helpful comments and suggestions. We would like to thank Mark
Seaman for providing excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Cheng Cheng and Mark Hoekstra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Does Strengthening Self-Defense Law Deter Crime or Escalate Violence? Evidence from
Castle Doctrine
Cheng Cheng and Mark Hoekstra
NBER Working Paper No. 18134
June 2012, Revised June 2012
JEL No. K0,K14

                                              ABSTRACT

From 2000 to 2010, more than 20 states passed laws that make it easier to use lethal force in self-defense.
 Elements of these laws include removing the duty to retreat in places outside of one’s home, adding
a presumption of reasonable belief of imminent harm, and removing civil liability for those acting
under the law. This paper examines whether aiding self-defense in this way deters crime or, alternatively,
increases homicide. To do so, we apply a difference-in-differences research design by exploiting the
within-state variation in law adoption. We find no evidence of deterrence; burglary, robbery, and
aggravated assault are unaffected by the laws. On the other hand, we find that homicides are increased
by around 8 percent, and that these homicides are largely classified by police as murder. This suggests
that a primary consequence of strengthened self-defense law is a net increase in homicide. Finally,
we present back-of-the-envelope calculations using evidence on the relative increase in reported justifiable
homicide, along with assumptions about the degree and nature of underreporting, to assess whether
the entire increase was legally justified.


Cheng Cheng
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
chencheng4@neo.tamu.edu

Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3087 Allen Building
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu
1. Introduction

         A long-standing principle of English common law, from which most of U.S.

self-defense law is derived, is that one has a “duty to retreat” before using lethal force

against an assailant.   The exception to this principle is when one is threatened by an

intruder in one’s own home, as the home is one’s “castle”.      In 2005, Florida became the

first in a recent wave of states to extend castle doctrine to places outside the home, and to

expand self-defense protections in other ways. Since then, more than 20 states have

followed in strengthening their self-defense laws by passing versions of “castle doctrine” or

“stand-your-ground” laws. While the specific components vary across states, the laws

eliminate the duty to retreat from a list of specified places, and often remove civil liability

for those acting under the law and establish a presumption of reasonableness as to the

beliefs and actions of the individual claiming self-defense.      For ease of exposition, we

subsequently refer to these laws as castle doctrine laws.

         These laws alter incentives in two important ways. First, the laws reduce the

expected cost of using lethal force.      Castle doctrine lowers the expected legal costs

associated with defending oneself against criminal and civil prosecution, as well as the

probability that one is ultimately found criminally or civilly liable for the death or injury

inflicted. In addition, the laws increase the expected cost of committing violent crime, as

victims are more likely to respond by using lethal force.     The purpose of our paper is to

examine empirically whether people respond to these incentives, and thus whether the laws

lead to an increase in homicide, or to deterrence of crime more generally.

         In doing so, our paper also informs a vigorous policy debate over these laws.

                                               1
Proponents argue these statutes provide law-abiding citizens with additional necessary

protections from civil and criminal liability. They argue that since the decision to use

lethal force is a split-second one that is made under significant stress, the threatened

individual should be given additional legal leeway. Critics argue that existing self-defense

law is sufficient to protect law-abiding citizens, and extending their scope will

unnecessarily escalate violence.                 These potential consequences have been of particular

interest recently following some highly publicized cases.1                             In examining the empirical

consequences of these laws, this study informs the debate over their costs and benefits.

               We use state-level crime data from 2000 to 2010 from the FBI Uniform Crime

Reports to empirically analyze the effects of castle doctrine on two types of outcomes.

First, we examine whether these laws deter crimes such as burglary, robbery, and

aggravated assault. In doing so, we join a much larger literature on criminal deterrence

generally (e.g., Becker, 1968; Ehrlich, 1973; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2004; Donohue and

Wolfers, 2009).           More specifically, however, we join a smaller literature focused on

whether unobserved victim precaution can deter crime.                              For example, Ayres and Levitt

(1998) examine whether LoJack reduces overall motor vehicle thefts, while others have

examined whether laws that make it easier to carry concealed weapons deter crime

(Bronars and Lott, 1998; Dezhbakhsh and Rubin, 1998; Lott and Mustard, 1997; Ludwig,

1998).2


1
   The most publicized case is that of Trayvon Martin, an unarmed teenager who was shot and killed by a neighborhood
watch volunteer (Alvarez, 2012).
2
   Our view is that relative to shall-issue concealed carry laws, the potential for castle doctrine law to deter crimes is quite
large. For example, in Texas only 1.5 percent of adults age 18 and older have a concealed carry permit, and presumably
only a fraction of those carry a gun on a regular basis (Texas Department of Public Safety, 2006; Texas Department of
State Health Services, 2006; and author’s calculations). In contrast, Gallup polls indicate that from 2000 to 2009, 44
percent of households own a gun that could be used in self-defense against a burglar or assailant (Saad, 2011). Moreover,
strengthened self-defense laws lower the cost of using a concealed carry weapon.
                                                               2
        We then examine whether lowering the expected cost of using lethal force results

in an increase in homicide, defined as the sum of murder and non-negligent manslaughter.

We also examine the effects of the laws on other outcomes in order to shed light on why

homicides are affected by the laws.

        To distinguish the effect of the laws from confounding factors, we exploit the

within-state variation in the adoption of laws to apply a difference-in-differences

identification strategy. Intuitively, we compare the within-state changes in outcomes of

states that adopted laws to the within-state changes in non-adopting states over the same

time period.   Moreover, we primarily identify effects by comparing changes in castle

doctrine states to other states in the same region of the country by including Census

region-by-year fixed effects.   Thus, the crucial identifying assumption is that in the

absence of the castle doctrine laws, adopting states would have experienced changes in

crime similar to non-adopting states in the same region of the country. Our data allow us

to test and relax this assumption in several ways. First, we empirically test whether

outcomes in the two groups of states diverge in the year prior to adoption. In addition, we

show that our findings are robust to the inclusion of time-varying covariates such as

demographics, policing, economic conditions, and public assistance, as well as to the

inclusion of contemporaneous crime levels unaffected by castle doctrine laws that proxy for

general crime trends.   Along similar lines, we offer placebo tests by showing that castle

doctrine laws do not affect crimes that ought not be deterred by the laws, such as vehicle

theft and larceny. Failing to find effects provides further evidence that general crime

trends were similar in adopting and non-adopting states.          Finally, we allow for

                                             3
state-specific linear time trends.

           Results indicate that the prospect of facing additional self-defense does not deter

crime.      Specifically, we find no evidence of deterrence effects on burglary, robbery, or

aggravated assault.           Moreover, our estimates are sufficiently precise as to rule out

meaningful deterrence effects.

           In contrast, we find significant evidence that the laws lead to more homicides.

Estimates indicate that the laws increase homicides by a statistically significant 8 percent,

which translates into an additional 600 homicides per year across states that adopted castle

doctrine.      The magnitude of this finding is similar to that reported in a new paper by

McClellan and Tekin (2012), who examine these laws’ effect on firearm-related homicide

using death certificate data from Vital Statistics.3,4                We further show that this divergence in

homicide rates at the time of castle doctrine enactment is larger than any divergence

between the same groups of states at any time in the last 40 years, and that magnitudes of

this size arise rarely by chance when randomly assigning placebo laws in

similarly-structured data sets covering the years prior to castle doctrine.                        In short, we find

compelling evidence that by lowering the expected costs associated with using lethal force,

castle doctrine laws induce more of it.

           This increase in homicides could be due either to the increased use of lethal force



3
  One advantage of using FBI UCR data is that it allows us to assess both how the laws affect the use of lethal force and
whether they deter violent crime. In addition, the nature of the UCR data enables us to measure all homicides, rather
than just those caused by firearms. The data also allow us to examine homicide subclassifications and relative changes
in reported justifiable homicide from the SHR, along with assumptions about the degree of underreporting, to address the
issue of whether the additional homicides are legally justified. This is not possible using data originating from death
certificates. The primary disadvantage of the UCR homicide data is that while the annual state-level data we use are
regarded as accurate and there is no reason to believe that any total homicide reporting issue at any level should be
systematically correlated with changes in castle doctrine law, the monthly data from Vital Statistics are more complete.
4
  Our findings contrast with those of Lott (2010) in More Guns, Less Crime, who reports that castle doctrine laws
adopted from 1977 through 2005 reduced murder rates and violent crime.
                                                              4
in self-defense situations that are classified by police as murder, or to the escalation of

violence in otherwise non-lethal conflicts. In an attempt to shed light on whether the

increase is driven entirely by legally justified homicide, we look at two things. For

evidence of escalation by criminals, we look at whether criminals are more likely to carry a

gun while committing robbery, and whether there is an increase in felony-type and

suspected felony-type murder, in which a murder is committed during the commission of

another felony. There is little robust evidence of an increase in criminals’ propensity to

carry a weapon. Estimated effects on felony-type and suspected felony-type murder are

positive and large, but imprecisely estimated.

            In addition, we look at justifiable homicide, which is a separate classification

available in the Supplemental Homicide Reports.                               One concern with these data is

underreporting; Kleck (1988) estimates that only one-fifth of legally justified homicides are

classified that way by police. Nevertheless, we would still expect relative changes in

reported justifiable homicides before and after the laws to be informative, and show that

while our best back-of-the-envelope estimate is that roughly half of the additional

homicides caused by castle doctrine are legally justified, stronger assumptions about the

degree of underreporting (e.g., one-tenth compared to one-fifth) can lead one to conclude

that all of the additional homicides caused by castle doctrine are legally justified.                                     We

emphasize that any conclusion depends on assumptions regarding the degree and nature of

underreporting of justifiable homicide by police.5

            Collectively, these findings suggest that incentives do matter in one important


5
 Of course, there is also the issue of whether all legally justified homicides under castle doctrine are socially desirable,
which is beyond the scope of this paper.
                                                               5
sense: lowering the threshold for the justified use of lethal force results in more of it.   On

the other hand, there is also a limit to the power of incentives, as criminals are apparently

not deterred by empowering victims to use lethal force to protect themselves.

         These findings also have significant policy implications.      The first is that these

laws do not appear to offer any hidden spillover benefits to society at large. Rather, the

evidence indicates that the benefits of strengthening self-defense laws begin and end with

the added protections to actual victims of violent crime.      On the other hand, the primary

potential downside of the law is the increased number of homicides.         Thus, our view is

that any evaluation of these laws ought to weigh the benefits of increased self-defense

against the net increase in loss of life caused by the laws.




2. Castle Doctrine Law and Identification

2.1   Castle Doctrine Law

         U.S. self-defense law, which stems from English common law, has long favored

the principle of “retreat to the wall”, which means that only after no longer being able to

retreat safely could one respond to an attacker with deadly force (Vilos and Vilos, 2010).

The exception to this rule is if the attack is inside one’s home, or “castle”, in which case

there is no longer a duty to retreat.   In 2005, a wave of states began removing the duty to

retreat from places outside the home, as well as strengthening self-defense laws in several

other ways. For example, most laws added language that explicitly states individuals are

justified in using deadly force in certain circumstances when they reasonably believe that

they face a serious risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm.          In addition, castle

                                               6
doctrine laws removed the duty to retreat in a list of special places such as one’s vehicle,

place of work and, in some cases, any place one has a legal right to be. Additionally,

many of these laws also added a presumption of reasonable fear of imminent serious injury

or death, which shifts the burden of proof to the prosecutor to show someone acted

unreasonably.6        Similarly, many laws also grant immunity from civil liability when using

defensive force in a way justified under law. Collectively, these laws lower the cost of

using lethal force to protect oneself, though they also lower the cost of escalating violence

in other conflicts.

           Our understanding is that the main rationale for these laws was to provide

additional legal leeway to potential victims in self-defense situations, not to deter crime.

Thus, there is little reason to believe that the enactment of these laws coincided with either

other policies expected to affect crime or homicides, or with expectations about future

crime.7

           To determine if and when states passed castle doctrine laws, we searched news

releases and other sources such as the Institute for Legislative Action of the National Rifle

Association to determine whether a state appeared to have passed a law that strengthened

self-defense law these ways. Specifically, we coded the specific attributes of each state

statute found, and classified whether the law i) removed the duty to retreat from somewhere

outside the home, ii) removed the duty to retreat from any place one has a legal right to be,



6
  For example, the law passed in Florida states that “a person is presumed to have held a reasonable fear of imminent
peril of death or bodily injury to himself or herself or another when using defensive force that is intended or likely to
cause death or bodily injury to another.”
7
  The National Rifle Association (NRA) was a major proponent of these laws (Goode, 2012). We are unaware of any
statement by the NRA that suggests their support for the laws is due to a belief that the law will deter crime, or that the
law is a necessary response to recent changes in violent crime. Rather, our understanding is that supporters view castle
doctrine as an issue of individual and victim rights.
                                                            7
iii) added a presumption of reasonable fear for the person using lethal force, and iv)

removed civil liability for those acting under the law. We then classified a state as having

a castle doctrine law if they remove the duty to retreat in some place outside the home.

Our goal in doing so was to create a list of states that extended castle doctrine and generally

passed meaningful changes to their self-defense law that would be widely reported.8

           Table 1 shows the list of states classified as those enacting castle doctrine between

2000 and 2010. We classify 21 states as having passed castle doctrine laws, as each of

these states extended the castle doctrine to places outside the home.9                             Of these, 17 states

removed the duty to retreat in any place one has the legal right to be, 13 included a

presumption of reasonable fear, and 18 explicitly removed civil liability.                                     Our main

analysis groups all of these laws together, and thus captures the average effect of passing a

law similar to those passed in these 21 states.                     However, since that approach is perhaps

unnecessarily blunt, in appendix Table A1 we show results from different subgroups and

find that the results are largely similar to the average effects.                      We note, however, that due

to the high degree of collinearity and the potential for interaction effects, distinguishing

between effects caused by different attributes of these laws is difficult.




8
  We are aware of four states that passed laws removing civil liability that that made no other changes to self-defense law
over this time period, including Idaho (2006), Maryland (2010), Maine (2007), and Illinois (2004). We do not code
those states as castle doctrine states. We also do not classify Wyoming as having passed a castle doctrine law, though we
note that they removed civil liability and added a presumption of reasonable fear (provisions that removed the duty to
retreat were stripped out prior to passage) (Vilos and Vilos, 2010). Finally, we note that in an earlier version of the paper
we defined these laws somewhat more broadly, and somehow missed that Oklahoma passed a castle doctrine law on
November 1st of 2006. We thank McClellan and Tekin (2012) for helpful conversations about the specific attributes of
laws passed in different states.
9
  To avoid confusion over which states are driving the within-state variation used in our study, we intentionally leave
states off Table 1 if they had passed a law that extended castle doctrine prior to 2000 or after 2010, which are outside our
sample period.
                                                               8
2.2    Crime Data

           Outcome data come from the FBI Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) and cover all 50

states from 2000 – 2010. 10                 Specifically, we use homicide, burglary, robbery, and

aggravated assault data from the official UCR data published online by the FBI.11                                     In

addition, for the other variables not available from the online UCR, we use data from the

FBI’s Master files (Return A and Supplemental Homicide Report).

           We use these data to test whether making it easier for individuals to use lethal

force in self-defense deters crime or increases homicide.                        For deterrence, we focus on

three criminal outcomes.            The first is burglary, which is defined as “the unlawful entry of

a structure to commit a felony or a theft” (FBI, 2004). The second is robbery, defined as

“the taking or attempting to take anything of value from the care, custody, or control of a

person or persons by force or threat of force or violence and/or by putting the victim in fear”

(FBI, 2004). Finally, we also examine aggravated assault, which the FBI defines as “an

unlawful attack by one person upon another for the purpose of inflicting severe or

aggravated bodily injury”, and is typically accompanied by the use of a weapon (FBI,

2004).12     In all cases, one might expect rational criminals to be less likely to commit such

crimes under castle doctrine, as the increased scope for the use of justifiable lethal force on




10
   There are relatively few cases of missing data. Data on whether robbery was committed with a gun were missing from
2000 to 2005 for Illinois. Justifiable homicide data were missing for Florida, so we requested and received those data
directly from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement Office.
11
   These data include corrections by the FBI to adjust for under-reporting by police agencies. We note, however, that
results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar if we instead use data from the Supplemental Homicide Report and
Return A from the FBI Master files, which were acquired directly from the FBI and include statistics reported after the
deadline, but do not correct for under-reporting. For example, estimates corresponding to the homicide estimates in the 6
columns of Panel A in Table 5 are 0.0853, 0.0926, 0.0850, 0.0892, 0.0729, and 0.128, respectively. All are significant at
the 1 percent level.
12
   Results are similar using data on all assaults, including simple assault, which were obtained from Return A of the FBI
Master files.
                                                               9
the part of the victim raises the expected cost to the criminal.13

           Our last set of outcomes is intended to measure the escalation of violence. The

primary outcome we examine is total homicides, which is defined as the sum of murder and

non-negligent manslaughter, although we also look at murder separately to determine

exactly how police are classifying the additional homicides.14

           An increase in homicide could represent either an increase in legally justified

homicide that is reported as murder or non-negligent manslaughter, or the escalation of

violence by criminals, or the escalation of violence in otherwise non-violent situations.15

In order to shed light on that issue, we look at two other outcomes, both of which measure

the escalation of violence by criminals in response to castle doctrine.                                   The ratio of

robberies committed with a gun measures whether criminals respond by being more likely

to carry and use weapons during the commission of a crime, as one might expect if they

believe they will be faced with lethal force by the victim.                      We also look at felony-type and

suspected felony-type murders, which also measure the escalation of violence by criminals.

We expect to see increases in these outcomes if castle doctrine laws induce criminals to be

more likely to carry and use deadly weapons during the commission of crimes.

                 In addition, we also ask whether the laws increase homicides that are reported

to the FBI as “justifiable homicides by private citizens”, which the FBI defines as “the

killing of a felon during the commission of a felony” (Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook,


13
   To the extent castle doctrine increases homicide, however, the hierarchy rule means that our results are (slightly) biased
in favor of finding deterrence effects. The hierarchy rule instructs reporting agencies to only code the highest, or most
serious, offense in multiple-offense situations. Thus, a burglary that escalates into a homicide due to castle doctrine will
be coded as a homicide, which would lead us to (slightly) overstate the magnitude of deterrence.
14
   Homicide figures come from the UCR data published online and do not include justifiable homicides. Murder figures
come from the FBI’s Return A, since murder is not available as a separate category in the published UCR.
15
   The general possibility that disputes can escalate dramatically in environments perceived to be dangerous is discussed
in O’Flaherty and Sethi (2010).
                                                             10
2004).      The major disadvantage of these data is that they are widely believed to be

underreported; Kleck (1988) estimates that around one-fifth of legally justified homicides

are reported that way to the FBI. However, note that we use these data only to look for

evidence of relative changes in legally justified homicide, and then use those estimates

along with varying assumptions about the degree of underreporting in order to determine if

the entire increase in homicides can be explained by legally justified homicide.                                       What

would complicate our analysis is if reporting changed over time in a way that was

systematically correlated with the passage of castle doctrine. While the FBI Uniform

Crime Reporting Handbook makes it look to us that this should not be the case,16 our view

is that if anything, police agencies are probably more likely to report homicides as

justifiable after the passage of these laws.                     Thus, we interpret our estimates as upper

bounds on the relative effect of castle doctrine on legally justifiable homicide.

            The data also allow us to perform several placebo, or falsification tests. For

example, because the focus of castle doctrine laws is on civilians, and not law enforcement,

we examine whether we detect effects of the laws on justifiable homicide by police.

Similarly, we use data on the rate of larceny and motor vehicle theft to determine whether



16
   For example, the handbook emphasizes that “law enforcement agencies must report the willful (non-negligent) killing
of one individual by another, not the criminal liability of the person or persons involved” (Uniform Crime Reporting
Handbook, 2004). In addition, the handbook emphasizes that by definition, justifiable homicide occurs in conjunction
with other offenses, and those other offenses must be reported. The handbook explicitly states that “reporting agencies
should take care to ensure that they do not classify a killing as justifiable or excusable solely on the claims of self-defense
or on the action of a coroner, prosecutor, grand jury, or court” (Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook, 2004).
Additionally, the handbook gives examples of specific hypothetical events that would and would not qualify as justifiable
homicide under the guidelines. An example given of an incident that would qualify as a justifiable homicide is “When a
gunman entered a store and attempted to rob the proprietor, the storekeeper shot and killed the felon” (Uniform Crime
Reporting Handbook, 2004). Note that in the absence of castle doctrine law, this may not qualify as a self-defense case
(though it could, of course), but according to the guidelines should still have been reported as a justifiable homicide. An
example of what would NOT qualify as a justifiable homicide is “While playing cards, two men got into an argument.
The first man attacked the second with a broken bottle. The second man pulled a gun and killed his attacker. The
police arrested the shooter; he claimed self-defense” (Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook, 2004). Note here that under
castle doctrine, the shooter may well have been justified as acting in self-defense, though again the reporting handbook
explicitly states that this would not qualify as a justifiable homicide under the guidelines.
                                                                11
castle doctrine laws appear to affect those crimes.17                   In both cases we expect to find no

effects so long as the identifying assumptions of our difference-in-difference research

design hold, which we discuss at length in the next section.

           Finally, we have data on several time-varying control variables. Specifically, we

have measures of the number of full-time equivalent police per 100,000 state residents

(Uniform Crime Reports, 2000-2010).                 We also include both contemporaneous and lagged

measures of the number of persons incarcerated in state prison per 100,000 residents

(Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, 2000-2010). These variables capture the effects of

deterrence and incapacitation caused by additional policing or incarceration. In addition,

we have two variables from the American Community Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau

that measure local legal opportunities, including median family income and the poverty rate.

We also have data on the share of white and black men in the 15-24 and 25-44 age groups

for each state over time (American Community Survey, 2000-2010). Finally, we measure

the generosity of public assistance in each state by measuring per capita spending on

assistance and subsidies and per capita spending on public welfare (US Census, 2000 –

2010).




3. Identification

           To distinguish the effect of the castle doctrine laws from confounding factors, we

exploit the within-state variation induced by the fact that 21 states passed such laws

between 2000 and 2010.             Specifically, we use a difference-in-differences research design


17
  While it may be possible for castle doctrine law to deter these crimes as well, our view is that deterrence should be
considerably less likely for these crimes than for burglary, robbery, and aggravated assault.
                                                              12
that asks whether outcomes change more in states that adopt castle doctrine laws than in

states that do not, and focus primarily on within-region comparisons.

             Formally, we estimate fixed effects ordinary least squares (OLS) panel data

models, where we typically use the log of the outcome per 100,000 population as the

dependent variable.            In addition, because a significant number of states report zero

justifiable homicides in a given year, we estimate a fixed effects negative binomial model

for that outcome as well as OLS models that use the number of justifiable homicides as the

dependent variable and control for population on the right-hand side.                           Ordinary least

squares models are estimated with and without weighting by state population.                         The OLS

model estimated is

Outcome

where CDLit is the treatment variable that equals the proportion of year t in which state i has

an effective castle doctrine law, X it is the vector of control variables, and ci and ut control

for state and year fixed effects, respectively.               In addition, in most models we also include

Census region-by-year fixed effects, to allow states in different regions of the country to

follow different trajectories and account for differential shocks by region over time.18

Note that for states that enacted the law partway through a year, we set CDL equal to the

proportion of the year in which the law was in effect.                     Robust standard errors are clustered

at the state level, though we also do additional exercises in the spirit of Bertrand, Duflo,

and Mullainathan (2004) to ensure standard errors are being estimated accurately, as well as

to perform inference using placebo estimates from simulated pre-castle doctrine data.


18
     There are four Census Regions: West, Midwest, Northeast, and South.
                                                           13
This last approach of using distributions of placebo estimates to do inference is similar in

spirit to the permutation inference approach used in the synthetic control method by Abadie,

Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010).

           Since we primarily rely on specifications that include state fixed effects and

region-by-year fixed effects, the identifying assumption is that in the absence of the castle

doctrine laws, adopting states would have experienced changes in crime similar to

non-adopting states in the same region of the country. Our data allow us to test and relax

this identifying assumption in several ways. First, we offer a formal statistical test of this

by including an indicator in equation (1) for the year prior to the passage of the laws.

That is, we ask whether states that pass the laws diverge even before they pass the laws.                            If

they do, it suggests that the identifying assumption of our research design is violated.

           We also examine whether time-varying determinants of crime are orthogonal to the

within-state variation in castle doctrine laws. Under our identifying assumption, factors

such as economic conditions, welfare spending, and policing intensity should not change

more over time in adopting states than non-adopting states, as this would suggest that crime

in the two groups might have diverged even in the absence of treatment.                                    Thus, we

examine whether adding these controls changes our estimates in a meaningful way. To the

extent that our difference-in-differences estimates remain unchanged, it provides some

assurance that our research design is reasonable.19

           Along similar lines, we also show results from specifications that include

contemporaneous motor vehicle theft and larceny as controls. While it is possible that

19
    The primary concern is not that observed determinants vary systematically over time—we can control for those
variables directly—but that if they do, it may suggest that unobserved determinants also change systematically over time
in the treatment and control groups.
                                                            14
castle doctrine laws could affect these crimes, we would expect any such effects to be

second-order and at most small in magnitude.                   Thus, we use these crime measures as

controls that pick up any differential trends in crime in adopting and non-adopting states.

We also perform falsification exercises using these crimes as outcomes to explicitly test

whether castle doctrine laws appear to affect crimes unrelated to self-defense.                            If our

identifying assumption holds, we would expect to see no effects on these crimes.

          Finally, we allow for state-specific linear time trends, thereby allowing each state

to follow a different trend.




4.    Results

4.1    Falsification Tests

          One way to test the identifying assumption is to directly examine whether crimes

that ought not be affected by the laws—and thus proxy for general crime trends—appear to

be affected by the laws.20         Finding effects on crimes that ought to be exogenous to castle

doctrine law would invalidate our research design.

          Thus, we examine whether castle doctrine laws appear to affect larceny or motor

vehicle theft. While it is possible that these outcomes are affected directly by self-defense

laws, we argue that such effects should be second-order, at best.

          Results are shown in Table 3, which uses a format similar to subsequent tables

showing other outcomes. Columns 1 through 6 represent OLS estimates that are weighted

by population, while Columns 7 through 12 are unweighted OLS estimates.                                The first


20
  Similar tests are performed by Ayres and Levitt (1998), when they look for effects of Lojack on crimes other than
motor vehicle theft.
                                                        15
column of each group controls for only state and year fixed effects. The second column

adds region-by-year fixed effects, while the third column adds time-varying controls.    The

fourth column additionally includes an indicator variable for the year before the castle

doctrine law was adopted; the fifth drops the leading indicator but adds controls for

contemporaneous larceny and motor vehicle theft. Finally, the last column controls for

state fixed effects, region-by-year fixed effects, time-varying controls, and state-specific

linear time trends.

         Estimates for larceny are close to zero and statistically insignificant across all

specifications. Estimates of the effect on the log of the motor vehicle theft rate are more

interesting.   Results in columns 1 and 7 in which only state and year fixed effects are

included provide suggestive evidence of increases in motor vehicle theft of 5 to 8 percent,

the latter of which is significant at the 10 percent level.             However, including

region-by-year fixed effects in columns 2 and 8 causes the estimate to drop to zero or even

turn negative, and both are statistically insignificant. This suggests that accounting for

differences in regional trends in some way may be important in assessing the impact of

castle doctrine laws.




4.2 Deterrence

         We now examine whether strengthening self-defense law deters crime.              We

examine three types of crime: burglary, robbery, and aggravated assault.    To the extent that

criminals respond to the higher actual or perceived risk that victims will use lethal force to

protect themselves, we would expect these crimes to decline after the adoption of castle

                                              16
doctrine.

        Results are shown in Table 4, where the first 6 columns show estimates from an

OLS regression weighted by state population, while the second 6 columns are from

unweighted OLS regressions. Results in Column 1 in Panel A for burglary are similar to

the finding for motor vehicle theft, in that estimates range from 6 to 8 percent and are

statistically significant at the 5 percent level.   Again, however, including region-by-year

effects in columns 2 and 8 reduces the estimates considerably, and all are statistically

indistinguishable from zero at the 5 percent level.

        Importantly, there is little evidence of deterrence effects in any specification for any

outcome: of the 36 estimates reported, none are negative and statistically significant at the

10 percent level.    The estimates are sufficiently precise as to rule out large deterrence

effects. For example, in our preferred specification in column 3, the lower bounds of

estimates on burglary, robbery, and aggravated assault are -2.1 percent, -1.9 percent, and

-2.5 percent. Put differently, our estimates and standard errors from column 3 indicate

that if we were to perform this castle doctrine policy experiment many times, we would

expect that 90 percent of the time we would find deterrence effects of less than 0.7 percent,

0.4 percent, and 0.5 percent for burglary, robbery, and aggravated assault, respectively.    In

short, these estimates provide strong evidence against the possibility that castle doctrine

laws cause economically meaningful deterrence effects.        Thus, while castle doctrine law

may well have benefits to those protecting themselves in self-defense, there is no evidence

that the law provides positive spillovers by deterring crime more generally.




                                               17
4.3 Homicide

         We now turn to whether strengthening self-defense laws increases homicide.

Given that the laws reduce the expected costs associated with using violence, economic

theory would predict that there would be more of it. This could be driven by any of

several possibilities. For example, the increase could be due to additional legally justified

killings that are not reported that way by police.   Perhaps more troubling is the possibility

that under castle doctrine, conflicts or crimes that might not have otherwise turned deadly

now do. For example, a criminal may not have intended to kill someone he was robbing

until the victim attempted to use a weapon in self-defense.     Alternatively, criminals may

escalate violence in response to castle doctrine laws and cause in increase in homicide.

          Results are shown in Panels A, B, and C of Table 5, which show

population-weighted OLS estimates, unweighted OLS estimates, and unweighted estimates

from a negative binomial model.       Estimates from the negative binomial regression are

interpreted in the same way as those from a log-linear OLS model.           Results from the

population-weighted shown in Panel A indicate that the homicide rate is increased by 8 to

10 percent; all 6 estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and 3 are

significant at the 1 percent level.   Estimates from unweighted OLS regressions shown in

Panel B range from 5 to 9 percent, though all are measured imprecisely: t-statistics range

from 0.6 to 1.5.    Estimates in Panel C from a negative binomial model indicate castle

doctrine leads to a 6 to 11 percent increase in homicide.    All negative binomial estimates

that include region-by-year fixed effects are significant at the 5 percent level, and that

which does not (column 1) is significant at the 10 percent level.

                                              18
          We have also done additional tests in order to ensure that we are making correct

inferences about statistical significance. Toward that end, we do tests in the spirit of

Bertrand et al. (2004), in which we randomly select 11-year panels from 1960 to 2004, and

then randomly assign states to the treatment dates found in our data, without replacement.

Thus, we assume that one state adopted castle doctrine on October 1st of the 6th year of the

11-year panel (just as Florida actually adopted in 2005, the 6th year of our panel), and that

13 more states adopted in the 7th year of the 11-year panel, etc. We generate distributions

of estimates, and ask how often we reject the null hypothesis of no effect at the 5 percent

level, as well as what proportion of the placebo estimates are larger than the actual

estimated effect of (real) castle doctrine. The latter figure corresponds to a p-value and is

similar to the method used in synthetic control methods (Abadie et al., 2010), as well as by

Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009).

          The resulting placebo distributions are shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3, and

correspond to Table 5 results from column 2 of Panels A, B, and C, respectively.     Results

from population-weighted OLS placebo estimates suggest that robust clustered standard

errors may be a bit too small: 11.9 percent of simulated estimates are significant at the 5

percent level.   However, the estimate of 9.46 percent in column 2 ranks in the 95th

percentile of placebo estimates, which means only 5 percent of placebo estimates are larger

than it is.

          Results for unweighted OLS simulation results are also interesting. On the one

hand, simulations corresponding to the specification in column 2 of Panel B in Table 5

suggest that clustered standard errors from unweighted OLS regressions are accurate: 6.3

                                             19
percent of the simulated estimates are significant at the 5 percent level.   At the same time,

however, the estimate of 8.1 percent shown in Table 5 corresponds to the 94.7th percentile

(see Figure 2), which would give it a p-value of 5.3 percent using the Abadie et al. (2010)

approach to inference.     This suggests that results in Panel B of Table 5 understate the

degree of statistical significance.

         Finally, simulations for the fixed effect negative binomial model corresponding to

column 2 in Panel C indicate that 9.7 percent of placebo estimates are significant at the 5

percent level, while 15.6 percent are significant at the 10 percent level. As shown in

Figure 3, the estimate of 7.3 percent in Table 5 ranks at the 95.4th percentile, as fewer than

5 percent of placebo estimates were larger than the actual estimate in the simulations.

         On the basis of these exercises, we conclude that it is unlikely that we would have

obtained estimates of the magnitude and statistical significance shown in Panels A, B, and

C of Table 5 due to chance.

         We have also performed simulations to see if the homicide rates of these particular

21 states ever diverged in the way they did after adopting castle doctrine in the late 2000s.

To do so, we created 40 panel data sets, each covering separate 11-year time periods

between 1960 and 2009. In each 11-year panel, we assume that Florida adopts castle

doctrine on October 1st of the 6th year, and that the 13 states that adopted in 2006 adopted in

the 7th year, etc. None of the 40 estimates corresponding to either the OLS

population-weighted regressions or from the negative binomial regression were larger than

those shown in column 2 of Table 5.     In the case of the OLS unweighted regressions, only

1 of the 40 placebo estimates was larger than the actual estimate of 8.1 percent shown in

                                              20
Column 2, Panel B, of Table 5.21                  Thus, there is no evidence that the homicide rates in

castle doctrine states show a general tendency to diverge from their regional counterparts:

in the last 40 years they have almost never done so as much as they did immediately after

they passed castle doctrine.

           The relative increase in the homicide rate can be seen graphically as well.                              Figure

4 shows the log of homicide rate for the 13 states that adopted castle doctrine in 2006, as

well as for the 29 states that did not extend castle doctrine from 2000 to 2010.22                               It shows

that while the trends of the two groups track each other closely prior to castle doctrine,

afterward homicides in adopting states increase relative to control states.                                 Importantly,

Figure 1 also gives us little reason to believe that even in the absence of castle doctrine,

adopting states would have experienced an increase in homicides after 2005 relative to

non-adopting states.23

           Collectively, we view these findings as compelling evidence that castle doctrine

increases homicide.           However, we note that one downside of the homicide measure is that

it could well include homicides that are justified under the new self-defense law, but are not

reported separately as justifiable homicides.                    Thus, this increase may not be viewed by

everyone as unambiguously bad.                       For example, the increase could be driven by



21
   The one larger estimate was 10.5 percent, and was from the 1975 to 1985 time period.
22
   It is more difficult to show a meaningful graph for the entire sample of adopting states, as they enacted castle doctrine
in different years. Also, note that this graph does not rely on within-regional variation, unlike most of our specifications.
Nevertheless, we think that showing results graphically for the largest subset of states that passed the law in the same year
gives the reader a rough idea of the raw variation in the data.
23
   As shown in Figure 1, adopting states have homicide rates that are about 30 percent higher than non-adopting states.
However, because we are using a difference-in-differences research design that conditions on year and state fixed effects,
differences in levels is not a concern for identification. Instead, what would worry us is if the homicide rate in adopting
states increased more than in non-adopting states even before treatment, as that would suggest that the groups might have
continued to diverge afterward, regardless of castle doctrine. We see no evidence of that, which suggests that the relative
increase seen after 2005 is caused by castle doctrine. Moreover, note that homicide estimates remained similar even
after controlling for time-varying police and incarceration rates and other controls, including region-by-year fixed effects,
and allowing for state-specific linear time trends.
                                                              21
individuals protecting themselves from imminent harm by using lethal force. On the other

hand, the increase could be driven by the escalation of violence in situations that otherwise

would not have ended in serious injury for either party. Note, however, that the net

increase cannot be driven by a one-to-one substitution of homicides of assailants for

homicides of innocent victims. In contrast, in order for the entire increase in homicide to

be driven by life-saving use of force, there would have to be at least some cases of multiple

killed assailants by a would-be-killed victim.

        Results in Panel D of Table 5 show results for murder, which excludes

non-negligent manslaughter classifications that one might think would be used more often

in self-defense killings not classified as justifiable homicides.      Estimates indicate a

similarly sized increase in murder, which suggests that police are largely classifying these

additional homicides as murders.

        Given the robustness of the estimates to various specifications, it is worth

considering what one would have to believe for a confounding factor to cause the observed

increase in murder/homicide, rather than castle doctrine.      That is, one would have to

believe that something else caused homicides to increase relative to non-adopting states

immediately after castle doctrine was enacted, but not in the years prior to enactment.   In

addition, this confounder must have only caused a divergence in homicide rates in the late

2000s coincidental with the passage of castle doctrine, and not at any point in the 40 years

prior. Furthermore, this confounder must cause an increase in homicides in castle doctrine

states after adoption, but not cause a similar increase in states in the same region of the

country that did not adopt castle doctrine at that time. Additionally, the confounder must

                                                 22
cause adopting states to diverge from their own pre-adoption trend in homicide rate,

coincidental with the enactment of castle doctrine. The confounder must also increase

homicides in adopting states after adoption without causing proportionate increases in

motor vehicle theft and larceny.       Finally, the confounder must be uncorrelated with

changes in the economic conditions, welfare generosity, and the rates of incarceration and

policing in adopting states immediately following adoption.    We are unable to think of any

confounding factor that would fit this description, and thus we interpret the increase in

homicides as the causal effect of castle doctrine.




4.4 Homicide: Interpretation

         While it is clear that the increase in homicide is largely being classified by police

as murder, it is possible that this represents a misclassification by police. Here we look

directly for evidence of this and other interpretations.   We start by assessing whether

criminals appear to escalate violence in response to castle doctrine laws. For example, a

rational criminal may respond to a real or perceived increase in the likelihood of

encountering a victim willing to use lethal force by using a deadly weapon himself. Thus,

we examine whether castle doctrine increases felony-type and suspected felony-type

murders, which appeared to be committed during a felony. Results are shown in Panel A

of Table 6.   The estimate from column 1, which controls only for state and year fixed

effects, is 10 percent and is statistically indistinguishable from zero.     Estimates from

specifications including region-by-year fixed effects are more suggestive of a criminal

escalation effect: estimates in columns 2 through 5 are around 20 percent and are

                                               23
statistically significant at the 10 percent level, though we note the estimate goes to zero

when allowing for state-specific time trends in column 6.                        We also examine whether

criminals are more likely to use guns during robberies.24                        Results in Panel B of Table 6

indicate that there is little evidence of this type of escalation, at least once one compares

states to others in their same region.25               In short, while we find some suggestive evidence

of escalation by criminals, the evidence is far from conclusive.

           Finally, we turn to evidence on whether the laws increase the reported number of

justifiable homicides.           The problem with these data is that justifiable homicides are

believed to be underreported: Kleck (1988) estimates that only one-fifth of legally justified

homicides by civilians are reported.                    However, even though the level of justifiable

homicides may be underreported, relative changes in justifiable homicide may still be

informative.        As a result, we focus on examining the relative increase in reported

justifiable homicide, and then estimate how many additional legally justified homicides

there really are by scaling the pre-castle doctrine figure by estimates of underreporting.

           Results are shown in Panels C, D, and E of Table 6. Panel C shows estimates

from population-weighted regressions in which the number of justifiable homicides is the

dependent variable.          Results range from 1 to 9 additional justifiable homicides, which is

relative to a baseline population-weighted average of 10.0 justifiable homicides per state in

the year prior to castle doctrine enactment. Thus, the estimate when controlling for only


24
   We also look at the proportion of assaults in which a gun was used and find no evidence of an increase, though the
baseline rate is small (3 percent). We also note that examining these ratios as outcome variables could be problematic if
the laws were found to reduce robbery or aggravated assault. However, as we show in Table 4 there is no effect on
robberies or aggravated assaults.
25
   It is difficult to think of how using other FBI classifications could help answer this question. For example, the FBI
classifies some non-felony-type homicides as having originated in an argument. It is difficult to know, however, whether
the argument would have resulted in serious injury to the killer, had that person not used lethal force, or if the argument
escalated from, say, a fistfight into a homicide. Yet most would agree that the latter is more disturbing than the former.
                                                              24
state and year fixed effects suggests that there is a statistically significant 90 percent

increase in justifiable homicide as a result of the law, though we note that the estimate in

our preferred specification in column 3 is 4.6, is statistically significant at the 10 percent

level, and represents a 46 percent increase.26

           Panel D shows estimates from unweighted regressions of similar form.                                    Results

range from 1 to 4.3 additional justifiable homicides per state per year as a result of castle

doctrine.      The estimate in our preferred specification is 3.4, is statistically significant at

the 5 percent level, and represents a 70 percent increase over the pre-castle doctrine average

of 4.9 justifiable homicides per year.

           Panel E reports estimates from a negative binomial model.                            Estimates range from

an insignificant 22 percent increase to a significant 57 percent increase in column 1, which

does not control for region-by-year fixed effects.

           Using these estimates, we now turn to assessing whether the relative increases

observed in Table 6 can explain the entire increase in homicide, given estimates of the

degree of underreporting of legally justified homicide.                           The largest estimated relative

increase from a specification in Table 6 that controls for region-by-year fixed effects is 70

percent, which is relative to a baseline total of 103 justifiable homicides across the 21 states

in the year prior to castle doctrine enactment.                    We assume that i) police departments are

not less likely to report an otherwise-identical homicide as justifiable after castle doctrine,

and ii) the relative increase in legally justified homicide due to castle doctrine is no lower

for reporting agencies than for non-reporting agencies.                              We view the first of these


26
   In contrast, we find no evidence of an increase in justifiable homicide by police, consistent with the identifying
assumption. Results are shown in Table A2 of the web appendix.
                                                              25
assumptions as likely to hold, and the second as reasonable, though we emphasize that they

are in fact assumptions. Combining these assumptions with our estimates in Table 5

suggests that the true castle-doctrine-induced relative increase in legally justified homicide

across the 21 states should be no larger than 70 percent.

         Kleck (1988) reports that approximately one-fifth of legally justified homicides are

reported correctly, while the others are classified as homicides.      Given the 103 reported

pre-castle doctrine justifiable homicides, that suggests that the true figure is 515.   A 70

percent increase means that castle doctrine causes an additional 361 legally justified

homicides, of which 289 (80 percent) would be (mis)reported as homicides. Recall that

estimates from Table 5 indicate that castle doctrine causes approximately an 8 percent

increase in homicide, which translates to an additional 611 homicides given the 7,632

pre-castle doctrine homicides.     Thus, under these assumptions, our best guess is that

around half of the additional homicides caused by castle doctrine were legally justified.

         Of course, different assumptions yield different conclusions.          For example,

assuming that only 10 percent of legally justified homicides are reported correctly, along

with a 70 percent relative increase and the second assumption outlined above, would

suggest that all of the additional homicides were legally justified.

         In summary, we find no evidence that strengthening self-defense law deters crime.

On the other hand, we find that a primary consequence of castle doctrine laws is to increase

homicide by a statistically and economically significant 7 to 10 percent.            Relative

increases in justifiable homicide along with Kleck’s (1988) estimate of the degree of

underreporting suggest that it is unlikely, but not impossible, for the increase in homicides

                                              26
to consist entirely of legally justified homicides.     We emphasize, however, that one’s

conclusion on that issue depends on assumptions about the nature and degree of

underreporting of legally justified homicides.




5.   Conclusion

        In recent years, more than 20 states have strengthened their self-defense laws by

adopting castle doctrine laws.   These statutes widen the scope for the justified use of lethal

force in self-defense by stating the circumstances under which self-defense is justified and

removing the duty to retreat from a list of protected places outside the home.    In addition,

in some cases they establish a presumption of reasonableness and remove civil liability.

Thus, these laws could hypothetically deter crime or, alternatively, increase homicide.

          Results presented indicate that castle doctrine law does not deter crime.

Furthermore, our estimates are sufficiently precise as to rule out moderate-sized deterrence

effects. Thus, while our view is that it is a priori reasonable to expect that strengthening

self-defense law would deter crime, we find this is not the case.

        More significantly, results indicate that castle doctrine laws increase total

homicides by around 8 percent.        Put differently, the laws induce an additional 600

homicides per year across the 21 states in our sample that enacted castle doctrine laws.

This finding is robust to a wide set of difference-in-differences specifications, including

region-by-year fixed effects, state-specific linear time trends, and controls for time-varying

factors such as economic conditions, state welfare spending, and policing and incarceration

rates. These findings provide evidence that lowering the expected cost of lethal force

                                              27
causes there to be more of it.

         A critical question is whether all of the additional homicides that occur were

legally justified.   Using results on the effect of the laws on justifiable homicide, along

with assumptions about the degree to which justifiable homicides are underreported, we

report back-of-the-envelope calculations that make it difficult to explain the entire increase

in homicide with an increase in legally justified homicide.    Our view is that this provides

suggestive evidence that at least some of the additional homicides were not legally justified,

though we emphasize that conclusions on this issue depend on assumptions regarding the

degree and nature of the underreporting of justifiable homicide by police to the FBI.

          With respect to policy, our findings suggest that an informed debate over these

laws will weigh the increased protections given to victims against the net increase in

violent deaths that result. More broadly, our findings indicate that incentives and expected

costs matter when it comes to the decision of whether to use lethal force.




                                              28
References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control
        Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s
        Tobacco Control Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105:
        493-505.

Alvarez, Lizette. “A Florida Law Gets Scrutiny After a Teenager’s Killing.” New York
        Times, March 20, 2012.           Last accessed on March 29, 2012 at
        http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/21/us/justice-department-opens-inquiry-in-killin
        g-of-trayvon-martin.html?scp=26&sq=trayvon%20martin&st=cse.

American Community Survey. 2000 – 2010.        United States Census Bureau.

Ayres, Ian, and Steven Levitt. 1998. “Measuring Positive Externalities from
         Unobservable Victim Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack.” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 113 (1): 43-77.

Becker, Gary. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 76 (2): 169-217.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much should
       We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        119(1): 249-275.

Blumenthal, Ralph. “Shootings Test Limits of New Self-Defense Law,” New York Times
      December 13, 2007. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 at
      http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/13/us/13texas.html.

Bronars, Stephen, and John R. Lott, Jr. 1998. “Criminal Deterrence, Geographic
        Spillovers, and the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns,” American Economic
        Review, 88 (2): 475-479.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2010. Microeconometrics Using Stata. Stata
       Press: College Station, Texas.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: theory and
         Evidence,” American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145-1177.

Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, and Paul H. Rubin. 1998. “Lives Saved or Lives Lost? The
       Effects of Concealed-Handgun Laws on Crime,” American Economic Review, 88
       (2): 468-474.


                                          29
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2004. “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates
         Using the Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack,” American Economic
         Review 94 (1): 115-133.

Donohue, John J., and Justin Wolfers. 2009. “Estimating the Impact of the Death Penalty
       on Murder,” American Law and Economics Review, 11 (2): 249-309.

Ehrlich, Isaac. 1973. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and
         Empirical Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, 81 (3): 521.

Goode, Erica. 2012. “N.R.A.’s Influence Seen in Expansion of Self-Defense Laws,”
        New York Times, April 12. Last accessed on May 29 at http://www.nytimes.com
        /2012/04/13/us/nra-campaign-leads-to-expanded-self-defense-laws.html
        ?pagewanted=all.

Kleck, Gary. 1988. “Crime Control through the Private Use of Armed Force”. Social
        Problems, 35(1): 1-21.

Lott, John R. Jr. 2010. More Guns, Less Crime. University of Chicago Press.

Lott, John R. Jr., and David B. Mustard. 1997. “Crime Deterrence, and the Right-to-Carry
        Concealed Handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies, 26 (1): 1-68.

Ludwig, Jens. 1998. "Concealed-Gun-Carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from
        State Panel Data." International Review of Law and Economics, 18 (3): 239-254.

McClellan, Chandler B., and Erdal Tekin. 2012. “Stand Your Ground Laws and
        Homicides.” NBER Working Paper 18187.

O’Flaherty, Brendan, and Rajiv Sethi. 2010. Homicide in Black and White. Journal of
        Urban Economics, 68: 215-230.

Saad, Lydia. 2011. “Self-Reported Gun Ownership in U.S. Is Highest Since 1993.” Last
        accessed on May 16, 2012 at http://www.gallup.com/poll/150353/self-reported-gun
        -ownership-highest-1993.aspx

Texas Department of Public Safety. 2006. “Active License Holders and Certified
       Instructors.” Last accessed on May 16, 2012 at http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/
       administration/crime_records/chl/PDF/ActLicAndInstr/
       ActiveLicandInstr2006.pdf.

Texas Department of State Health Services. 2006. “Texas Population Data Detailed
       Data in Excel Format.” Last accessed on May 16, 2012 at
       http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/chs/popdat/detailX.shtm.
                                            30
Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook. 2004. Federal Bureau of Investigation.
       Last accessed on April 30, 2012 at
       http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/handbook/ucrhandbook04.pdf.

Uniform Crime Reports. 2000 – 2010. Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin.   2000-2010. United States Bureau of Justice
        Statistics.

United States Census. 2000 – 2010. State Government Finances. Last accessed on
        June 24, 2012 at http://www.census.gov//govs/state/historical_data_2000.html.

Vilos, James. D., and Evan John Vilos. 2010. Self-Defense Laws of All 50 States.
         Guns West Publishing.




                                              31
Figure 1: Empirical Distribution of Placebo Homicide Estimates: Population-Weighted
OLS




Notes: The vertical line represents the actual estimated effect of castle doctrine on log
homicide of 0.0946, as shown in Column 2, Panel A, Table 5. A total of 5.0 percent of
placebo estimates lie to the right of this estimate.

Figure 2: Empirical Distribution of Placebo Homicide Estimates: Unweighted OLS




Notes: The vertical line represents the actual estimated effect of castle doctrine on log
homicide of 0.0811, as shown in Column 2, Panel B, Table 5. A total of 5.3 percent of
placebo estimates lie to the right of this estimate.

                                           32
Figure 3: Empirical Distribution of Placebo Homicide Estimates: Negative Binomial




Notes: The vertical line represents the actual estimated effect of castle doctrine on homicide
of 0.0734, as shown in Column 2, Panel C, Table 5. A total of 4.6 percent of placebo
estimates lie to the right of this estimate.

Figure 4: Log Homicide Rate for the 13 States That Enacted Castle Doctrine in 2006
Compared to States That Did Not Enact Castle Doctrine from 2000 to 2010




                                              33
Table 1: States that Extended Castle Doctrine Between 2000 and 2010
                               Removes duty to    Removes duty to retreat                     Removes
                  Effective                                                 Presumption of
     State                    retreat somewhere   in any place one has a                         civil
                    Year                                                    reasonable fear
                                 outside home         legal right to be                        liability

   Alabama         2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              Yes
     Alaska        2006             Yes                    No                    Yes             Yes
    Arizona        2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
     Florida       2005             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
    Georgia        2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              Yes
    Indiana        2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              Yes
    Kansas         2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              Yes
   Kentucky        2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
   Louisiana       2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
   Michigan        2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              Yes
  Mississippi      2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
    Missouri       2007             Yes                    No                    No              Yes
   Montana         2009             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             No
 North Dakota      2007             Yes                    No                    Yes             Yes
      Ohio         2008             Yes                    No                    Yes             Yes
   Oklahoma        2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
 South Carolina    2006             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
 South Dakota      2006             Yes                    Yes                   No              No
  Tennessee        2007             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
     Texas         2007             Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
 West Virginia     2008             Yes                    Yes                   No              No




                                                  34
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                            Mean (Unweighted)     Mean (Weighted by
                                                                                     Population)
Dependent Variables
Homicides per 100,000 Population                                    4.8                  5.5
                                                                    (2.5)                (1.9)
Justifiable Homicide by Private Citizens (count)                    5.1                  11.8
                                                                    (8.2)               (12.9)
Justifiable Homicide by Police (count)                              8.0                  23.4
                                                                   (16.9)               (34.3)
Robberies per 100,000 Population                                   107.2                143.1
                                                                   (59.6)               (47.5)
Aggravated Assault per 100,000 Population                           267                   296
                                                                   (131)                (114)
Burglary per 100,000 Population                                     710                   744
                                                                   (240)                (235)
Larceny per 100,000 Population                                     2,334                2,328
                                                                   (533)                (532)
Motor Theft per 100,000 Population                                   331                  381
                                                                   (178)                (174)
Proportion of Robberies in Which a Gun Was Used                     0.35                 0.37
                                                                   (0.13)               (0.13)
Control Variables
Police per 100,000 residents                                          315                   336
                                                                     (65)                  (66)
Unemployment Rate (%)                                                5.49                 5.93
                                                                    (1.99)                (2.10)
Poverty Rate (%)                                                     12.4                 12.9
                                                                     (3.0)                 (2.6)
Median Household Income ($)                                        51,648               52,146
                                                                   (7873)                (6895)
Prisoners per 100,000 residents                                      439                    461
                                                                    (169)                 (150)
Government spending (assistance and subsidies) per capita            125                   110
                                                                     (56)                  (48)
Government spending (public welfare) per capita                     1,319                1,344
                                                                    (391)                 (409)
% Black Male Aged 15-24                                              2.60                 0.97
                                                                    (4.61)                (2.11)
% White Male Aged 15-24                                             10.77                 4.36
                                                                   (17.70)               (7.69)
% Black Male Aged 25-44                                              4.32                 1.61
                                                                    (7.71)                (3.53)
% White Male Aged 25-44                                             21.97                 8.88
                                                                   (36.40)              (15.90)
Notes: Each cell contains the mean with the standard deviation in parentheses. All variables have 550
observations except for the proportion of assaults in which a gun was used (544) and the proportion of
robberies in which a gun was used (544).




                                                   35
Table 3: Falsification Tests: The Effect of Castle Doctrine on Larceny and Motor Vehicle Theft
                                           OLS - Weighted by State Population                                        OLS - Unweighted
                                    1         2        3        4        5        6                   7          8       9       10       11       12
Panel A: Larceny                                   Log (Larceny Rate)                                                Log (Larceny Rate)
Castle Doctrine Law              0.00300 -0.00660 -0.00910 -0.0149 -0.00401 -0.00284               0.00745 0.00145 -0.00188 -0.00445 -0.00361 -0.0137
                                 (0.0161) (0.0147) (0.0139) (0.0156) (0.0128) (0.0180)             (0.0227) (0.0205) (0.0210) (0.0226) (0.0201) (0.0228)

One Year Before Adoption of                                    -0.0197**                                                         -0.0103
Castle Doctrine Law                                            (0.00975)                                                         (0.0114)

Observation                        550       550     550        550       550         550            550       550     550        550       550         550
Panel B: Motor Vehicle Theft                  Log (Motor Vehicle Theft Rate)                                    Log (Motor Vehicle Theft Rate)

Castle Doctrine Law               0.0517 -0.0389 -0.0252 -0.0320 -0.0165 -0.00708                  0.0767* 0.0138 0.00814 0.00775 0.00977 -0.00373
                                 (0.0563) (0.0448) (0.0396) (0.0451) (0.0354) (0.0372)             (0.0413) (0.0444) (0.0407) (0.0462) (0.0391) (0.0361)

One Year Before Adoption of                                     -0.0231                                                          -0.00155
Castle Doctrine Law                                            (0.0233)                                                          (0.0287)

Observation                          550       550       550        550        550       550            550      550       550       550       550       550
State and Year Fixed Effects         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects                   Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Time-Varying Controls                                    Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes                               Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Controls for Larceny or Motor Theft                                            Yes                                                             Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                                                        Yes                                                             Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. The unit of observation is state-year. Robust standard errors are clustered at the state
level. Time-varying controls include policing and incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty rate, unemployment rate,
and demographics.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level



                                                                                 36
Table 4: The Deterrence Effects of Castle Doctrine: Burglary, Robbery, and Aggravated Assault
                                           OLS - Weighted by State Population                                        OLS - Unweighted
                                     1        2        3        4         5       6                    7         8       9        10      11       12
Panel A: Burglary                                 Log (Burglary Rate)                                                Log (Burglary Rate)
Castle Doctrine Law             0.0780*** 0.0290 0.0223 0.0164 0.0327* 0.0237                      0.0572** 0.00961 0.00663 0.00277 0.00683 0.0207
                                 (0.0255) (0.0236) (0.0223) (0.0247) (0.0165) (0.0207)             (0.0272) (0.0291) (0.0268) (0.0304) (0.0222) (0.0259)

One Year Before Adoption of                                  -0.0201                                                           -0.0154
Castle Doctrine Law                                         (0.0139)                                                           (0.0214)
Panel B: Robbery                                  Log (Robbery Rate)                                                  Log (Robbery Rate)
Castle Doctrine Law               0.0408   0.0344 0.0262 0.0216 0.0376** 0.0515*                     0.0448 0.0320 0.00839 0.00552 0.00874 0.0267
                                 (0.0254) (0.0224) (0.0229) (0.0246) (0.0181) (0.0274)              (0.0331) (0.0421) (0.0387) (0.0437) (0.0339) (0.0299)

One Year Before Adoption of                                   -0.0156                                                           -0.0115
Castle Doctrine Law                                          (0.0167)                                                           (0.0283)
Panel C: Aggravated Assault                   Log (Aggravated Assault Rate)                                      Log (Aggravated Assault Rate)
Castle Doctrine Law               0.0434   0.0397 0.0372 0.0362 0.0424 0.0414                        0.0555 0.0698 0.0343 0.0305 0.0341 0.0317
                                 (0.0387) (0.0407) (0.0319) (0.0349) (0.0291) (0.0285)              (0.0604) (0.0630) (0.0433) (0.0478) (0.0405) (0.0380)

One Year Before Adoption of                                       -0.00343                                                         -0.0150
Castle Doctrine Law                                                (0.0161)                                                        (0.0251)
Observations                         550        550       550        550        550       550           550       550      550       550       550        550
State and Year Fixed Effects         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects                    Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes                     Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Time-Varying Controls                                     Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes                              Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Contemporaneous Crime Rates                                                     Yes                                                            Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                                                         Yes                                                             Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. The unit of observation is state-year. Robust standard errors are clustered at the state
level. Time-varying controls include policing and incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty rate, unemployment rate,
and demographics. Contemporaneous crime rates include larceny and motor vehicle theft rates.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level



                                                                                     37
Table 5: The Effect of Castle Doctrine on Homicide
                                                   1                2          3             4             5             6
Panel A: Log Homicide Rate (OLS - Weighted)

Castle Doctrine Law                             0.0801**     0.0946***     0.0937***      0.0875**     0.0985***       0.100**
                                                (0.0342)     (0.0279)      (0.0290)       (0.0337)     (0.0299)       (0.0388)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.0212
Law                                                                                       (0.0246)
Observations                                      550           550           550           550           550           550
Panel B: Log Homicide Rate (OLS - Unweighted)

Castle Doctrine Law                              0.0877        0.0811        0.0600        0.0461        0.0580        0.0672
                                                (0.0638)      (0.0769)      (0.0684)      (0.0764)      (0.0662)      (0.0450)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.0557
Law                                                                                       (0.0494)
Observations                                      550           550           550           550           550           550
Panel C: Homicide (Negative Binomial - Unweighted)

Castle Doctrine Law                             0.0565*       0.0734**     0.0879***      0.0783**     0.0937***      0.108***
                                                (0.0331)      (0.0305)     (0.0313)       (0.0355)     (0.0302)       (0.0346)

One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.0352
Law                                                                                       (0.0260)

Observations                                      550           550           550           550           550           550
Panel D: Log Murder Rate (OLS - Weighted)

Castle Doctrine Law                             0.0906**      0.0955**      0.0916**      0.0884**      0.0981**       0.0813
                                                (0.0424)      (0.0389)      (0.0382)      (0.0404)      (0.0391)      (0.0520)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.0110
Law                                                                                       (0.0230)
Observations                                      550           550           550           550           550           550

State and Year Fixed Effects                        Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects                                      Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
Time-Varying Controls                                                            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
Contemporaneous Crime Rates                                                                                  Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                                                                                         Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. The unit of observation is state-year. Robust standard errors
are clustered at the state level. Negative binomial estimates are interpreted in the same way as those in a log-linear OLS model.
Time-varying controls include policing and incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty
rate, unemployment rate, and demographics. Contemporaneous crime rates include larceny and motor vehicle theft rates.
Homicide data are from the published FBI Uniform Crime Reports, while murder data are from Return A of the FBI Master files.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                               38
Table 6: The Effect of Castle Doctrine on Felony-Type Homicide, Proportion of Robberies
Committed Using a Gun, and Justifiable Homicide by Private Citizens
                                                1            2                 3             4             5             6
Panel A: Log Felony-Type and Suspected Felony Type Homicides
(OLS - Weighted)
Castle Doctrine Law                          0.0993       0.203*             0.220**       0.249**       0.222**      0.00121
                                             (0.112)      (0.109)           (0.0907)      (0.0992)      (0.0871)      (0.0686)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                                0.106
Law                                                                                       (0.0648)
Observations                                       539          539           539           539           539           539
Panel B: Proportion of Robberies Using Gun
(OLS - Weighted)
Castle Doctrine Law                             0.0444***      0.0218        0.0187        0.0227        0.0183      -0.00404
                                                (0.0145)      (0.0186)      (0.0153)      (0.0166)      (0.0155)     (0.0133)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               0.0130
Law                                                                                      (0.00823)
Observations                                        544         544           544           544           544           544
Panel C: Justifiable Homicide by Private Citizens
(OLS - Weighted, Dep. Variable = Count)
Castle Doctrine Law                              9.624***     6.028**       4.550*         4.291        4.559*         0.835
                                                  (3.310)     (2.450)       (2.572)       (2.936)       (2.493)       (1.802)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.854
Law                                                                                       (2.006)
Observations                                        550         550           550           550           550           550
Panel D: Justifiable Homicide by Private Citizens
(OLS - Unweighted, Dep. Variable = Count)
Castle Doctrine Law                              4.328***     3.370**       3.200**       2.908**       3.239**        0.960
                                                  (1.467)     (1.300)       (1.202)       (1.350)       (1.216)       (1.219)
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -1.168
Law                                                                                       (1.223)
Observations                                        550         550           550           550           550           550
Panel E: Justifiable Homicide by Private Citizens
(Negative Binomial - Unweighted)
Castle Doctrine Law                               0.573***     0.428*        0.283         0.219         0.324          NA
                                                  (0.210)     (0.244)       (0.235)       (0.254)       (0.228)         NA
One Year Before Adoption of Castle Doctrine                                               -0.253*
Law                                                                                       (0.147)
Observations                                        550           550             550         550            550           550
State and Year Fixed Effects                        Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects                                      Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
Time-Varying Controls                                                            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
Contemporaneous Crime Rates                                                                                  Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                                                                                          Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. The unit of observation is state-year. Robust standard errors
are clustered at the state level. Negative binomial estimates are interpreted in the same way as those in a log-linear OLS model.
Time-varying controls include policing and incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty
rate, unemployment rate, and demographics. Contemporaneous crime rates include larceny and motor vehicle theft rates.
Homicide data are from the published FBI Uniform Crime Reports, while murder data are from Return A of the FBI Master files.
NA indicates that the model did not converge. Castle doctrine states averaged 4.9 justifiable homicides in the year prior to
enactment, or 10.0 if weighted by population.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                               39
Web Appendix
Table A1: Differential Effects of Castle Doctrine Law by Treatment of Duty to Retreat and Civil Liability
Panel A: Effect of Castle Doctrine Law That Extends to Any Place One Has a Legal Right to Be                                                 Proportion of        Justifiable Homicide
                                                                                           Log Aggravated                                  Robberies with a        by Private Citizens
                                            Log Burglary Rate      Log Robbery Rate                               Log Homicide Rate
                                                                                             Assault Rate                                        Gun                      (count)
Castle Doctrine Law That Removes Duty 0.0263           0.0133      0.00903 0.0575*         0.0225 0.0547*         0.0668** 0.109***       0.0347* -0.00381         4.697**      1.717
to Retreat in Any Place                   (0.0266) (0.0218)        (0.0267) (0.0286)      (0.0286) (0.0314)       (0.0289) (0.0352)       (0.0186) (0.0140)        (2.123)     (2.023)

Observations                                 506        506           506       506          506       506          506       506           500       500           506         506

Panel B: Differential Effects by Whether the Law Includes a Presumption of Reasonableness                                                    Proportion of        Justifiable Homicide
                                                                                            Log Aggravated                                 Robberies with a        by Private Citizens
                                           Log Burglary Rate       Log Robbery Rate                               Log Homicide Rate
                                                                                              Assault Rate                                       Gun                      (count)
Castle Doctrine Law That Includes         0.00622     0.0185       0.00912 0.0396           0.0262 0.0604**      0.0808*** 0.0831*        0.0353* -0.0125          5.806**     -0.0621
Presumption of Reasonableness             (0.0307)   (0.0210)      (0.0301) (0.0307)       (0.0315) (0.0264)     (0.0299) (0.0492)        (0.0181) (0.0136)        (2.652)     (2.360)

Other Castle Doctrine Law                 0.0683*** 0.0188          0.0322 0.0699           0.0606 0.0215          0.0814    0.102         0.0266 0.0269            0.633      0.387
                                          (0.0202) (0.0296)        (0.0261) (0.0429)       (0.0395) (0.0524)      (0.0545) (0.0615)       (0.0242) (0.0296)        (2.124)    (2.133)

Observations                                 550        550           550       550          550       550          550       550           544       544           550         550

Panel C: Effect of Castle Doctrine Law, Excluding States That Did Not Also Remove Civil Liability                                            Proportion of        Justifiable Homicide
                                                                                            Log Aggravated                                 Robberies with a        by Private Citizens
                                            Log Burglary Rate       Log Robbery Rate                              Log Homicide Rate
                                                                                               Assault Rate                                      Gun                      (count)
Castle Doctrine Law That Removes Civil      0.0310     0.0200        0.0183 0.0528*         0.0366 0.0433         0.0682** 0.0888**       0.0337** -0.000340        3.809*      0.157
Liability                                  (0.0236) (0.0202)        (0.0250) (0.0298)      (0.0293) (0.0294)      (0.0297) (0.0424)       (0.0166) (0.0143)        (2.092)     (2.042)

Observations                                 517        517           517       517          517       517          517       517           511       511           517         517

State and Region-by-Year Fixed Effects       Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes
Time-Varying Controls                        Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes            Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                        Yes                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes                      Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a regression, each of which is weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are clustered at the state level. The unit of
observation is state-year. Time-varying controls include policing and incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty rate, unemployment rate, and
demographics.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                                      40
Table A2: Justifiable Homicide by Police
Panel A: OLS - Weighted, Dep. Variable = Count

Castle Doctrine Law                  8.963*      2.770       1.252       0.621       1.182       1.129
                                     (4.501)     (2.829)     (2.600)     (2.710)     (2.643)     (2.878)

One Year Before Adoption of Castle                                         -2.085*
Doctrine Law                                                               (1.094)

Observations                          550        550            550         550         550         550
Panel B: OLS - Unweighted, Dep. Variable = Count

Castle Doctrine Law                  1.726       -0.244      -0.415      -0.643      -0.380      -0.352
                                     (1.836)     (1.423)     (1.372)     (1.426)     (1.374)     (1.628)

One Year Before Adoption of Castle                                          -0.911
Doctrine Law                                                               (0.933)

Observations                           550          550         550         550         550         550
Panel C: Negative Binomial - Unweighted

Castle Doctrine Law                    0.0328     -0.204**     -0.208*    -0.242**     -0.193*    -0.0751
                                       (0.164)     (0.101)     (0.107)     (0.104)     (0.104)    (0.144)

One Year Before Adoption of Castle                                          -0.128
Doctrine Law                                                               (0.127)

Observations                              550         550         550          550          550      550
State and Year Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects                          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes
Time-Varying Controls                                             Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes
Contemporaneous Crime Rates                                                                 Yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends                                                                    Yes
Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. The unit of observation is state-year.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the state level. Time-varying controls include policing and
incarceration rates, welfare and public assistance spending, median income, poverty rate, unemployment
rate, and demographics. Contemporaneous crime rates include larceny and motor vehicle theft rates.
Homicide data are from the published FBI Uniform Crime Reports, while murder data are from Return A of the
FBI Master files.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                     41
