NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES FINANCE CAUSE GROWTH? EVIDENCE FROM THE ORIGINS OF BANKING
IN RUSSIA
Daniel Berkowitz
Mark Hoekstra
Koen Schoors
Working Paper 18139
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18139

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Lee Alston, Dave DeJong, Dave Denis, Sergei Guriev, Joel
Hellman, Juliet Johnson, E. Han Kim, Pete Leeson, Nathan Nunn, Tom Remington, Olga Tkacheva,
Katya Zhuravskaya, and seminar participants at the EPRU-AUEB Symposium at the University of
Leicester, the Higher School of Economics, the Journal of Comparative Economics Conference at
the University of Pittsburgh, the Tor Vergata Conference on Money, Banking and Finance in Rome,
Baylor University, University of Ghent, University of Missouri, University of Texas-Austin, Georgetown
Public Policy Institute, and the Workshop on Legal Order, the State and Economic Development in
Florence for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Daniel Berkowitz, Mark Hoekstra, and Koen Schoors. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Finance Cause Growth? Evidence from the Origins of Banking in Russia
Daniel Berkowitz, Mark Hoekstra, and Koen Schoors
NBER Working Paper No. 18139
June 2012
JEL No. O16,O43,P3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effect of banking on economic growth in modern Russia. To overcome simultaneity
and selection, we exploit regional banking variation induced by the creation of “specialized banks”
(spetsbanks) in the last years of the Soviet Union (1988-1991). Consistent with the qualitative work
of Joel Hellman [1993] and Juliet Johnson [2000], we show that these reforms generated an ideal natural
experiment in that the concentration of spetsbanks is jointly uncorrelated with 15 predictors of future
growth, including pre-banking income, education, anti-market sentiment, institutional quality, and
government interference in the economy. Results indicate that while the presence of one additional
spetsbank per million inhabitants increased total within-state lending to private firms and individuals
by 14 to 26 percent in the early 2000s, it had no effect on investment or per capita income. In contrast,
we find that spetsbanks increased employment. Additional results indicate that spetsbanks increased
growth in regions in which they were less connected to government and were generally more similar
to non-spetsbanks, as well as in regions that were better at protecting property rights. Our results thus
indicate that bank origins, political connections, and property rights are important determinants of
effective finance.

Daniel Berkowitz
University of Pittsburgh
Department of Economics
230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
dmberk@pitt.edu
Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3087 Allen Building
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu

Koen Schoors
Gent University
CERISE, Hoveniersberg 24, B-9000
Gent, Belgrium
Koen.Schoors@UGent.be

1. Introduction
There is a large body of cross-country evidence showing that financial development
promotes economic growth.1 In their pioneering study of 77 countries during 1960-1989, King
and Levine [1993] show that increasing the size of the financial intermediary sector2 from the
mean of the slowest quartile of countries to the mean of the fast growing quartile would increase
per capita growth by almost 1 percent per year. However, as those and other researchers have
noted, cleanly identifying the impact of finance on growth is challenging because of the potential
for bias due to selection and simultaneity. For example, countries with developed financial
systems may also have strong enforcement of property rights and rule of law, making it difficult
to distinguish the effect of one factor versus another [La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny et al., 1998]. Similarly, countries that grow quickly may also have ample savings
available for banks to lend, or may generate high demand for financing. While subsequent
studies have used instrumental variables and panel data methods in an attempt to overcome these
problems,3 there are lingering concerns that these approaches do not overcome the simultaneity
and selection biases. For example, within-country changes in financial systems may not be
exogenous to economic growth, and instruments such as legal origins may have their own
independent effect on economic growth.4
In response to these concerns, several studies have exploited within-country variation in
bank regulation to identify the effect of finance on growth. Jayaratne and Strahan [1996] use the
variation in the state-level deregulation of intrastate bank branching in the USA that starts in the
1

For a survey of these findings, see Demirgiuc-Kunt and Levine [2008].
Their original measure is currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of bank and nonbank financial
intermediaries. However, their results also hold for alternative measures that are more precisely specify the sources
and users of finance.
3
e.g., see Beck, Levine, and Loayaza [2000].
4
See La Porta et al. [2008].
2

1

1970s.5

Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales [2004] estimate effects using both OLS and an

instrumental variable strategy exploiting a 1936 bank regulation in Italy as a source of exogenous
variation in local financial development in the 1990s. These within-country studies largely
support the findings of the cross-country literature: for example, Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
[2004] find that between 1989 and 1997, moving from the least to most financially developed
region would boost GDP per capita by 1.2 percentage points per year.
This paper uses an approach similar to these papers to study the effect of finance on
growth, albeit in a much less financially developed country.

Specifically, it exploits the

plausibly exogenous variation in banking across regions within Russia induced by the top-down
creation of “specialized” banks, herein denoted “spetsbanks”, in the last years of the former
Soviet Union (1988-1991). According to Soviet reform documents, these banks were supposed
to provide external finance to state owned enterprises. The decision to create spetsbanks was
made by high level Soviet administrators on the basis of their own preferences, as was the typical
approach to decision-making in the now defunct Soviet System. Because the preferences of
Soviet administrators were largely divorced from forces shaping organizations in market
economies, reforms of economic organizations in the classic Soviet system were “exogenous” to
market forces (see Kornai [1992] chapter 7 and Ickes [1990]), an assertion that we will carefully
document with both qualitative and empirical evidence.6 In a study of banking in Soviet Union
and Russia, Hellman [1993] describes how the creation of spetsbanks in 1988 was yet another
case of top down institutional tinkering.
5

Deheja and Lleras Muney [2007] conduct a similar analysis of branching and deposit insurance in the American
states during 1900-1940.
6
One powerful explanation for organizational reform is that would serve to increase the number of privileged
administrative and managerial positions. Another explanation is the spetsbanks were created as part of a bank war
between powerful administrators in the former Soviet Union and the former Russian Socialist Republic (which
became subsequently became Russia). Regardless, one advantage of this variation in banking capacity is that it is
less susceptible to concerns regarding endogeneity than variation in state- or region-level banking policy.

2

“Like previous reform efforts in the Soviet Union, the reorganization of the banking
system was a true exogenous reform. The new banking institutions were not designed by
bankers or other economic actors in response to the problems and incentives of the
centrally planned financial system. Instead, a small group of so-called economic
reformers crafted an entirely new institutional structure based on external models,
political interests, and their beliefs about economic efficiency. The new structure was
imposed on the banking system in a series of decrees and internal instructions that caught
most Soviet bankers by surprise… ” [Hellman [1993], p.101]
Importantly, we find powerful empirical support backing up the argument that the
locations of spetsbanks were exogenous to economic factors. Specifically, we show that the
concentration of spetsbanks that were created between 1988 and 1991 and survived till at least
October of 1995 is jointly uncorrelated with 15 variables one might expect to be correlated with
future economic growth, including per capita income in 1996, education and other
demographics, anti-market sentiment, the quality of economic and political institutions, and
government interference in the economy.
The spetsbanks created between 1988 and 1991 began to function as commercial banks
for state owned enterprises circa 1991. During 1991 many of the spetsbanks were informally and
spontaneously privatized.7 After the breakup of the USSR the formal privatization of spetsbanks
successors was part of the broad package of large-scale market reforms. While many of their
spetsbank successors went bankrupt during the financial crisis of 1998—as did many other
banks—their presence did have a lasting impact on the regional banking market. By the end of
1999, when banks were beginning to make loans to firms and households,8 130 of the 1351
registered banks in Russia were spetsbank successors, and they accounted for roughly 11.4% of
loans to firms and households.

7

See Abarbanell and Meyendorff [1997] and Schoors [2003].
See Berkowitz and DeJong [2011] and sources cited therein. See Klapper et al (2011) for a description of how
bank finance accelerates starting in 2001.

8

3

Moreover, this increased regional bank capacity caused by spetsbank successors resulted
in a significant net increase in regional loans. Results indicate that regions that have one more
spetsbank per million population—approximately a ½ standard deviation increase—have a 14 to
26 percent increase in lending to private firms and individuals during the period 2002-2006.
This result is robust to the inclusion or exclusion of controls, consistent with exogenous
spetsbank location.
However, our results indicate that this increase in banking did not cause economic
growth. Specifically, we find that this additional lending did not increase investment in 2007 or
per capita income or GNP growth from 1996 to 2007. In contrast, the additional lending induced
by spetsbanks did significantly increase employment in the regions. Consistent with this finding,
we show that despite being privately owned, on average spetsbanks appear to act like
government-owned banks in that they remained significantly more connected to government and
government-owned firms than their non-spetsbank counterparts (see La Porta et al. [2002]).9
Furthermore, we find substantial heterogeneity in the effectiveness of spetsbanks in causing
economic growth based on both the behavior of the spetsbanks, as well as the institutional
environment in which they operated. Specifically, we show that spetsbanks did cause positive
regional economic growth when they had a weaker relationship with the federal government and
when they operated in a region with a recent history of good protection of property rights. More
generally, spetsbanks promote growth in regions where they are similar to non-spetsbanks in
terms of lending and deposit behavior.

9

One reason why the spetsbanks likely continued to behave like government owned banks long after the fall of the
Soviet Union and long after they were privatized is that former Soviet managers remained on their boards. Using
personnel data, we find that four to five years after the creation of the Soviet spetsbanks and after their privatization,
the boards of directors at spetsbanks successors contained significantly more former managers at the Soviet
spetsbanks than did the boards of directors at non-spetsbanks.

4

Collectively, our findings suggest that banking origins (history) matters for finance.
Moreover, our results highlight the importance of breaking political connections between banks
and governments, and establishing good property rights in regions where banks operate.
The next section contains a brief description of Soviet banking and spetsbanks. Section 3
describes the identification strategy, and section 4 describes the data. Section 5 documents that
the location of spetsbanks at the end of 1995 is as good as random, and is a strong predictor of
regional bank capacity during 2002-2006. Section 6 presents contains our mains results on the
impact of regional bank capacity on growth and other economic outcomes in 2007; section 7
interprets our findings and section 8 concludes.

2. Banking in the former Soviet Union and in Russia
Before 1990, physical plans set by central administrators were more important than
financial constraints in the socialist economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
In the former Soviet Union, the mono-bank Gosbank issued credits to state owned enterprises so
that they could fulfill administered plan targets. State owned enterprises typically had “soft”
financial budget constraints, which meant they could get credits from the bank for fulfilling plan
targets even if their projects were unprofitable and served no particular consumer or firm need.10
Banks collected taxes from state owned firms and monitored the extent to which these firms
were fulfilling centrally administered plan targets.11
During 1987-1991, the Soviet banking system underwent significant changes. On the one
hand, after the passage of a law on state owned enterprises in 1987 that was designed to harden
their budget constraints, commercial banks spontaneously and informally emerged. These new
10
11

See, e.g., Kornai, Maskin and Roland [2003].
See Garvy [1997].

5

commercial banks took advantage of profit opportunities created by the breakdown of the system
of enforced planning quotas, the large spreads between state and market prices, and the ability to
set up cooperative ventures in state-owned enterprises. Many of these commercial banks
flourished and continued their activities after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The Gosbank mono-bank system that had previously been the only source of banking in
the Soviet Union also underwent significant changes from 1987 to 1991, though we note that
these changes were driven entirely by the Soviet authorities rather than market forces. In 1987 a
working group with representatives from Gosbank and Stroibank (the Construction Bank which
was a subsidiary of Gosbank) divided the Soviet banking system into a central bank and five
kinds of spetsbanks. This division went into effect January of 1988. The old Soviet foreign trade
bank and the old Soviet savings bank were renamed, but they remained under the control of the
Gosbank and no substantial changes were made in their personnel or organizational structure or
assets. The rest of Gosbank and its subsidiary Stroikank (the Soviet bank for construction),
however, was divvied up into three spetsbanks including the Agromprombank (agriculturalindustrial banks), Zhilsotsbank (the banks for housing and social development) and
Promstroibank (the banks for industrial-construction). These three kinds of spetsbanks were
supposed to provide finance to the reforming state-owned enterprises on the basis of criteria that
were more market-based than under the previous system. However, while Gosbank transferred
assets and cash reserves, control over the interbank clearing system, and control over personnel
policy to these three spetsbanks, initially Gosbank did not give these spetsbanks control over
their credit and interest rate policies.
There are several explanations for why the Gosbank system was transformed in this way.
One is that spetsbanks were created in order to increase the number of privileged management

6

positions within the old Soviet command system. A complementary explanation is the
spetsbanks were established as part of a bank war between powerful administrators in the former
Soviet Union and the former Russian Socialist Republic (which subsequently became Russia).
After Soviet leaders created spetsbanks and the Soviet Union Central Bank in 1987, in an effort
to be independent of the former Soviet Union and its central bank, the leaders of the Russian
Republic subsequently created the Central Bank of Russia (CBR), which then gave spetsbanks
additional autonomy from the Soviet Central Bank to serve as commercial banks for state owned
enterprises. Specifically, the CBR worked to transfer all of the assets and liabilities of the
spetsbanks to its local branches, and then gave the bank managers in each branch the power to
form a small bank or join with other branches in a larger bank (Abarbanell and Meyendorff
[1997], p.70). Many regional branches did separate from these three banks and established new
regional banks within the regional branches of the Central Bank of Russia (Schoors [2003]).
This informal and spontaneous privatization of spetsbanks deprived the Soviet Union Central
Bank control over Russian bank branch managers. Thus, while the Agprombank, Zhilsotbank
and Promstroibank and their successors initially “had few incentives to operate in a marketoriented way” (Johnson [2000], p.30) in time and, in particular, after the disintegration of the
former Soviet Union, they learned to behave like commercial banks.

We consider these three

banks and their successors as spetsbanks.
Importantly for our research design, while these spetsbanks were given additional
autonomy by the Central Bank of Russia, the location of the banks themselves was based on preexisting Soviet Banking capacity.

And as discussed above, that capacity had been built

according to the preferences of Soviet bureaucrats, independent of economic conditions one
might expect to affect future economic growth.

7

The former Soviet Union officially ceased to exist on December 25, 1991, and the
Russian Federation emerged as a new country the next day. The Russian government instituted
market reforms in January 1992 when it released price controls on a broad set of goods and then
subsequently instituted several sweeping programs that formally privatized state owned
enterprises. Spetsbanks that operated as private banks in the former Soviet Union were formally
privatized when the Soviet Union was dissolved and large scale privatization was implemented.
From 1992 to 1998 the successors of the spetsbanks and the other commercial banks
continued to perform many tasks that they performed under socialism, including providing credit
to state firms, financing state-related programs, and financing government debt (see Tompson
[1997]). Spetsbanks and commercial banks made substantial profits transferring central bank
credits to state owned enterprises and exploiting negative real interest rates on bank deposits up
till 1995, and invested in foreign currencies and precious metals in a variety of ways throughout
the 1990s. Similarly, banks made a great deal of money issuing high-interest bearing government
bonds known as GKOs starting around 1995 (Johnson [2000] and Shleifer and Treisman [2001],
chapter 4). Because banks made so few loans, private firms had to finance projects with either
internal funds or funds raised from internal sources, even though they could earn an unusually
high return on their capital (see Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff [2002]). In return for
providing finance to the government, some commercial banks were able to buy up state assets at
very low prices.12
Overall, from August of 1992 through 1998 spetsbanks and commercial banks were
profitable without serving as a source of finance to private firms and households. And, as Juliet
Johnson argues, they were profitable largely because of their political connections.
12

The most famous case is the “loans for shares” deal in 1995 in which the Yeltsin government effectively sold
interests in lucrative nickel, oil and steel companies to bankers.

8

“These banks could be profitable without being productive by relying on central bank
credits at negative real interest rates, conducting foreign exchange operations, facilitating
export-import operations and capital flight, handling government monies, developing the
interbank credit market, and granting expensive short-term loans. All of these activities
exploited their ties to government ministries, the CBR13, and state-run enterprises”.
[Johnson [2000], p.8]
The dysfunctional behavior of the banks, along with falling world oil prices and the Asian crisis
likely contributed to the near collapse of the Russian financial system in August of 1998.
Following the crisis the Russian government defaulted on its domestic and international debts,
GDP fell almost 5%, there was a massive outflow of capital from Russia, and hundreds of
Russian banks went bankrupt.
After the financial crisis, there was a large increase in growth of exports due in part to the
massive devaluation of the ruble and in part to the large increase in world oil prices. It was
during this period that banks began making loans to private firms and households: between 1999
and 2007 bank-issued loans to firms as a share of GDP went from 10.5% to 37.3%. Moreover,
during this period real income overall grew rapidly and there was also substantial variation in the
growth in bank finance and income across the regions (see Berkowitz and DeJong [2011]). Thus,
the period after the financial crisis is a good testing ground for whether or not bank finance
matters for growth and other indicators of economic welfare.

3. Identification Strategy and Methodology
The purpose of this study is to determine whether increased banking capacity leads to
higher economic growth. However, estimating the causal impact of banking on growth is
difficult because of the potential for simultaneity and selection biases. That is, one might worry
13

CBR stands for the Central Bank of Russia.

9

that countries that grow quickly may have more capital available for lending, or that fastgrowing countries have more demand for loans, which may lead one to infer incorrectly that
additional lending causes growth. Similarly, selection bias may arise if those countries or
regions that have well-developed banking sectors are also those that have better legal and judicial
institutions to protect property rights, in which case one may misattribute higher income or
growth to better banking rather than to better institutions generally.
To overcome these identification problems, we exploit the variation in the number of
spetsbanks per million inhabitants across the Russian regions in 1995.

The identifying

assumption is that regions with many spetsbanks would have grown at the same rate as regions
with few spetsbanks in the absence of the additional banking. This assumption appears broadly
consistent with the existing views of the reforms discussed in the previous section, in which the
location of the spetsbanks was determined largely on the basis of bureaucratic reasons, rather
than economic ones.
Nonetheless, we test this identifying assumption empirically in two ways. As a starting
point, we ask whether the concentration of spetsbanks predicts either the log of per capita income
in 1996 or the annual growth rate in personal income from 1993 to 1996, both of which were
prior to modern banking in Russia. In addition, to compare the exogeneity of spetsbanks to that
of non-spetsbanks that did not have their origins in the Soviet Union, we also examine whether
the number of non-spetsbanks predict income or growth in 1996. Formally, we estimate the
following:

(1) preBanking Outcome i   0   1 LnPop 1996 i   2 Spetsbank

 3 NonSpetsba nk i   i

10

i



where i denotes the ith region, PreBankingOutcome measures either log income per
capita in 1996 or the growth rate in real income per capita from 1993 to 1996, LnPop1996 is the
log of the regional population in 1996, Spetsbank is the number of spetsbanks per million
population in 1995, and Non-Spetsbank is the number of non-spetsbank banks per million
population operating in 1995. The coefficient of interest is θ2, though we also expect that θ2
should be smaller in absolute value than θ3, as non-spetsbanks arose in an endogenous fashion.
In addition, we test whether spetsbank concentration was uncorrelated with a host of
other exogenous pre-banking variables that one would expect to predict economic growth. Thus,
we examine whether the concentration of spetsbanks in 1995 is conditionally correlated with
other variables expected to cause economic growth, such as income and demographics, antimarket sentiment, quality of institutions, and government interference in the economy circa
1996. We do so by estimating the following:

(2) Spetsbanki   0  1LnPop1996i   2 LnRinc1996i   3 X i   i

where subscript i denotes the ith region, LnRinc1996i is the log of real income in 1996, and Xi is
a vector of covariates measured circa 1996 including demographics, the political environment
and preferences, institutional quality, and government interference in the economy, and εi is a
stochastic error term.
We test the null hypothesis that log of real income in 1996 is insignificant, and we also
test the null that log of real income in 1996 and the vector of covariates Xi, are jointly
insignificant. These are powerful tests of whether regional spetsbank concentration is orthogonal
to other observed factors known to predict growth. To the extent that we fail to reject these
11

nulls, it provides some assurance that our measure of bank capacity is also uncorrelated with
unobserved determinants of economic growth.
After empirically assessing the exogeneity of the spetsbank variation, we turn to whether
additional spetsbanks increased the banking capacity in the 2000s. That is, we examine whether
regions with higher concentrations of spetsbanks in October of 1995—a period when there was
almost no lending in Russia—have more lending in the 2000s than regions with lower
concentrations of spetsbanks in 1995. Formally, we estimate the following:

( 3) Bank Outcome i   0   1 LnPop 1996 i   2 LnRinc 1996 i   3 X i
  4 Spetsbank i  u i

where the variable Bank Outcomei can denote log of lending per capita by region of lender, log
of lending per capita by region of borrower, log of the bank Herfindahl index, and the interest
rate charged. Bank outcomes are measured from 2002 to 2006.
Finally, we examine whether the increased lending caused by having a higher
concentration of spetsbanks in 1995 leads to differences in regional economic outcomes
including investment, per capita income, unemployment, and the share of small business activity
years later in 2007. To do this we replace the variable Bank Outcomei in equation (3) with
variables measuring regional economic outcomes in 2007.14
We estimate all models controlling for real income and population in 1996, and each
specification is estimated with and without controls for the vector of covariates, Xi. To the

14

Here we are using a reduced form instrumental variables approach. This estimation strategy is more flexible than
a two-stage least squares approach in which the spetsbanks concentration in 1995 must influence economic
outcomes in 2007 exclusively through one particular measure of bank outcomes.

12

extent that our estimates are unaffected by the inclusion of covariates Xi that predict growth in a
significant way, we gain some confidence that including unobserved determinants of investment
and economic growth would also not matter.
One important implication of our research design is that the coefficient of interest is a
local average treatment effect that captures the effect of the increased lending induced by
successors to the old spetsbanks (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin [1996]). Thus, while these results
are informative regarding the impact of additional banking capacity induced by the top-down
creation of spetsbanks in the final years of the Soviet Union, they may be less informative of the
causal impact of other types of banking on growth. We return to this question of interpretation
later in the paper.

4. Data
Data on spetsbank status come from “A Guide to Russian Bank Data” (Karas and
Schoors [2010]), as collected from various publications from the Central Bank of Russia. This
source contains the registration records of all Russian banks from August 1988 through April
2007. Banks are classified as old spetsbanks if they were registered as an Agprombank and/or a
Zhilsotbank and/or a Promstroibank no later than December 30, 1991, as Russia instituted
market reforms shortly after this date. These old spetsbanks are measured in each region of
Russia per million inhabitants of a region at the beginning of 1992. The average region has
almost 2 spetsbanks per million inhabitants; 6 regions have no spetsbanks, and the Altai Krai has
more than 15. We report data on spetsbanks for 78 of Russia’s 83 regions.15

15

We drop three small regions for which data is limited including the Jewish Autonomous oblast, the Komi-Perm
Autonomous oblast and Taimyr Autonomous district; and, we drop the war-torn Chechen Republic and Ingush
Republic for which data are also limited.

13

The bank registry contains records only for those banks that survived until October 1,
1995. Some spetsbanks that registered before December 30, 1991 subsequently were absorbed
primarily by the agricultural spetsbanks (Agprombank) and some may have gone out of business.
Of the 250 spetsbanks that were in operation on October 1, 1995, 236 spetsbanks were registered
before December 30, 1991 and an additional 14 spetsbank were registered after December 30,
1991. Thus, our measure of old spetsbanks is conditional on survival as a spetsbank through
October 1, 1995. This is reasonable since there was little bank lending activity to private firms
and households as of October 1, 1995. Moreover, we show in the next section that the location
of these spetsbanks that survive until October 1, 1995 is orthogonal to a host of covariates that
predict future economic growth.
We use four measures of regional bank capacity including lending per capita by the
region of the lender, lending per capita by the region of the borrower, the concentration of
regional banks, and the loan interest rate charged by the banks. These variables are measured
during the period 2002 through 2006, and allow us to test whether having additional spetsbanks
increases lending or bank competition in the years preceding 2007, when we measure economic
outcomes of interest.

All lending variables are deflated by a regional consumer price index

(April 2007=100) acquired from Roskomstat (Web site: www.gks.ru) and expressed in thousands
of deflated rubles per capita.
The source for lending per capita by region of lender, bank concentration and loan
interest rate charged by the regional banks is “A Guide to Russian Bank Data” (Karas and
Schoors [2010]), as meticulously collected from quarterly reports put out by a Moscow-based
information agency “Interfax” (www.interfax.ru). Interfax publishes quarterly an extensive list
of items from the financial statements and regulatory ratios of all Russian banks. Loan interest

14

rate is calculated as the volume-weighted annualized rate charged to firms and individuals. Bank
concentration is computed using a weighted average of the Herfindahl indices for the firm and
consumer markets.16

Lending per capita by region of lender is computed as the total stock of

loans to private firms and households made by the banks in a region during the period 2002
through 2006. While the advantage of these data is that they include the entire population of
banks, the downside is that they may capture lending to firms and individuals in other states.
This is a problem primarily for Moscow and St. Petersburg, because banks registered in these
cities often make loans throughout Russia. Consequently, we complement these data with data
on aggregate lending per capita by region of the borrower during the period 2003-2006, the
source of which is the Bulletin of Banking Statistics: Regional Supplement (Central Bank of
Russia, various years).17
Our primary economic outcomes of interest include per capita income growth from 1996
to 2007, per capita GNP growth from 1996 to 2007, and investment, employment and
unemployment rates, and the number of small and medium enterprises per capita in 2007. All
measures were collected by the Russian official statistical agency (Sources: Goskomstat Rossii,
1996, 2001, 2008a, 2008b, 2010)
Our data allow for the inclusion of many important control variables, which we use both
to show the exogeneity of the concentration of spetsbanks as of 1995 as well to test the
robustness of the main results. We measure these variables in 1996 or earlier, which is well
before the period when bank finance emerges. Education in a region is taken from 1994 Russia
micro-census and is measured as the share of the population that is at least fifteen years old as of
16

The Herfindahl Index is calculated as the sum of squared market shares (in percent) for all firms in a market, and
thus can theoretically range from 0 (least concentrated) to 10,000 (monopolist).
17
We measure 2003 loans as the average of the stock of loans held by private firms and households in October 2002
and October 2003, and in 2006 average the stock of loans for October 2005 and October 2006.

15

1994, completed secondary school, and has at least some post-secondary education (source:
Goskomstat [1995]).

Another important potential determinant of future growth is ethno-

linguistic fractionalization, which is related to levels of trust, corruption and financial depth (see,
for example, Alesina et al [2003]).

We use the standard measure18 using data from the All

Union Census of 1989 (Goskomstat RSFSR [1990]), where higher values represent more
ethnically fragmented regions. We also have data on urban population share and migration
inflows per 10,000 inhabitants (source: Goskomstat [2008a and 2010]). Finally, since Moscow
was and is the financial capital of the Former Soviet Union and Russia, respectively, we also
include distance to Moscow.
We also have several political measures in order to capture popular sentiment regarding
market reform, as these preferences may well predict future growth after the fall of the Soviet
Union. One such measure is the urban Jewish population in areas occupied by the Nazis during
World War II measured just prior to their invasion. As argued by Acemoglu, Hasan, and
Robinson [2010], this variable predicts the extent of the destruction of the Soviet urban middle
class during World War II and the subsequent anti-market and pro-Communist sentiment that
persists long after the fall of the Soviet Union. In addition, our data also contain a measure of
the regional importance of powerful elites inherited from the Former Soviet Union, which we
proxy using voter participation rates in the Russian regions in 1989.19 In what was considered to
be the first open elections in Soviet history, Soviet citizens were allowed to vote for some
representatives to the national legislature. However, these elections for the first time allowed
J

18

ETHNO  1   (g i,reg / POPreg ) 2 ,

i  1,...., J

i 1

Where gi,reg is the number people in ethnic group i in a region, POPreg is the total population of the region, and J is
the total number of ethnic groups.
19
This argument is taken from Berezkin et al. [1989] and Berkowitz and DeJong [2011].

16

opposition candidates to compete with Communists for power. Thus, in regions where the
Communist Party remained strong and well organized, the Communists used their traditional
administrative structures to mobilize voter turnout from traditional bases of support including
state farms and state owned enterprises. Thus, high voter turnout in these elections is a
reasonable indicator of the strength of the old Communist party.
Our last measures of the political environment are proxies for pro-reform sentiment
among the general population, in that they measure the share of the regional population that
voted for then President Yeltsin in the presidential election in June of 1991, and the share of the
regional population that supported Yeltsin again in June of 1996 in the first round of a
presidential runoff election.20 In both elections, Yeltsin stood for economic and political reform
and his opponents wanted a return to the socialist past; therefore, pro-market sentiment is
stronger when vote shares for Yeltsin are higher.
To proxy for the quality of political institutions, we use an indicator variable that equals 1
if the appointed regional executive in 1991 was an insider and 0 if he/she was outsider (source:
Remington [2011]). This variable then picks up roughly the extent to which entrenched Soviet
elites could remain in power after the fall of the Soviet Union.
Finally, our data include four direct measures of government involvement in market circa
1997 including the share of production subsidies in regional budget expenditures in 1995; the
share of agriculture subsidies in the regional budget in 1995; the share of enterprises in
commerce, public catering and public services owned as state or municipal property as of July 1,
1997 and the weighted average of goods and that had regulated prices in 1996 (source:
Remington [2011]).
20

We obtain basically the same results if we use the second round of election in July of 1996.

17

Summary statistics are shown in Table 1. Figures are shown in 1995-1996, when there
was very little banking in Russia. In addition, we show statistics separately for regions with
more and fewer than 1.4 spetsbanks per million, which is the median number of spetsbanks
across the regions. This was done to enable evaluation of the identifying assumption that these
groups should otherwise trend similarly over time.21
As shown in Table 1, by construction these two groups have significantly different levels
of banking. This highlights the relatively high degree of variation in the full sample, where the
number of spetsbanks per million people ranges from 0 to 15, averages 2, and has a standard
deviation of approximately 2.22
However, there are no other statistically distinguishable differences between regions with
high and low concentrations of spetsbanks. Even more, the similarities along most dimensions
are quite striking: the two groups have similar levels of education, urban population share,
political environment, institutional quality, and government involvement in the economy. While
this is somewhat surprising given that politics and institutions in particular have been shown to
be drivers of finance,23 it is consistent with what we would expect based on our understanding of
how spetsbanks were created by Soviet bureaucrats.
There are only a few dimensions along which the two groups are less similar, though still
not statistically so. Regions with more spetsbanks per million inhabitants have somewhat lower
population.24 This makes some sense; one spetsbank might have been able to serve more state-

21

In the main analysis, we exploit the continuous variation in spetsbank concentration. Here, for ease of illustration,
we simply categorize regions into two groups based on spetsbank concentration.
22
None of the results in the paper are qualitatively different when excluding the region with 15 spetsbanks per
million population, which is substantially more than the next-highest region has (7.8).
23
See Malmendier [2009].
24
We note that this difference is not statistically significant, and that there is no such difference in the urban
population share. Moreover, the correlation between our spetsbanks measure and population is mechanical because
our spetsbank measure is calculated as the number of spetsbanks per million population. Thus, when we estimate

18

owned enterprises in an area with higher population density.

Migration is also somewhat

different, although the difference of 35.5 migrants per population of 10,000 is small. Distance to
Moscow is also somewhat different, with high-concentration regions located an average of 900
kilometers further away than regions with fewer spetsbanks per million population.
Table 2 also contains summary statistics for regions with low and high concentrations of
spetsbanks for variables available both circa 1996 and 2006. Thus, these results offer a glimpse
into the primary results of the paper on the impact, as well as a way to see whether other
plausibly exogenous covariates are changing systematically over time.
As shown in Table 2, banking in Russia took off quickly between 1996 and 2007. While
real loans per capita were only 40 and 110 rubles for the two groups in 1996, this increased to
over 5,000 and 17,000 rubles per capita in 2007. This increase in banking, however, was not
accompanied by a systematic change in other plausibly exogenous variables such as percent
urban or population, which is consistent with the assumptions of our research design. It also
appears that the divergence in banking did not cause a divergence in real income per capita
growth. Specifically, while real per capita income went up by 96 percent on average in states
with below-median spetsbank concentration, it went up by only 66 percent in states with abovemedian spetsbank concentration. These patterns are also apparent from Figures 1 and 2, where
Figure 1 shows the positive relationship between the log of per capita lending during 2002 - 2006
and the number of spetsbanks in 1995, and Figure 2 shows the lack of such a relationship
between the annualized increase in real income per capita from 1996 to 2007 and the number of
spetsbanks in 1995.

regressions we include population as a control to allow for flexible estimation, but we do not report or interpret the
population coefficient due to “division bias.”

19

In contrast, the increased presence of spetsbanks did appear to increase the employment
rate, as shown in Table 2. This is intriguing, as it gives some indication of what the spetsbanks
might be doing with their private lending, if not funding productivity-enhancing projects.

5. Test of the Exogeneity of Spetsbank Concentration
Before estimating the effect of spetsbanks on both banking capacity and economic
outcomes, we first test whether spetsbank concentration in October of 1995 is uncorrelated with
other variables (shown in Table 1) that predict future income. Specifically, we first ask whether
spetsbanks predict pre-banking per capita income in 1996 or annualized growth in per capita
income from 1993 to 1996. For comparison purposes, we also include the number of nonspetsbanks per million population at the end of 1995.
Results are shown in the first two columns of Table 3. Consistent with the qualitative
evidence described earlier, there is little correlation between spetsbank concentration and 1996
income: one more spetsbank per million population is associated with per capita income that is
0.3 percent lower. There is also little relationship between spetsbank concentration and the real
per capita income growth rate from 1993 to 1996; one more spetsbank is associated with a
growth rate that is a statistically insignificant 0.18 percentage points higher.
It is not surprising that the concentration of non-spetsbanks in 1996 is more closely
correlated with these pre-banking economic outcomes, though estimates are imprecise. We
estimate that one more non-spetsbank per million is associated with income that is 2.9 percent
higher, and an annual growth rate that is 0.3 percentage points higher.
Next, we ask whether spetsbank concentration is predicted by any of 15 covariates
measuring income and demographics, political environment, institutional quality, and

20

government involvement in markets. Results are shown in column 3 of Table 3. Of the 15
covariates included in the regression, only one is statistically significant at the 5 percent level,
which is consistent with a random process. Furthermore, at the 10 percent level we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that spetsbanks are uncorrelated with the income and demographic variables,
or with the political environment and institutions variables, or with the government involvement
in the economy variables. In fact, we also cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients
on all 15 variables are equal to zero at the 5 percent level (F = 1.64). In short, the empirical
evidence is consistent with the qualitative evidence of Hellman (1993) and Johnson (2000) in
suggesting that the location of spetsbanks across Russian regions is exogenous to economic
factors.
By comparison, column 4 shows results from similar regressions, except using instead
non-spetsbanks in October of 1995. As shown, this banking measure is highly correlated with
variables expected to predict future growth. Two of the 15 coefficients are significant at the 5
percent level (income and budget subsidies), and two more are significant at the 10 percent level.
This is also reflected in the F-tests shown at the bottom of the table, where at the 5 percent level
one can reject the null hypothesis that all the coefficients are jointly equal to zero. Thus, while
the concentration of non-spetsbanks is likely endogenous, the concentration of spetsbanks
appears to be orthogonal to other relevant determinants of finance and growth.

6. Results
The Effect of Spetsbanks on Banking Capacity in the Modern Banking Era
We now examine whether the concentration spetsbanks in 1995 increases banking
capacity once modern banking takes hold in Russia. The raw data are shown in Figure 1, while

21

the estimation results are shown in Table 4. There are three specifications corresponding to each
outcome. The first controls for log 1996 population, while the second additionally controls for
all other pre-banking characteristics from Table 1 to examine whether the spetsbank measure
appears to be orthogonal to other important determinants of banking and income. The third
column excludes the regions containing the capital cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg, which
are outliers in terms of foreign investment, growth, and finance.
The first three columns of table 4 estimate the effect of spetsbank concentration on the
log of per capita lending in 2002-2006, as measured by the state of the lender. As described
earlier, these are the most reliable data we have, as they come from banks’ administrative records
and include the entire population. Results indicate that having one more spetsbank per million
population—or about a ½ standard deviation increase in spetsbanks—causes between an 18 and
26 percent increase in per capita lending, with all estimates statistically significant at the 1
percent level.
In columns 4 through 6 of Table 4, we show results using a second measure of regional
lending compiled by the Central Bank of Russia. While this measure falls somewhat short of the
gold standard of administrative data, the advantage is that regional lending is defined at the level
of the borrower. Results indicate that having one more spetsbank in a region increases lending
during 2003-2006 by 14 to 19 percent, all of which are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level.
In columns 7 through 9, we ask whether having the presence of spetsbanks affects bank
competition, as measured by the Herfindahl Index. Results indicate that having more spetsbanks
reduces the Herfindahl Index by 6 to 9 percent, suggesting that their presence makes the banking
industry more competitive.

22

Finally, in columns 10 through 12 we estimate the effect of spetsbanks on the (volumeweighted) average interest rate charged on loans in each region. Here, while point estimates are
negative—as one might expect given the results on loan quantity and bank competition—most
are economically small and only some are marginally significant. The largest estimate implies
that having one additional spetsbank per million population reduces the interest rate charged by
0.15 percentage points (s.e. = 0.13), which is relatively small relative to the average annual rate
in 2006 of 16.6 percent.

The Effect of Spetsbanks on Investment, Per Capita Income, Unemployment, and Small Business
Activity
Next, we turn to whether the increase in private banking induced by spetsbanks affects
investment, per capita income growth, per capita GNP growth, employment rates, unemployment
rates, or the number of small and medium enterprises per capita. Results are shown in Table 5.
As shown in Panel A, there is no evidence that additional spetsbanks increase real per capita
income growth or real per capita GNP growth. For example, in our preferred specification in
column 2, results indicate that one additional spetsbank reduced annualized per capita income
growth from 1996 to 2007 by a statistically insignificant 0.11 percentage points, with a
corresponding 95 percent confidence interval of [-0.22, 0.11].

This is also clear from Figure 2,

which graphs the percent increase in real per capita income from 1996 to 2007 against spetsbank
concentration.
In contrast, we do find evidence that additional banking increases employment rates and
reduces unemployment; results in column 5 of Panel B indicate that having one additional
spetsbank increases the employment rate by 0.54 percentage points.

23

Importantly, none of our estimates except for unemployment are sensitive to the inclusion
of controls, and none are affected by the exclusion of Moscow and St. Petersburg.

7. Interpretation and Discussion
Our findings are somewhat surprising given the consensus in the literature that banking
increases economic growth. For example, Guiza, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) estimate that
moving from the least to the most financially developed region in Italy (which was twice as
developed, by their measure) would increase growth by 1.2 percentage points per year. In
contrast, we show that while the presence of an additional spetsbank induced a 14 to 26 percent
increase in lending over the following 10 years, it did not increase growth in GNP or personal
income. Our estimates are also precise; even the upper bound of our largest estimate on annual
real per capita income growth implies an effect of no more than 0.18 percentage points, which is
small relative to the average of 5.8 percent.
This pattern of results is intriguing, as it is appears more consistent with what one might
expect of a government owned bank, as opposed to banks that had been privatized and
competing in a market with other privately owned banks (see La Porta et al. [2002]). For
example, in governments such as the old Soviet regime, the role of the “banks” was often to help
traditional large firms retain workers, in part to build popular support for the regional political
elites and in part because these firms provided public goods such as health services and
education to the populace and thus helped maintain social stability (see Remington [2011]).
We use two approaches in order to assess whether the Soviet origins and corresponding
connections to the federal government persisted after bank privatization.

First, we check

whether employees in the original spetsbanks tended to hold powerful positions in spetsbank

24

successors.25 In 1996, for example, 77 percent of the membership of the board of directors of an
average spetsbank successor had worked in one of the original spetsbanks. At the same time, in
the non-spetsbanks only 25 percent of the board members had worked in an original spetsbank.
These findings suggest that political connections established in the original spetsbanks were
persistent through at least the mid-1990s.
In our second approach for determining whether spetsbank successors appear to have
remained connected to the government, we perform two empirical exercises. We ask whether
spetsbank successors charge similar interest rates as non-spetsbanks of similar size who operate
in the same region. We also ask whether spetsbank successors generate a greater share of their
interest income from government and government owned firms than their non-spetsbank
counterparts. Specifically, using bank-level data, we regress the outcome of interest (interest rate
charged or share of income) on regional fixed effects, log of bank assets, and an indicator for
whether the bank had its origins as a spetsbank.
Results are shown in Table 6. Using data from the period 1999-2006, we find that the
biggest difference between spetsbanks and non-spetsbanks is that spetsbanks receive
significantly more of their interest income from federal and sub-federal government (0.89
percentage points) and from firms owned by the government (1.39 percentage points). These are
large differences, representing 152 and 101 percent increases over the averages for all Russian
banks.26 Spetsbank successors also receive significantly less of their income (0.75 percentage
points, or 51 percent) from foreign banks, which is also consistent with what one might expect
25

The sampling procedure is to use all of the banks for which the relevant personnel data is given. Thus, we obtain
data for 120 spetsbanks and 149 non-spetsbanks in 1996. We obtain similar findings with a similar sample size for
1995. We also obtain qualitatively similar findings when we calculate the number of general directors, vice
directors and accountants in 1995 and 1996 who had worked in the original spetsbanks during 1988-1991.
26
We emphasize, however, that in previously showing that spetsbanks induced lending, we counted only lending to
private firms, as that is the lending likely to induce growth. In contrast, here we ask whether spetsbanks also make
more loans to government and government-owned firms than their non-spetsbank counterparts.

25

from a government bank, as these banks are outside the political sphere of government and the
banks. These differences are striking, as these banks and all other commercial banks had been
privatized since at least the early 1990s. Thus, in principle, the spetsbank successors should not
be receiving additional financial support from the government. Evidence consistent with this
assertion is that during 1999-2006 spetsbank successors do not hold significantly more
government deposits and do not reap significantly higher profits from government owned firms
than their counter-parts. Moreover, while spetsbank successors receive somewhat more transfers
from federal and regional governments 1999-2006, this difference is not statistically
significant.27
In addition, we find evidence that spetsbanks charge individuals an interest rate that is 2
percentage points lower than non-spetsbanks, which is relative to an average rate of 16.5 percent.
This could suggest some form of insider or nepotist lending where the spetsbank successors lend
to friends at beneficial prices, though it is also consistent with spetsbanks making lower risk
loans than their non-spetsbank counterparts.
Thus, we find considerable evidence that while spetsbanks do induce an increase in
private lending, they remain more connected to government than other banks. This relationship
exists despite the fact that spetsbank successors are operating in markets as private firms, and, to
our knowledge, free from any financial support from the government. The persistence of a
relationship with government may help explain why spetsbank lending does not increase growth;
perhaps spetsbanks are unable to develop the culture and capabilities necessary to make

27

These numbers are available upon request. Our measure of profits from government owned firms is interest
payments received net of expenses paid to government owned firms. Our measure of transfers from the government
is interest payments from the government net of expenditures paid. In making these calculations we control for bank
assets and region fixed effects and quarter fixed effects during 1999-2006.

26

productivity-enhancing loans, or perhaps they are pursuing other objectives that have persisted
due to their origins, such as increasing employment.
To the extent that spetsbank successors lend to inefficient firms—either intentionally to
increase employment,28 or unintentionally due to poor capital allocation skills29—it raises
questions about the impact of this lending on the private sector. For example, Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap (2008) present compelling evidence that by keeping credit flowing to otherwise
insolvent borrowers nicknamed “zombies” by the authors, Japanese banks suppressed job
destruction and creation and lowered productivity.
However, while poor capital allocation is one explanation for why spetsbank lending
does not cause positive growth, another explanation is that the institutional context in Russia
makes it difficult for any lending to lead to investment and economic growth. For example, if
firm owners do not believe their property rights will be protected after they take risks to expand
and grow their business, they may not be willing to invest.
To test more directly for whether our finding of no growth on average is caused by
spetsbank behavior or regional institutional context, we exploit the heterogeneity of both across
the different regions of Russia. Specifically, we use measures of bank behavior taken prior to
2001, and ask whether different types of spetsbanks have different effects on economic growth
from 2001 to 2007.
The first measure of bank behavior captures how closely spetsbanks are connected to the
federal government. Spetsbanks that are highly connected receive federal government transfers,
28

We attempted to acquire data on employment at the regional level at firms that were formerly state-owned—that
is, firms known to be less efficient—in order to examine whether spetsbanks increased employment at those firms,
but we were unable to do so.
29
We did compare the rate of non-performing loans across spetsbanks to non-spetsbanks as a way of measuring loan
quality. However, non-performing loan rates are small across all banks in Russia, which we suspect is due in large
part to loan restructurings that would make it hard for us to infer much from those data.

27

which are measured as interest income received from federally owned firms net of payments to
these firms as a share of total loans. In each region, then, we can compute these transfers to
spetsbanks during 1999-2001 and use banks assets as weights. However, one might worry that
the level of government involvement by spetsbanks within a region is endogenous to current and
future expected growth, or that there are region-specific differences that cause both high
government involvement by all banks as well as future growth. Consequently, we ask whether
regions in which spetsbanks are less connected to government than their non-spetsbank
counterparts in the same region experience higher growth as a result.30
Our second measure captures spetsbank similarity to nonspetsbanks in their region more
directly. Specifically, we regress spetsbank status on a set of variables describing sources and
share of deposits and loan activity as well as log assets from 1997 to 2001, and then calculate an
F-statistic for each region testing whether the coefficients on the deposit and loan variables are
jointly equal to zero. We normalize the F-statistics to have mean zero and standard deviation
one. This variable thus measures the degree of to which spetsbanks deposit and loan behavior is
different from non-spetsbanks of similar size in their region that do not share the Soviet history
of the spetsbanks.
To measure the institutional context of each region, we use a measure of property rights
protection constructed by experts at the Moscow Carnegie Center under the direction of Nikolai
Petrov and Alexei Titkov. It is measured on a scale of 1 to 5, where higher numbers mean that
greater protection of property rights.
Results are shown in Table 7, where the first four rows contain coefficients, while the last
three rows use those coefficients to estimate the marginal effects of spetsbanks that have
30

The analysis is thus necessarily limited to regions that have both spetsbank origins and successors and nonspetsbank origins and successors.

28

different levels of government involvement, similarity with non-spetsbanks in their region, or
operate in regions with differing protection of property rights. Importantly, the marginal effect
of spetsbanks on lending does not vary significantly by these three factors, as shown in Appendix
Table A1. This means that any differential effects on economic outcomes are not due to
differences in the magnitude of the first stage on the quantity of lending. We examine three
outcomes: annual growth in real personal income from 2001 – 2007, annual real GNP growth
from 2001 – 2007, and log investment in 2007.
Several patterns emerge. First, spetsbanks that operate in regions with better
institutions—namely, better protection of property rights—have a significantly more positive
effect on growth. For example, columns 7 – 10 indicate that operating in a region where
protection of property rights are classified as one point better (i.e., just over one standard
deviation) causes the marginal spetsbanks to increase growth by between 0.76 and 1.01
percentage points. This suggests that the institutional context of banking matters.
There is less clear evidence that having connections to the federal government is bad for
growth. While these connections appear to lower growth in real personal income, there is no
evidence that it lowers real annual GNP growth, and it somewhat counter-intuitively appears to
increase investment.31 However, there is much stronger evidence to suggest that spetsbanks
most different from non-spetsbanks are bad for growth.
The net impacts of these factors shown in the last three rows of Table 7 suggests that
while there is no effect of spetsbanks on economic growth or investment on average (see
columns 1, 6, and 11), there is substantial heterogeneity depending on both the behavior of the

31

One potential explanation is that while spetsbanks with close connections to the federal government may induce
additional investment, it may be investment aimed primarily at increasing employment, rather than productivity
growth. This would be consistent with the findings of Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) in Japan.

29

spetsbank as well as the institutional environment.

For example, the marginal effect of

spetsbanks that are most connected to the federal government or are the least similar to nonspetsbanks in their region is to reduce economic growth and investment, when they operate in a
region with bad institutions. For example, none of the twelve point estimates for the effect of
these banks are positive, while four are significant at the one percent level, two more are
significant at the five percent level, and one more is significant at the ten percent level. In
contrast, spetsbanks that are not connected to government, or that appear to behave similarly to
their non-spetsbank counterparts, increase economic growth by between 0.4 and 1.2 percentage
points. For example, the estimate in column 3 suggests that one additional spetsbank increases
growth by 1.1 percentage points when it has little relationship to the federal government and
operates in a region offering substantial protection of property rights.
In summary, two interesting findings shed light on our result that lending by spetsbank
successors does not increase growth or investment, but does increase employment. We show
that despite having been privatized and subject to market competition, spetsbank successors have
retained some of their historical relationships with government.

This provides a potential

explanation for why spetsbanks lend to increase employment, rather than productivity.

In

addition, the impact of spetsbank-induced lending on economic growth depends on both the
behavior of the spetsbank and the institutional environment in which they operate.

8. Conclusions
This paper examines whether additional banking capacity causes increases in per capita
income, investment, unemployment, and the share of small business activity. To overcome
biases due to selection and simultaneity, we exploit variation induced by the creation of old

30

banks created to function as clearinghouses under the former Soviet Union. Existing qualitative
research on these banks characterizes the locational decision as bureaucratic and exogenous to
economic factors, which we confirm by showing the concentration of spetsbanks is uncorrelated
with 15 covariates that predict economic growth. Despite their Soviet origins, however, these
banks have become an important source of lending in Russia: in 2006, privatized spetsbank
successors accounted for nearly 14 percent of all lending to firms and households in Russia.
Results indicate that while having one additional spetsbank per million population
increases private lending up to 10 years later by 14 to 26 percent, this increase in lending does
not cause an economically meaningful increase in investment or per capita growth in real income
or GNP.

Rather, we find that spetsbank-induced lending increases employment.

This is

consistent with other findings that spetsbanks are significantly more connected to the federal
government than their non-spetsbank counterparts who lack the historic connections to the Soviet
financial and political system. This is also consistent with the finding that even after the
privatization of banks, employees of the original Soviet spetsbanks were much more likely to
hold powerful positions in spetsbank successor banks than in the non-spetsbanks.
Furthermore, we find evidence that the effectiveness of spetsbanks in causing economic
growth was determined by both the behavior of the spetsbanks, as well as the institutional
environment in which they operated. Specifically, we find that a one standard deviation in the
regional index of protection of property rights increases the marginal effect of a spetsbank on
annual economic growth by nearly one percentage point. Similarly, our results suggest that
spetsbanks that are either less connected to government, or are more similar to their nonspetsbank counterparts, subsequently increase economic growth.

31

These latter findings are

roughly consistent with the conclusion of Jayaratne and Strahan [1996], who argue that lending
quality, rather than volume, is responsible for growth.
Thus, on the one hand, we view our finding that the spetsbank-induced lending did not
cause growth as an important counterexample to the existing literature. On the other hand, we
emphasize that unlike the United States and Italy examined by previous researchers, our findings
are in the context of a country that lacked the long history of modern banking, and that attempted
to transform these banks relatively quickly through privatization and the corresponding
incentives.
Consequently, our results indicate that the origins of financial institutions can have
persistent effects on behavior and growth years afterward. Additionally, our findings suggest
that the quality of institutions and the weakening of political connections between banks and
government are necessary for banking to cause economic growth.

32

References
Abanrbanell, Jeffrey.S, and Anna Meyendorff, “Bank Privatization in Post-Communist Russia:
The Case of Zhilsotsbank,” Journal of Comparative Economics 25, (1997), 62-96.
Acemoglu, Daron, Tarek A. Hasan and James A. Robinson, “A Legacy of the Holocaust in
Russia,” MIT working paper August 2010, forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat and Romain
Wacziarg, "Fractionalization," Journal of Economic Growth, 8 (2003), 155-94.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin, “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
91 (1996), 444-455.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza, “Finance and the Sources of Growth,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 58 (2000), 261-300.
Berezkin, A., L. Smirnyagin,, V. Kolosov,, M. Pavlovskaya and N., Petrov, N., “The Geography
of the 1989 Elections,” Soviet Geography, 30 (1989), 607-34.
Berkowitz, Daniel, and David N. DeJong, “Growth in Post-Soviet Russia: A Tale of Two
Transitions?,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 79 (2011), 133-43.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. “Zombie Lending and Depressed
Restructuring in Japan,” American Economic Review, 98 (2008), 1943-1977.
Central Bank of the Russian Federation, Bulletin of Banking Statistics: Regional Supplement,
(2002-2007), Moscow.
Dejeha, Rajeev and Adriana Llleras-Muney “Institutions, Financial Development, and Pathways
of Growth: The United States from 1900 to 1940," Journal of Law and Economics, 50
(2007), 239-272.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, “Finance, Financial Sector Policies and Long-Run
Growth,” Commission on Growth and Development, the World Bank, Working Paper
No. 11, 2008.
Garvy, George, Money, Financial Flows, and Credit in the USSR (Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger, 1977).
Gokomstat Rossi. Maloye Predprimatel’stvo v Rossii (2001, 2008b), Moscow.
Goskomstat RSFSR, Natsional'niy Sostav Naseleniya RSFSR (po dannim vsesoyuznoy perepisi
naseleniya 1989 g), (1990), Moscow.
33

Goskomstat Rossii, Obrazovanie Naseleniya Rossii (po dannim mikroperepisi naseleniya 1994
g.), (1995), Moscow.
Goskomstat Rossii, Rossiyskiy Statisticheskii Yezhegodnik, Goskomstat Rossii, (1996, 2002,
2008a, 2010), Moscow.
Guiso, Luigi., Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, “Does Local Financial Development Matter?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 929-969.
Hellman, Joel S., Breaking the Bank: Bureaucrats and the Creation of Markets in a Transition
Economy (New York: Columbia University Doctoral Dissertation, 1993).
Ickes, Barry. “Obstacles to Economic Reform of Socialism: An Institutional Choice Approach,”
ANNALS, American Association of Political and Social Science, 507 (1990), 53-60.
Jayartne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 639-671.
Johnson, Juliet, A Fistful of Rubles: The Rise and Fall of the Russian Banking System (New
York: Cornell University Press, 2000).
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, C., Property Rights, Finance and
Entrepreneurship. American Economic Review, 92 (2002), 1335-1356.
Karas, Alexei and Koen Schoors, A Guide to Russian Bank Data (August 13, 2010).
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1658468.
King, Robert, and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Shumpeter Might be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108 (1993), 717-738.
Klapper, Leora F., Annamaria Lusardi and Georgios A Panos, “Financial Literacy and the
Financial Crisis: Evidence from Russia” (March 15, 2011). Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1786826 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1786826.
Kornai, Janos, The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1992).
Kornai, János, Eric Maskin, and Gérard Roland, "Understanding the Soft Budget Constraint."
Journal of Economic Literature, 41 (2003), 1095–1136.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, “Government Ownership of
Commercial Banks,” Journal of Finance, 57 (2002), 265-301.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Law and
34

Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (1998), 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, “"The Economics
Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature (2008), 285-332.
Malmendier, Ulrike, “Law and Finance at the Origin,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47
(2009), 1076-1108.
Remington, Thomas F, The Politics of Inequality in Russia (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2011).
Schoors, Koen, “The Fate of Russia’s Former State Banks: Chronicle of a Restructuring
Postponed and a Crisis Foretold.” Europe-Asia Studies, 55 (2003), 75-100.
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Treisman, Without a Map: Political Tactics and Economic Reform in
Russia (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001).
Tompson, William, " Old Habits Die Hard: Fiscal Imperatives, State Regulation and the Role of
Russia’s Banks.” Europe-Asia Studies, 49(1997), 1159-1185.

35

Log Per Capita Lending 2002 - 2006

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Spetsbanks in 1995

Annualized Income Growth 1996 - 2007

Figure 1: Spetsbank Concentration and Per Capita Lending from 2002 to 2006
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Spetsbanks in 1995

Figure 2: Spetsbank Concentration and Per Capita Income Growth from 1996 to 2007
36

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for States in 1995-1996 with Above- and Below-Median Number
of Spetsbanks
Low Spetsbank

High Spetsbank

Difference in Means

Observations

0.78
(0.43)

3.25
(2.62)

2.469***
(0.43)

76

Population (millions), 1996

2.10
(1.33)

1.75
(1.76)

-0.35
(0.36)

76

Share of 15 + year olds with at least some tertiary
education, 1994

13.3
(3.4)

14.0
(3.9)

0.706
(0.83)

76

Ethno-linguistic fractionalization, 1990

0.30
(0.22)

0.31
(0.19)

0.01
(0.05)

76

Urban population share, 1996

68.7
(11.6)

69.7
(14.3)

1.027
(2.98)

76

Migration per 10,000, 1996

20.6
(56.1)

-14.7
(123.4)

-35.24
(21.8)

76

1765.0
(1749.3)

2675.9
(3277.7)

910.90
(598.40)

76

% of Urban Jewish Population in 1939 in regions
subsequently occupied by the Nazis during WWII

0.09
(0.22)

0.07
(0.23)

-0.01
(0.05)

76

Strength of Communist Party, 1989 (proxied by
participation in Soviet elections)

87.5
(6.1)

87.0
(6.2)

-0.5
(1.4)

76

Support for Yeltsin, 1991

54.4
(10.4)

51.1
(12.8)

-3.3
(2.7)

76

Support for Yeltsin, 1996

32.1
(9.0)

33.2
(11.1)

1.1
(2.3)

76

0.28
(0.40)

0.18
(0.35)

-0.10
(0.09)

76

Budget subsidies, 1995

16.7
(14.9)

13.3
(4.7)

-3.4
(2.6)

76

Agricultural subsidies, 1995

8.9
(4.8)

10.0
(6.1)

1.2
(1.3)

76

Share of municipal and state enterprises, July 1, 1997

18.8
(15.1)

23.0
(21.2)

4.2
(4.2)

76

Weighted average of goods and services with regulated
prices, 1996

16.2
(10.3)

14.5
(7.0)

-1.7
(2.0)

76

Banking:
Spetsbanks Per Million Population in 1996
Demographics:

Distance to Moscow (km)

Political Environment:

Institutions:
Appointed Governor, 1991, Insider or
Outsider
Government Involvement in Markets:

Notes: Figures represent the average across all states during that time period. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors for differences in
means assumes that variances are equal. Low Spetsbank refers to regions in which there were fewer than the median of 1.4 spetsbanks per million
population, while high Spetsbank refers to regions in which there was an above-median number of spetsbanks per million population.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

37

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics Before and After Modern Banking, by Presence of Old Spetsbanks
Prior to Modern Banking in Russia (circa 1996)
Low Spetsbank
High Spetsbank
Spetsbanks Per Million Population

2007
Low Spetsbank

High Spetsbank

0.8
(0.4)

3.3
(2.6)

0.6
(0.5)

1.6
(1.8)

Bank Loans to Households and Firms
Thousands of Rubles Per Capita

0.04
(0.04)

0.11
(0.37)

5.31
(17.03)

16.74
(74.09)

Real income per capita in rubles
April 2007=100

4334
(1830)

5547
(4048)

8504
(2834)

9233
(4724)

Employment Rate (%)

93.7
(7.6)

92.1
(6.7)

89.8
(5.9)

90.2
(6.3)

Unemployment Rate (%)

10.7
(4.6)

10.4
(3.7)

7.2
(4.0)

6.5
(3.2)

Herfindahl Index for Household
Loans

3381
(2315)

3252
(1852)

5249
(2426)

4945
(2397)

Herfindahl Index for Firm Loans

3606
(2321)

2808
(1398)

4820
(2436)

4490
(2518)

Migration

20.6
(56.1)

-14.7
(123.4)

-1.9
(36.0)

-9.2
(39.9)

% Urban

68.7
(11.6)

69.7
(14.3)

68.7
(11.5)

70.0
(13.9)

Population, millions

2.10
(1.33)

1.75
(1.76)

2.00
(1.32)

1.70
(1.90)

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Low Spetsbank refers to regions in which there were fewer than the median of 1.4 spetsbanks per million
population, while high Spetsbank refers to regions in which there was an above-median number of spetsbanks per million population. Bank loans to private sector
prior to modern banking are from the last 2 quarters of 1997, as this is the earliest time for which reasonable data coverage is available.

38

Table 3: Correlation Between Spetsbank Concentration and Other Pre-Banking Region
Characteristics

1

Annual Growth Rate
1993-96
2

Spetsbanks per Million Population, 1996

-0.003
(0.041)

0.183
(0.423)

-

-

Non-Spetsbanks per Million Population, 1996

0.029
(0.023)

0.314
(0.292)

-

-

Log of real per capita income, 1996

1.66
(1.40)

6.45**
(2.59)

Share of 15 + year olds with at least some tertiary
education, 1994
Ethno-linguistic fractionalization, 1990

0.08
(0.09)

0.01
(0.20)

0.16
(1.22)

4.44*
(2.48)

Urban population share, 1996

-0.05
(0.06)

-0.04
(0.08)

Migration per 10,000, 1996

0.00
(0.01)

0.02*
(0.01)

Distance to Moscow (1000s of kilometers)

0.04
(0.16)

0.42
(0.25)

% of Urban Jewish Population in 1939 in regions
subsequently occupied by the Nazis during WWII

-0.37
(0.88)

-1.83
(1.66)

Strength of Communist Party in 1989

-0.07
(0.06)

0.15
(0.12)

Support for Yeltsin, 1991

-0.01
(0.03)

-0.04
(0.04)

Support for Yeltsin, 1996

-0.01
(0.04)

0.06
(0.05)

-0.10
(0.45)

0.31
(1.13)

Budget subsidies, 1995

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.06**
(0.03)

Agricultural subsidies, 1995

-0.02
(0.05)

0.03
(0.10)

Share of municipal and state enterprises, 1997

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.06
(0.03)

Weighted average of goods and services with
regulated prices, 1996

-0.04**
(0.02)

-0.04
(0.04)

Dependent Variable:

Log 1996 Income

Spetsbanks per
Million Pop.
3

Non-Spetsbanks per
Million Pop.
4

Income and Demographics

Political Environment:

Institutions:
Appointed Governor, 1991, Insider or Outsider
Government Involvement in Markets:

Observations
F-Test of Joint Significance (Income & Demographics)

76

74

76

76

-

-

1.36

2.81**

F-Test of Joint Significance (Politics & Institutions)

-

-

0.30

0.76

F-Test of Joint Significance (Govt. Involvement)

-

-

1.47

3.12**

F-Test of Joint Significance (All Covariates)

-

-

1.64*

2.21**

Notes: Each column represents a different regression. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Each specification also controls for logged
population, though the coefficient is not reported or included in the F-test due to division bias caused by also having population in the denominator of the
dependent variable.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

39

Table 4: The Effect of Spetsbank Presence on Banking Capacity
1
2
3
Log Per Capita Lending 2002
- 2006, by State of Lender
Spetsbanks per Million Population

4
5
6
Log Per Capita Lending 2003
- 2006, by State of Borrower

7
8
9
Log Herfindahl Index 2002 2006

10
11
12
Loan Interest Rate Charged
in 2002, 2006

0.26***
(0.07)

0.18***
(0.05)

0.18***
(0.05)

0.19***
(0.04)

0.14***
(0.04)

0.14***
(0.04)

-0.09***
(0.02)

-0.06**
(0.02)

-0.06**
(0.02)

-0.09
(0.18)

-0.13
(0.13)

-0.15
(0.13)

Observations/Regions

76

76

74

76

76

74

76

76

74

73

73

71

Includes additional controls

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Capital cities are dropped (Moscow and
St. Petersburg)

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Each specification controls for logged 1996 population. Household lending is deflated by the CPI where April 2007=100,
and the first two quarters of 2007 are included. Loan interest data in 2006 is missing for three regions including the Kursk, Magadan and the Republic of Kalmykia. Additional
controls include the log of per capita income in 1996 as well as all of the pre-banking characteristics shown in Table 1.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

40

Table 5: The Effect of Banking on Income Growth, GNP Growth, Investment, Small Businesses, Employment, and Unemployment
Panel A: Income and Investment

Spetsbanks Per Million Population

Observations/Regions

1
2
3
Annual Growth Rate in Personal
Income Per Capita, 1996 - 2007

4
5
6
Annual Growth Rate in Real GDP
Per Capita, 2001 - 2007

7
8
9
Log Investment Per Capita in
2007

0.00
(0.09)

-0.11
(0.11)

-0.11
(0.12)

-0.04
(0.17)

-0.09
(0.21)

-0.06
(0.21)

-0.013
(0.022)

-0.021
(0.035)

-0.020
(0.034)

76

76

74

76

76

74

72

72

70

Panel B: Small Enterprises and Employment

Log Small and Medium
Enterprises Per Capita in 2007

Spetsbanks Per Million Population

0.020
(0.024)

0.010
(0.019)

0.010
(0.020)

0.60**
(0.26)

0.54**
(0.27)

0.54**
(0.27)

-0.13
(0.14)

-0.40***
(0.09)

-0.42***
(0.09)

Observations/Regions

76

76

74

76

76

74

76

76

74

Includes additional controls

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Capital cities are dropped (Moscow
and St. Petersburg)

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Employment Rate in 2007

Unemployment Rate in 2007

Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. Each specification controls for the natural log of 1996 population. Additionally, each
per capita income growth specification includes logged income in 1996, while each GNP growth specification includes logged GNP in 2001. Each
specification for the other four outcomes controls for the lagged level of the dependent variable in 1996. Additional controls include the log of per capita
income in 1996 as well as all of the pre-banking characteristics shown in Table 1.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

41

Table 6: Differences Between the Business Practices of Spetsbank Successors versus Non-Spetsbanks
Interest Rates Charged To:

The Share of Interest Income That Comes From:

Firms

Individuals

Government

Central Bank
of Russia

Domestic
Banks

Foreign
Banks

Firms Owned
by the Govt.

Private
Firms

Households

Spetsbank Origin

-0.01
(0.65)

-1.98***
(0.66)

0.886**
(0.374)

0.0491
(0.190)

0.775
(0.805)

-0.745**
(0.357)

1.385***
(0.487)

0.716
(1.616)

-3.474***
(0.978)

Observations

37,823

34,871

40,407

40,407

40,407

40,407

40,407

40,407

40,407

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Each specification includes logged bank assets, region fixed effects, and quarter fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the bank level. Private firms include domestic and foreign firms and registered entrepreneurs. Firms owned by the government include federal
and sub-federal firms.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

42

Table 7: The Differential Impact of Spetsbanks on Growth and Investment by Relationship to Government, Similarity to NonSpetsbanks, and the Extent of Regional Property Rights Protection
Dependent Variable:

1
2
3
4
5
Annual Growth Rate in Real Personal Income,
2001 - 2007

11

12
13
14
Log Investment in 2007

15

-0.060
(0.06)

-0.29* -0.45*** -0.060
(0.17) (0.15) (0.14)

-0.40*
(0.20)
0.11*
(0.06)

-1.74
(1.11)

-2.56*
(1.27)

-0.420
(1.16)

-2.13*
(1.14)

-0.110 -3.00*** -3.31*** -2.35*** -3.07***
(0.31) (0.71) (0.72) (0.77) (0.74)

Spetsbanks x Property Rights Protection
(higher → more protection)

0.63*
(0.32)

0.82**
(0.37)

0.26
(0.33)

0.72*
(0.35)

0.96*** 1.01*** 0.76*** 0.91***
(0.21) (0.23) (0.25) (0.24)

0.08*
(0.05)

0.11**
(0.05)

Spetsbanks x Difference in Spetsbank vs NonSpetsbank Relationship with Fed Govt (higher
→ spetsbanks more involved)

-0.92**
(0.43)

-0.8
(0.62)

-0.11
(0.29)

0.08*
(0.05)

0.11**
(0.05)

Spetsbanks Per Million Population

0.29
(0.37)

6
7
8
9
10
Annual Growth Rate in Real Per Capita GNP,
2001 - 2007

Spetsbanks x Within-Region Index of
Differences Between Spetsbanks and NonSpetsbanks (higher → less similar)

-0.60**
(0.24)

-0.82*
(0.46)

0.01
(0.45)

-0.28**
(0.13)

-0.47*
(0.24)

0.01
(0.04)

-0.13*** -0.08
(0.03) (0.07)

Est. Marginal Effect of Spetsbank on Region at:
10th Pctile of Institutions; 90th Pctile of Fed
Govt Connection/Dissimilarity with nonSpetsbanks

-1.22
(0.74)

-1.57*
(0.91)

0.27
(0.59)

-0.46
(0.58)

-1.17*** -1.28** -0.75** -1.11***
(0.42) (0.51) (0.34) (0.36)

-0.27*** -0.42*** 0.00
(0.10) (0.09) (0.07)

-0.15
(0.10)

50th Pctile of Institutions; 50th Pctile of Fed
Govt Connection/Dissimilarity with nonSpetsbanks

0.18
(0.31)

-0.07
(0.40)

0.50
(0.30)

0.22
(0.36)

-0.11
(0.17)

-0.28
(0.27)

-0.00
(0.18)

-0.22
(0.25)

-0.05
(0.04)

-0.11**
(0.05)

0.01
(0.04)

-0.05
(0.06)

90th Pctile of Institutions; 10th Pctile of Fed
Govt Connection/Dissimilarity with nonSpetsbanks

1.21***
(0.35)

1.10**
(0.45)

0.45
(0.32)

0.50
(0.42)

0.90***
(0.26)

0.72*
(0.36)

0.61*
(0.32)

0.44
(0.38)

0.11**
(0.05)

0.10*
(0.06)

-0.06
(0.05)

0.02
(0.07)

Observations/Regions

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

45

45

45

45

45

Includes additional controls

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. Each income growth specification includes logged income in 2001; each GNP growth specification includes logged GNP
in 2001; each investment specification controls for logged investment in 2001. Additional controls include the log of per capita income in 1996 as well as all of the pre-banking characteristics
shown in Table 1. Property rights protection is a measure constructed by experts at the Moscow Carnegie Center under the direction of Nikolai Petrov and Alexei Titkov and is measured on a
scale of 1 to 5. The difference in spetsbank and non-spetsbank relationship with the federal government is defined as the difference between the share of bank asset weighted federal transfers
to spetsbanks and non-spetsbanks, where the federal transfer is interest payments net of payments from federally owned firms paid to banks divided by the value of overall bank loans. The
within-region index of differences between spetsbanks and non-spetsbanks is calculated as the normalized F-statistic arising from a region-specific regressions in which an indicator for
spetsbank status is regressed on a set of variables describing sources and share of deposits and loan activity.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

43

Web Appendix:
Table A1: The Differential Impact of Spetsbanks on Lending by Relationship to Government, Similarity to Non-Spetsbanks, and the
Extent of Regional Protection of Property Rights
Dependent Variable:
Spetsbanks Per Million Population

1
2
3
4
5
Log Per Capita Lending by Region of Lender, 2002 2007
0.27**
(0.10)

0.42
(0.25)

0.33
(0.40)

0.42
(0.34)

0.11
(0.41)

Spetsbanks x Property Rights Protection (higher → more
protection)

-0.06
(0.08)

-0.01
(0.12)

-0.07
(0.11)

0.05
(0.12)

Spetsbanks x Difference in Spetsbank vs Non-Spetsbank
Relationship with Fed Govt (higher → spetsbanks more involved)

-0.01
(0.17)

0.26
(0.15)

Spetsbanks x Within-Region Index of Differences Between
Spetsbanks and Non-Spetsbanks (higher → less similar)

0.00
(0.08)

0.13
(0.14)

6
7
8
9
10
Log Per Capita Lending by Region of Borrower, 2002 2007
0.10
(0.08)

0.71**
(0.31)

0.11
(0.25)

0.40*
(0.23)

-0.01
(0.15)

-0.17**
(0.08)

-0.01
(0.07)

-0.06
(0.07)

0.05
(0.05)

-0.16
(0.13)

-0.13
(0.13)
0.18***
(0.05)

0.31***
(0.05)

Est. Marginal Effect of Spetsbank on Region at:
0.29
(0.20)

0.52*
(0.26)

0.29*
(0.17)

0.17
(0.20)

0.23
(0.21)

-0.01
(0.18)

0.21*
(0.11)

0.01
(0.09)

0.25**
(0.09)

0.29**
(0.13)

0.22**
(0.10)

0.23*
(0.13)

0.19
(0.07)

0.09
(0.09)

0.16**
(0.06)

0.08
(0.08)

0.20
(0.14)

0.17
(0.16)

0.15
(0.14)

0.35**
(0.17)

0.09
(0.08)

0.14
(0.10)

0.19**
(0.08)

0.29***
(0.11)

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

10th Pctile of Institutions; 90th Pctile of Fed Govt
Connection/Dissimilarity with non-Spetsbanks
50th Pctile of Institutions; 50th Pctile of Fed Govt
Connection/Dissimilarity with non-Spetsbanks
90th Pctile of Institutions; 10th Pctile of Fed Govt
Connection/Dissimilarity with non-Spetsbanks
Observations/Regions
Includes additional controls

Notes: Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. Each income growth specification includes logged income in 2001; each GNP growth specification includes
logged GNP in 2001; each investment specification controls for logged investment in 2001. Additional controls include the log of per capita income in 1996 as well as all of the prebanking characteristics shown in Table 1. Property rights protection is a measure constructed by experts at the Moscow Carnegie Center under the direction of Nikolai Petrov and
Alexei Titkov and is measured on a scale of 1 to 5. The difference in spetsbank and non-spetsbank relationship with the federal government is defined as the difference between
the share of bank asset weighted federal transfers to spetsbanks and non-spetsbanks, where the federal transfer is interest payments net of payments from federally owned firms
paid to banks divided by the value of overall bank loans. The within-region index of differences between spetsbanks and non-spetsbanks is calculated as the normalized F-statistic
arising from a region-specific regressions in which an indicator for spetsbank status is regressed on a set of variables describing sources and share of deposits and loan activity.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

44

