                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INFLATION TRACKING PORTFOLIOS

                                      Christopher T. Downing
                                       Francis A. Longstaff
                                        Michael A. Rierson

                                        Working Paper 18135
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18135


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




Christopher Downing is a Director at Blackrock, 400 Howard Street, San Francisco, CA 94105; email
chris.downing@ blackrock.com. Francis A. Longstaff is the Allstate Professor of Insurance and Finance,
UCLA Anderson School, 110 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles CA 90095-1481; email francis.longstaff@
anderson.ucla.edu.Francis Longstaff has a consulting relationship with Blackrock. Michael Rierson
is a Managing Director at Blackrock, 400 Howard Street, San Francisco, CA 94105; email mike.rierson@
blackrock.com. The views expressed here are those of the authors alone and not necessarily those of
Blackrock or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is intended to stimulate further
research and is not a recommendation of any particular securities or investment strategy.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Christopher T. Downing, Francis A. Longstaff, and Michael A. Rierson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Tracking Portfolios
Christopher T. Downing, Francis A. Longstaff, and Michael A. Rierson
NBER Working Paper No. 18135
June 2012
JEL No. G11

                                                ABSTRACT

We propose a new approach to constructing inflation tracking portfolios. The key to this approach
is the insight that asset returns track expected inflation far better than they track current realized inflation.
Thus, we can construct portfolios that track next month's inflation much more closely than they track
this month's inflation. We show this staggered hedging approach can eliminate nearly 90 percent of
the tracking error of more conventional inflation hedging strategies. We also find that long-short positions
in equities play a dominant role in the effective hedging of inflation risk over extended horizons. These
results suggest that the goal of protecting portfolios against inflation may be more feasible that is commonly
believed.


Christopher T. Downing                                  Michael A. Rierson
Blackrock                                               Blackrock
400 Howard Street                                       400 Howard Street
San Francisco, CA 94105                                 San Francisco, CA 94105
chris.downing@blackrock.com                             mike.rierson@blackrock.com

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
One of the most fundamental risks facing investors in financial markets is the erosion of
the real value of their portfolios through the effects of inflation. Recently, fears about the
resurgence of higher inflation in the U.S. have been heightened by a number of factors
including the growth in Treasury debt, multiple rounds of quantitative easing by the Federal
Reserve, and volatile global oil prices. In light of this, it is not suprising that many investors
view protecting their portfolios against inflation risk as a priority.
     Inflation, however, has proven to be very difficult to hedge, as it has a low correlation
with the returns from most asset classes. In fact, a number of important asset classes, such
as US equities, have returns that are slightly negatively correlated with realized inflation.
     This paper presents a new approach for creating portfolios that track realized inflation
and protect investors against declines in the real value of their wealth. This approach takes
a fundamentally different perspective on what it means to track realized inflation over time.
Specifically, while stock returns have little contemporaneous correlation with inflation, they
can be strongly correlated with realized inflation in subsequent months. Intuitively, one rea-
son for this may be that stock prices react more to expectations for future price developments
than to contemporaneous realizations of inflation. Goods and services price changes may
reflect forcastable information, and stock prices probably incorporate this information more
efficiently than the survey-based price indexes that are commonly used to measure inflation.
Thus, stock returns and inflation may be “out of synch” with each other.
     In light of this basic insight, we construct portfolios of assets that are optimized to track
subsequent, as opposed to contemporaneous, inflation rates. When applied over a longer time
period, such as ten years, this approach may result in weaker tracking during the first month
since the portfolio and realized inflation are “out of synch.” However, the strategy can then
attain excellent inflation tracking over the subsequent 119 months as each month’s portfolio
return hedges the next month’s realized inflation. Thus we attain far better cumulative
inflation tracking over the next ten years than with the usual approach of trying to track
contemporaneous inflation. We show that this approach can eliminate nearly 90 percent of
the inflation-tracking error that would result from following the traditional approach over a
long horizon.
     To illustrate these ideas, we consider a simple look-ahead portfolio that includes both
Treasury bills and the Fama-French 30-industry equity portfolios. The portfolio weights
in the look-ahead tracking portfolio are intuitive and load most heavily on industries that
represent important components of the CPI such as energy, transportation, and household
products. The portfolio also places significant weight on Treasury bills, which are effective


                                                1
in tracking expected inflation and, therefore, subsequent realized inflation. We find that
effective inflation tracking requires taking long positions in some industry equity portfolios
and short positions in others. In particular, we find that long-equity-only portfolios are not
nearly as successful in hedging inflation.
    This paper contributes to an extensive literature on tracking macroeconomic variables
using portfolios of financial securities. An important example of this literature is Lamont
(2001) whose economic tracking portfolios have many parallels with our approach. Other
important papers on hedging inflation include Fama (1975, 1981), Bodie (1976, 1983), Fama
and Schwert (1977), Titman and Warga (1989), Yobaccio, Rubens, and Ketcham (1995),
Bruno and Chincarini (2001), Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006), and Bekaert and Wang
(2010).


2       Contemporaneous Correlations with Inflation
The contemporaneous correlations between many asset classes and realized inflation tend
to be very low. This makes it particularly difficult to construct portfolios that are able to
hedge realized inflation month by month. Figure 1 plots scatterplots of monthly inflation
against S&P 500, Treasury bond, real estate, commodity index, gold, and TIPS returns. We
proxy for the inflation rate using the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for
All Urban Consumers (not seasonally adjusted). The Treasury bond returns are computed
from the Bloomberg total return index for all Treasury bonds with maturities of one year
or more. The real estate returns are computed using the Case-Shiller ten-city index prior
to February 2000 and the Dow Jones U.S. Real Estate total return index thereafter. We
measure gold returns using the Bloomberg values for the spot dollar price of physical gold.
The commodity returns are computed using the S&P GSCI Commodity Total Return index
(which is about 70 percent weighted towards energy). TIPS returns are computed from
the Barclays Capital U.S. Treasury Inflation Notes Index.1 The S&P 500 index, gold, and
commodity returns range from January 1985 to December 2011. The Treasury returns range
from January 1992 to December 2011, while the real estate returns range from March 1987
to July 2011. The TIPS returns range from April 1997 to November 2011. Table 1 displays
correlations between inflation and these returns.
    The scatterplots in Figure 1 and the data in Table 1 show that the contemporaneous
correlations of returns with realized inflation are relatively small. For example, S&P 500
    1
    Barclays also offers a somewhat shorter-tenor index, covering TIPS from 0-5 years. Though our results
are qualitatively similar using this index, we do not focus on it because the index offers a much shorter
history.



                                                   2
index returns have a slightly negative correlation of −2.59 percent with inflation. This
negative correlation is consistent with earlier results in the literature, such as Fama and
Schwert (1977), arguing that stocks have little ability to hedge against contemporaneous
realized inflation. Treasury bond returns are also negatively correlated with realized inflation.
Of the six asset classes, the highest correlation coefficient is for the commodity index returns
with a value of 29.11 percent.
    Surprisingly, the correlation of TIPS returns with realized inflation is only 9.89 per-
cent. This result may seem counterintuitive since TIPS explicitly carry inflation protection.
The reason for this low correlation, however, is that TIPS prices are also very sensitive to
changes in real interest rates and real term premia. In fact, these changes have been more
important drivers of TIPS prices since these securities were first issued in 1997 than the
inflation-protection component of their returns.2 Thus, TIPS have been relatively ineffective
at hedging monthly realized inflation.


3       Benchmarking the Standard Approach
To provide a benchmark for comparison with later results, we begin by examining the
inflation-tracking performance of a portfolio of assets chosen to provide the best hedge against
contemporaneous realized inflation. This standard approach is frequently recommended in
the financial press.3
    Without singling out any specific strategy, we observe that many recommended inflation-
tracking strategies include a number of common elements. In particular, these strategies
typically attempt to track inflation contemporaneously through the returns of asset classes
such as commodities, real estate, gold, TIPS, Treasury bonds, and equities.
    We illustrate the inflation-tracking performance of these types of strategies as follows.
First, we focus on the major asset classes whose correlations with inflation are shown in Table
1. Second, we limit the analysis to the twenty-year period from January 1992 to December
2011 in order to include returns for as many of these asset classes as possible. Even with
    2
     Further underscoring this point, the annualized volatility of monthly TIPS returns is 5.9 percent (for the
shorter-tenor Barclays index mentioned in footnote 1, from its inception in 2002 to the end of our sample
period the volatility is 3.7 percent). Over the same period, the volatility of inflation is only 1.6 percent.
   3
     For example, see Pollock (2011) in The Wall Street Journal:
  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748705662604576256912139434434.html,
  Fisher (2012) in Forbes:
  http://www.forbes.com/sites/greggfisher/2012/03/05/hedging-inflation/,
  Andriotis (2011) at SmartMoney.com:
  http://www.smartmoney.com/invest/markets/inflation-hedges-the-truth-and-lies-1297893705390/,
  and Kristof (2012) in The Los Angeles Times:
  http://www.latimes.com/la-diverse-story3,0,7475319.story.


                                                    3
this limitation, portfolios over the first five years of this period include only five of the six
asset classes until the TIPS index returns become available in April 1997.
    Third, using the first 60 months of the sample period as a training period, we regress the
monthly inflation rate on the contemporaneous asset returns. Specifically, let CPIt denote
the realized inflation rate for month t based on the (seasonally unadjusted) CPI-U index.
Let Rit denote the return for month t for the i-th asset class. The regression specification is
given by
                                            n
                                            X
(1)                                CPIt =         βi Rit + t ,
                                            i=1

where the regression is estimated without an intercept. By leaving out the intercept, we
can interpret the slope coefficients βi as portfolio weights for the respective asset classes in
a portfolio that best tracks the contemporaneous inflation rate. We then form the tracking
portfolio for month 61 using these weights estimated from the prior 60 months and compute
the realized return for the tracking portfolio for month 61. We then roll the process forward
one month and restimate the regression using the data from months 2 through 61, and again
use the slope coefficients as weights to form the tracking portfolio for month 62. We repeat
the process for all months in the sample period. By forming the portfolio for month t on the
basis of information available prior to month t, we can then assess the actual out-of-sample
performance of the inflation-tracking strategy.
    Figure 2 plots the cumulative change in the price level during the portfolio tracking period
(solid line labeled ‘Inflation’), along with the cumulative return of the tracking portfolio
(dashed line labeled ‘Tracking’). Summary statistics for the percentage tracking error are
provided in Table 2, where the tracking error is defined as the percentage difference in the
cumulative price level and value of the tracking portfolio (the ratio of the two levels, where
the levels are normalized to one in the first period).
    As Figure 2 and Table 2 show, the out-of-sample inflation tracking performance of this
strategy is not particularly impressive. On average, the value of the tracking portfolio differs
from the price level by more than eight percent. While the errors tend to be in the positive
direction throughout most of the sample period, the tracking portfolio also has long periods
in which it fails to protect against realized inflation. Specifically, during 2002, the tracking
portfolio had a cumulative value more than 12 percent below the price level, or equivalently,
had lost over 12 percent of its real value. Thus, an investor who exited the strategy at this
point in time would have realized a large loss in purchasing power. Although the tracking
portfolio was able to preserve (and increase) the real value of the investor’s portfolio over
the entire sample period, there are clearly extremely large swings in the real value of the
portfolio. The standard deviation of the cumulative tracking error over the entire period is


                                                  4
about 14.5 percent. The root-mean-squared error (RMSE) of the tracking portfolio is nearly
16.6 percent.


4    Look-Ahead Correlations with Inflation
In contrast to the low contemporaneous correlations with inflation, a number of investments
have returns that are strongly correlated with subsequent realized inflation. In particular,
stock returns for a broad cross section of industries are significantly correlated with next
month’s reported inflation.
    This feature is illustrated in Figure 3 which plots the long-run correlations (1960-2011)
between the monthly returns of the equally-weighted 30 Fama-French industry portfolios
and both the current and subsequent month’s inflation rate. As shown in the upper panel,
the correlations with the current month’s inflation rate are generally very low. In contrast,
the correlations with the next month’s realized inflation rate, shown in the lower panel,
are often dramatically higher. All except one of these look-ahead correlations are positive in
sign, in contrast with the contemporaneous correlations which are almost all slightly negative.
The industries with the highest look-ahead correlations include Oil, Coal, and Mines with
correlations ranging from 0.15 to almost 0.3.
    One possible reason for the strong correlations between stock returns and the subsequent
month’s inflation rate could be that stock returns reflect expected inflation rates. Inflation
rates are measured using survey data on goods and services prices. Consider, for example,
the published inflation rate for the month of July. The July rate is based on surveys of prices
collected during the month of July and published in the middle of August. The information
in these surveys, however, may aggregate information about consumer prices that could be
predictable on the basis of detailed information available at the producer, manufacturer, or
wholesale level. If stock prices are efficient, then this information would be largely impounded
into stock prices earlier than the month of July. If so, then in July stock prices would be
responding not to contemporaneous inflation, but to changes in expected inflation rates.


5    Constructing the Look-Ahead Inflation-Tracking
     Portfolio
We can use the insight that security returns are more correlated with subsequent inflation
than current inflation to create more effective inflation-tracking portfolios. In doing this, we
adopt a broader perspective on what it means to track inflation. If one views the objective as


                                               5
being the ability to track inflation each month, then the standard approach is probably the
right way to approach the problem (albeit not a particularly successful one). On the other
hand, if the objective is to construct a portfolio that minimizes the cumulative tracking error
over a long horizon, then alternative strategies are potentially superior.
    In particular, consider the case of a tracking portfolio that is able to track the subsequent
month’s inflation rate, but not the current month’s. If the tracking strategy were followed
for a 60 month period, then the result could be that we have one month of poor tracking
(the first month), but then effective tracking over the next 59 months. In essence, we would
be following a staggered tracking strategy in which the return for month t hedges realized
inflation for month t + 1 by taking advantage of the fact that returns and realized inflation
are one month “out of synch” with each other. Despite the one-month offset between returns
and realized inflation, the cumulative tracking over the entire 60-month period would likely
be much better than if we attempted to track inflation month by month.
    To illustrate our approach, we proceed in two stages. In the first stage, we form an
inflation-tracking portfolio using only short-term Treasury bills. This may seem puzzling
since realized inflation has only a relative modest 17.7 percent correlation with contempo-
raneous one-month Treasury-bill rates. Fama (1975), however, demonstrated that returns
on short-term Treasury-bill rates are driven primarily by investors’ expectations of future
inflation. Thus, including Treasury bills in the tracking portfolio reflects our focus on ex-
pected, rather than contemporaneous, inflation tracking. In the second stage, we introduce a
broad cross-section of industry stock portfolios into the tracking portfolio to take advantage
of the strong correlation between industry-portfolio stock returns and subsequent realized
inflation. The sample period for this analysis is from 1980 to 2011, where five years of data
are again used as a training period in estimating the portfolio weights. Thus, we report
inflation-tracking results for the 1985-2011 period.
    We follow a procedure similar to that described in Section 3, except that we now regress
the inflation rate for month t + 1 (not month t) on the return for month t. Let rt denote
the return on a one-month Treasury bill during month t, and observe that the return on a
one-month Treasury bill held to maturity at the end of month t is simply the one-month
Treasury-bill yield at the end of month t − 1. The regression specification for the tracking
portfolio weights is given by
(2)                                 CPIt+1 = β0 rt + t+1 ,

which is again estimated without an intercept. As before, we estimate the slope coefficient β0
using data for the 60 months prior to the month in which it is used as the tracking-portfolio
weight to ensure that our tracking results are completely out of sample.
   Figure 4 plots the cumulative change in the price level and the cumulative return of the

                                               6
tracking portfolio. Table 3 reports summary statistics for the percentage tracking error.
This simple tracking portfolio significantly outperforms the conventional tracking portfolio
described earlier. The average tracking error over the sample period is −4.126 percent and the
standard deviation is 2.808 percent. The largest tracking error is −11.386 percent, occurring
in 2011. Intuitively, this error is likely the result of the low policy rates adopted by the
Federal Reserve during the ongoing financial crisis, which leads to short-term Treasury bills
having essentially zero returns during this period. A similar pattern can also be observed
during the 2001–2004 Greenspan period in which policy rates were also at historically low
levels.
    In the second stage, we retain the Treasury bill returns in the regression specification
and then add the Fama-French 30-industry equally-weighted portfolios into the forecasting
model,
                                                   30
                                                   X
(3)                        CPIt+1 = β0 rt +              βi Rit + t+1 ,
                                                   i=1

where Rit now denotes the return for month t for the i-th industry portfolio. In doing this,
we allow for industry stock portfolios to serve as hedging instruments for the subsequent
month’s realized inflation rate.
    Figure 5 plots the cumulative change in the price level and the cumulative return of the
tracking portfolio. Table 4 reports summary statistics for the tracking error. The average
tracking error of the equity-industry-only portfolio is only 0.62 percent, much better than
the over 8 percent error for the contemporaneous approach. The standard deviation of the
tracking error is now 2.132 percent and the RMSE is 2.220 percent. This RMSE is only
about 13.5 percent as large as the 16.564 percent RMSE for the more conventional tracking
portfolio reported in Table 2. Thus, the use of the look-ahead tracking portfolio with both
industry equity portfolios and Treasury bills reduces the RMSE of inflation tracking by nearly
90 percent.
    Table 5 provides summary statistics for the weights of the 30 industry portfolios. The
industries with the largest average portfolio weights (in absolute terms) are fabricated prod-
ucts, oil, utilities, carriers, and household, with average weights of 2.240, 2.064, −1.424,
−1.210, and 1.067 percent, respectively. The sum of the average weights over all 30 indus-
tries is only 0.528 percent. The sum of the absolute values of the portfolio weights, however,
is 17.57 percent. Thus, the equity component of the inflation-tracking portfolio can essen-
tially be viewed as a long-short portfolio of industries, rather than as an outright position
in equities.
    Figure 6 plots the time series of portfolio weights for Treasury bills in the tracking port-
folio. Observe that the coefficient is always smaller than one, and averages 57.16 percent.


                                               7
During the latter part of the sample, the weight placed on Treasury bills declines, reflecting
the near-zero policy rate followed by the Federal Reserve. Thus, the tracking portfolio is
generally not fully invested in stocks and Treasury bills, thereby allowing for the remaining
funds to be invested in other assets.4


6       Robustness Results
We have presented results illustrating the performance of the tracking strategy over a 25-
year horizon using the simplest possible out-of-sample methodology. The performance of the
strategy, however, is robust to a wide range of specifications.
    For example, we also implemented the strategy using all prior data in the training pe-
riod based on an exponential-weighting scheme with a three-year half life instead of the
rolling five-year-window approach described above. We found that the performance of the
inflation-tracking strategy was similar. In addition, we implemented the strategy for a vari-
ety of different starting dates ranging from 1970 to 1995 in steps of five years. The hedging
performance of the strategy was very similar across all choices of starting dates, indicating
that the results are not sub-period specific. Finally, we also tried alternative specifications
for estimating the portfolio weights of the tracking portfolio such as a least-angle-regression
approach that places constraints on the sum of the absolute values of the portfolio weights.
These alternative specifications produced results comparable to those we report.
    Going beyond these robustness checks, we also examined how the results are affected
by a number of major changes to the basic hedging strategy. For example, we considered a
specification in which short positions were not allowed. This restriction significantly impaired
the tracking performance of the strategy, with the overall RMSE essentially doubling. We
also considered a specification in which we used S&P 500 index returns rather than the Fama-
French industry portfolio returns, which resulted in significantly worse tracking performance.
Furthermore, we also implemented a tracking strategy in which we used only the six Fama-
French industry portfolios with the highest look-ahead correlations with realized inflation.
Using only six industry portfolios resulted in a modest decline in the hedging portfolio of the
strategy, with the RMSE increasing by about 40 percent. Intuitively, these results suggest
that the long-short nature of the strategy is fundamental to its success, and that tracking
inflation effectively requires being able to exploit differences across industries in terms of
how their returns respond to expected inflation.
    We note that our analysis has ignored the impact of transaction costs. Given that the
    4
    Since our focus is on the performance of the inflation-tracking strategy, however, we will abstract from
the issue of how the remaining funds are invested.


                                                     8
bulk of the portfolio is made up of highly liquid instruments, we expect transaction costs and
other trading frictions such as short-sale constraints to have only a small effect on tracking
performance. We abstract from these issues in order to focus on the basic insight.


7    Conclusion
Hedging investment portfolios against inflation has become an important priority for many
investors. Traditional approaches to hedging inflation, however, have struggled with the low
contemporaneous correlation between realized inflation and returns for many major asset
classes such as equities, bonds, commodities, real estate, and even TIPS.
    In this paper, we present a new approach for hedging inflation that is based on the
insight that some asset returns have strong look-ahead correlations with future realized
inflation. Intuitively, this is because these assets have returns that are driven by expected
inflation rather than comporaneous inflation. We construct inflation tracking portfolios that
maximize the correlation between the return on the portfolio and the realized inflation rate
for the subsquent month. This staggered approach leads to significantly better tracking over
an extended period such as 60 months since 59 of the realized inflation rates are well hedged
by the one-month out-of-phase returns. Nearly 90 percent of the tracking error is eliminated
through the use of a simple look-ahead inflation tracking portfolio.
    We have focused only on the most vanilla implementation of this inflation strategy in
order to demonstrate the concept as clearly as possible. There are, of course, many ways in
which this approach might be refined to further improve its performance. For example, we
have included only Treasury bills and industry equity portfolios in the tracking portfolio. An
enhanced strategy might include other asset classes such as Treasury and corporate bonds,
commodities, TIPS, and real estate. In conclusion, these results illustrate that the goal
of hedging portfolio values against inflation may be much more achievable than commonly
believed.




                                              9
                                      References

Bekaert, Geert, and Xiaozheng Wang, 2010, Inflation Risk and the Inflation Risk Premium,
Economic Policy 25, 755-806.
Bodie, Zvi, 1976, Common Stock as a Hedge Against Inflation, The Journal of Finance 31,
459-470.
Bodie, Zvi, 1983, Commodity Futures as a Hedge Against Inflation, The Journal of Portfolio
Management 9, 3, 12-17.
Bruno, Salvatore, and Ludwig Chincarini, 2001, A Multi-Asset Approach to Inflation Hedg-
ing for a U.S. Investor, The Journal of Portfolio Management 37, 102-115.
Fama, Eugene, 1975, Short-Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation, American Eco-
nomic Review 65, 269-282.
Fama, Eugene, 1981, Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money, The American
Economic Review 71, 545-565.
Fama, Eugene, and William Schwert, 1977, Asset Returns and Inflation, Journal of Financial
Economics 5, 115-146.
Gorton, Gary, and K. Rouwenhorst, 2006, Facts and Fantasies about Commodity Futures,
The Financial Analysts Journal 62, 2, 47-68.
Lamont, Owen A., 2001, Economic Tracking Portfolios, Journal of Econometrics 105, 161-
184.
Titman, Sheridan, and Arthur Warga, 1989, Stock Returns as Predictors of Interest Rates
and Inflation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24, 47-58.
Yobaccio, Elizabeth, Jack H. Rubens, and David C. Ketcham, 1995, The Inflation-Hedging
Properties of Risk Assets: The Case of REITS, The Journal of Real Estate Research 10,
279-296.




                                           10
                   Figure 1: Scatterplots of Inflation and Returns
Each graph shows a scatterplot of monthly inflation and the returns to the indicated asset class.
The inflation rate is based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers and is not seasonally adjusted. The returns series are described in the main text.




                                               11
             Figure 2: Contemporaneous Tracking Model Performance
The figure shows the cumulative change in the price level (solid line) and the cumulative return to
the tracking portfolio (dashed line). The tracking-portfolio weights are calibrated to contempora-
neous inflation using rolling-window, no-intercept regressions with a window-length of 60 months.
The explanatory variables are the asset returns shown in Table 1 and described in the main text.




                                                12
               Figure 3: Correlations of Equity Returns and Inflation
The top panel shows the contemporaneous correlation of each industry equity portfolio with infla-
tion. The lower panel shows the correlations of the month-t equity portfolio returns with month-t+1
inflation. The underlying data are monthly from January 1960 through July 2011.




                                                13
                   Figure 4: Tracking Inflation with Treasury Bills
The figure plots the cumulative change in the price level (solid line) and the cumulative return
to the Treasury-bill tracking portfolio. The tracking portfolio is calibrated against look-ahead
inflation using 60-month rolling-window regressions with no intercept, as shown in Equation (2)
above, reproduced here for convenience:

                                    CPIt+1 = β0 rt + t+1 ,

where CP It+1 denotes time t + 1 inflation, rt denotes the time-t Treasury-bill return, and t+1 is
error. The estimated slope coefficient, β0 , is the Treasury-bill holding for the subsequent month;
the return to this holding over the subsequent month is the tracking-portfolio return.




                                                14
           Figure 5: Tracking Inflation with Treasury Bills and Equities
The figure plots the cumulative change in the price level (solid line) and the cumulative return to the
Treasury bill and equity tracking portfolio. The tracking portfolio is calibrated against look-ahead
inflation using 60-month rolling-window regressions with no intercept, as shown in Equation (3) in
the text, reproduced here for convenience:
                                                    30
                                                    X
                              CPIt+1 = β0 rt +            βi Rit + t+1 ,
                                                    i=1

where CP It+1 is time t+1 inflation, rt and Rit are time-t Treasury-bill and equity portfolio returns,
respectively, and t+1 is error. The slope coefficients are the Treasury-bill and equity holdings for
the subsequent month. The return to this portfolio over the subsequent month is the tracking-
portfolio return. The rolling estimates of β0 are shown in Figure 6 below; average estimates of the
βi coefficients are shown in Table 5.




                                                  15
                      Figure 6: Treasury Bill Weights over Time
The figure shows the estimated regression coefficients for Treasury-bills in the inflation-tracking
portfolio.




                                                16
                                  Table 1
Correlations of Monthly Asset Returns with Contemporaneous Realized Infla-
tion. This table reports the correlation between monthly returns for the indicated asset
classes and the contemporaneous inflation rate. The inflation rate is based on the CPI-U
seasonally unadjusted index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The sources for the asset
returns are described in the text. The data are monthly for the 1985–2011 period, although
some asset return time series begin later than 1985. N denotes the number of monthly
observations.


           Asset Returns                           Correlation              N


           S&P 500                                    −0.0259             323
           Treasury Bonds                             −0.1970             240
           Real Estate                                 0.0556             293
           Commodity Index                             0.2911             323
           Gold                                        0.0157             323
           TIPS                                        0.0989             176




                                            17
                                Table 2
Percentage Tracking Error from Contemporaneous Inflation Tracking Approach.
This table reports summary statistics for the percentage tracking errors from a portfolio
formed using returns from the S&P 500, Treasury bonds, the real estate index, the S&P 500
GSCI commodity total return index, gold, and TIPS. RMSE denotes the root mean squared
error of the tracking errors. N denotes the number of monthly observations.


               Summary Statistic                                   Value


               Average                                             8.011
               Std. Deviation                                     14.498
               RMSE                                               16.564

               Minimum                                          −12.257
               Median                                             4.690
               Maximum                                           35.869

               N                                                     174




                                           18
                                Table 3
Percentage Tracking Error from Look-Ahead Inflation Tracking Portfolio using
Treasury Bills. This table reports summary statistics for the percentage tracking errors
from a look-ahead inflation tracking portfolio using Treasury bill returns. RMSE denotes
the root mean squared error of the tracking errors. N denotes the number of monthly
observations.


               Summary Statistic                                  Value


               Average                                           −4.126
               Std. Deviation                                     2.808
               RMSE                                               4.991

               Minimum                                          −11.386
               Median                                            −3.767
               Maximum                                            1.891

               N                                                    319




                                          19
                                  Table 4
Percentage Tracking Error from Look-Ahead Inflation Tracking Portfolio using
Industry Stock Portfolios and Treasury Bills. This table reports summary statistics
for the percentage tracking errors from a look-ahead inflation tracking portfolio using returns
from the Fama-French 30 industry portfolios and Treasury bills. RMSE denotes the root
mean squared error of the tracking errors. N denotes the number of monthly observations.


                Summary Statistic                                      Value


                Average                                               −0.619
                Std. Deviation                                         2.132
                RMSE                                                   2.220

                Minimum                                               −4.364
                Median                                                −0.432
                Maximum                                                4.247

                N                                                        319




                                              20
                                    Table 5
Average Portfolio Weights for the Look-Ahead Inflation Tracking Portfolio. This
tables shows the average value of the percentage portfolio weights for the industry compo-
nents of the look-ahead inflation tracking portfolio as well as the Treasury bill component.
The averages are based on the monthly rolling regressions.


             Returns                                         Portfolio Weight


             Food                                                       0.303
             Beer                                                      −0.240
             Smoke                                                      0.376
             Games                                                     −0.529
             Books                                                      0.790
             Household                                                  1.067
             Clothing                                                   0.153
             Health                                                     0.697
             Chemicals                                                 −0.721
             Textiles                                                  −0.136
             Construction                                              −0.857
             Steel                                                      0.057
             Fabricated Products                                        2.240
             Electrical Equipment                                      −0.576
             Autos                                                     −0.207
             Carriers                                                  −1.210
             Mines                                                      0.013
             Coal                                                       0.093
             Oil                                                        2.064
             Utilities                                                 −1.424
             Telecommunication                                         −0.246
             Services                                                   0.180
             Business Equipment                                        −0.945
             Paper                                                      0.367
             Transportation                                            −0.406
             Wholesale                                                  0.038
             Retail                                                     0.572
             Meals                                                      0.042
             Financial                                                 −0.694
             Other                                                     −0.331

             Treasury Bills                                            57.161




                                              21
