                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MANAGING CATASTROPHIC RISK

                                        Howard Kunreuther
                                          Geoffrey Heal

                                       Working Paper 18136
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18136


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Howard Kunreuther and Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Managing Catastrophic Risk
Howard Kunreuther and Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 18136
June 2012
JEL No. D62,D80,D85,H20

                                                ABSTRACT

A principal reason that losses from catastrophic risks have been increasing over time is that more individuals
and firms are locating in harm’s way while not taking appropriate protective measures. Several behavioural
biases lead decision-makers not to invest in adaptation measures until after it is too late. In an interdependent
world with no intervention by the public sector, it may be economically rational for those at risk not
to invest in protective measures. Risk management strategies that involve private-public partnerships
that address these issues may help in reducing future catastrophic losses. These may include multi-year
insurance contracts, well-enforced regulations, third-party inspections, and alternative risk transfer
instruments such as catastrophe bonds.


Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu

Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
616 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
                                   Managing Catastrophic Risk

                                          Howard Kunreuther
                                            Geoffrey Heal

                                 To Be Published in
       Encyclopedia of Energy, Natural Resources and Environmental Economics


Economic and insured losses from catastrophes such as natural disasters and
technological accidents have increased significantly in recent years. According to Munich
Re (2012), economic losses from natural catastrophes alone increased from $528 billion
(1981-1990), $1.2 trillion (1991-2000) to $1.6 trillion over the period 2001-2011. During
the past ten years the losses were principally due to hurricanes and resulting storm surge
occurring in 2004, 2005, and 2008. Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the direct economic
losses and the insured portion from great natural disasters over the period 1970-2011.1




    FIGURE 1. Natural   Catastrophes Worldwide 1980-2011 - Overall and Insured Losses ($ billion)
                                Sources: Munich Re Geo Risks Research




1
  Catastrophes are classed as “great” if the ability of the region to help itself is overtaxed, making inter-
regional or international assistance necessary. This is normally the case when thousands of people are
killed, hundreds of thousands made homeless or when a country suffers substantial economic losses.


                                                     2
        Data on 2011 reveals that it is the most costly year that the insurance industry has
every faced with respect to catastrophic losses. The Japan earthquake, tsunami and
nuclear power plant accident in March 2011 caused over US$210 billion in economic
losses (not including nuclear-related damage), and insured losses in the range of US$35–
40 billion (Munich Re, 2012). This disaster highlighted the interdependencies between
natural and technological accidents. More specifically the 9.0 magnitude earthquake that
struck the Tohoku region of northeastern Japan caused a tsunami that hit the country’s
coastline within half an hour, taking the lives of nearly 20,000 people and destroying over
100,000 buildings, including the cooling system and the back-up power generator of the
Fukushima nuclear plant. The resulting meltdown of three nuclear reactors led to high
radiation levels which required the evacuation of more than 60,000 people (World
Economic Forum Global Risk Report, 2012).
        A principal reason that losses from catastrophic risks have been increasing over
time is that more individuals and firms are locating in harm’s way while not taking
appropriate protective measures. Section 2 focuses on the types of behavioural biases
that lead decision-makers not to invest in adaptation measures until after it is too late.
Section 3 shows that in an interdependent world with no intervention by the public sector,
it may be economically rational for those at risk not to invest in protective measures.
Section 4 proposes risk management strategies that involve private-public partnerships
for addressing these issues and reducing future catastrophic losses. The paper concludes
with suggestions for future research.


2. Why Decision-Makers Do Not Invest in Protective Measures
We now explore in more detail why decision-makers are reluctant to protect themselves
against low-probability, high-consequence events. It is useful to begin by reviewing how
protective decisions should ideally be made in a world where all decision-makers follow
the economic rationality of utility maximization. We can then examine how biases,
constraints and simplified decision rules foster actions that diverge from economic
rationality.

        Suppose that the decision-maker is considering incurring an investment that has
potential payoffs for the next T years and that there is an annual probability p of a


                                             3
catastrophic loss in any given year t. We will denote as B the annual benefit of investing
in a measure that reduces the consequences of the disaster should such an event occur.2 In
this case, the decision to protect against this event could be made by observing whether
the upfront cost (C) of the investment is less than the discounted stream of expected
benefits (pB); that is, if
                                       C < Tt=1 (p B) t                                               (1)
where β is the decision-maker’s annual discount rate.
        Implicit in (1) are three strong assumptions about how the decision-maker
estimates and values costs and benefits over time. Specifically:
        1) all future benefits are discounted exponentially
        2) individuals can estimate future probabilities of a disaster
        3) individuals can estimate the costs and benefits of the risk reduction measure


        In practice, decision-makers are likely to utilize simplified choice rules, focus on
constraints as well as short-run benefits and costs rather than discounting the future
exponentially and may not consider probabilities in their decision on whether or not to
invest in the risk-reduction measure (Kahneman and Tversky, 2000; Kunreuther, Meyer
and Michel-Kerjan, in press).

Budgeting Heuristics

The simplest explanation as to why decision-makers may fail to invest in protection is
affordability. If the decision-maker has limited capital on hand, there may be little point
in undertaking a benefit-cost analysis of whether to incur the upfront cost of investing in
protection.

        Budget constraints may extend to higher income individuals if they have separate
mental accounts for different expenditures (Thaler, 1999). Empirical evidence for this
budgeting heuristic comes from a study where many renters indicated no change in their


2
  For simplicity, we are assuming only a single event in any year t with a well-specified probability. The
qualitative conclusions will not change if there are a number of possible events and probabilities vary over
time. One could also make probabilities of a disaster in future years t+n conditional on what happens in
year t to address issues of correlated risk.


                                                     4
willingness to pay for a dead-bolt lock when the lease for the apartment was extended
from 1 to 5 years. When asked why, one individual responded by saying:

          $20 is all the dollars I have in the short-run to spend on a lock. If I had more, I
          would spend more—-maybe up to $50 (Kunreuther, Onculer and Slovic, 1998,
          p. 284).


Safety-first Behavior

Decision-makers may utilize a simplified decision rule that determines whether to invest
in protective measures only if the probability of the event (p) is above their threshold
level of concern (p*). If the decision-makers perceives p < p*, then they will not
undertake any protection. If, on the other hand, p >p* then they will want to invest in
protection.

          Should there be an opportunity to determine how much to invest in mitigating the
consequences of the event, then the decision-maker may utilize a safety first rule by
determining the optimal amount of protection so that p ≤ p*. This “safety first” rule
initially proposed by Roy (1952) is utilized by insurers today in determining how much
coverage to offer and what premium to charge against extreme events such as wind
damage from hurricanes in hazard-prone areas (Kunreuther, Pauly and McMorrow, in
press).


Under-weighing the Future

There is extensive experimental evidence revealing that human temporal discounting
tends to be hyperbolic: temporally distant events are disproportionately discounted
relative to immediate ones. As an example, people are willing to pay more to have the
timing of the receipt of a cash prize accelerated from tomorrow to today, than from the
day after tomorrow to tomorrow (in both cases a one-day difference) (Loewenstein and
Prelec, 1992).

          The implication of hyperbolic discounting for protective decisions is that
decision-makers might be asked to invest a tangible fixed sum now to achieve a benefit
later that they instinctively undervalue.     The effect of placing too much weight on


                                               5
immediate considerations is that the upfront costs of protection will loom
disproportionately large relative to the delayed expected benefits in losses over time.

Myopic Behavior

An extreme form of hyperbolic discounting is when the decision-maker considers only
the expected benefits from the protective measure over the next year or two, rather than
over the life of the protective measure. Elected officials are likely to view the decision
by reflecting on how their specific decisions will affect their chances of re-election. If
the perceived expected benefits from the measure achieved before their next re-election
campaign are less than the costs of protection, they will very likely oppose the
expenditure. They will prefer to allocate funds where they can see an immediate return.
The fact that protective measures yield positive returns only when a disaster occurs
makes it even more difficult to justify these measures. This reluctance to incur upfront
costs that do not yield immediate benefits highlights a NIMTOF (Not in My Term of
Office) behavior.

Procrastination

The tendency to shy away from undertaking investments that abstractly seem worthwhile
is exacerbated if individuals have the ability to postpone investments—something that is
almost always the case with respect to protection. A community might recognize the
need to invest in irrigation measures to reduce the consequences of a disaster but may
still fail to act.

         A case in point with respect to lack of preparedness is demonstrated by the city of
New Orleans and FEMA in advance of Hurricane Katrina in 2005. While emergency
planners and the New Orleans Mayor’s office were fully aware of the risks the city faced
and understood the need for investments in preparedness, there was inherent ambiguity
about just what these investments should be and when they should be undertaken. Faced
with this uncertainty, planners did what decision-makers tend to do when faced with a
complex discretionary choice: they opted to defer it to the future, in the (usually false)
hope that the correct choices would become clearer and/or more resources would then be
available (Tversky and Shafir, 1992).




                                              6
Underestimation of Risk

Another factor that has been shown to suppress investments in protection is under-
estimation of the likelihood of a hazard—formally, under-estimation of p in (1). For one
thing, decisions about protection are rarely based on formal beliefs about probabilities.
Magat, Viscusi and Huber (1987) and Camerer and Kunreuther (1989), for example,
provide considerable empirical evidence that individuals do not seek out information on
probabilities in making their decisions. In a study by Huber, Wider and Huber (1997),
only 22 percent of subjects sought out probability information when evaluating risk
managerial decisions. When asked to justify their decisions on purchasing warranties for
products that may need repair, consumers rarely use probability as a rationale for
purchasing this protection (Hogarth and Kunreuther, 1995).

       There is also evidence that people tend to simply ignore risks when the likelihood
is small enough. In laboratory experiments on financially protecting themselves against a
loss by purchasing insurance or a warranty, many individuals bid zero for coverage,
apparently viewing the probability of a loss as sufficiently small that they were not
interested in protecting themselves against it (McClelland et al. 1993; Schade et al.,
2011). Many homeowners residing in communities that are potential sites for nuclear
waste facilities have a tendency to dismiss the risk as negligible (Oberholzer-Gee, 1998).

       Even risk experts disregard some hazards. After the first terrorist attack against
the World Trade Center in 1993, terrorism risk continued to be included as an unnamed
peril in most commercial insurance policies in the United States. Insurers were thus liable
for losses from a terrorist attack without their ever receiving a penny for this coverage
(Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan, 2004). Following the attacks of September 11, 2001,
insurers and their reinsurers had to pay over $35 billion in claims due to losses from the
terrorist attacks, at that time the most costly event in the history of insurance worldwide,
now second only to Hurricane Katrina.




                                             7
Impact of Interdependencies on Investing in Protective Measures

In an interdependent world, the risks faced by any agent, whether an individual,
organization or country, depend not only on that agent’s own choices but also on the
choices of others with whom the agent is linked. The economic incentive for an agent to
invest in risk reduction therefore depends on how he or she expects the others to behave.
The probabilistic nature of risks, and the fact that the risk which one agent faces is often
determined in part by the behavior of others, gives a unique and complex structure to the
incentives that interdependent agents face to reduce their exposures to risks. This has
been called interdependent security (IDS) (Kunreuther and Heal 2003, see also Heal and
Kunreuther 2007).

       Often, the incentives for agents to invest in risk management will be
compromised if they can be damaged by the failure of their peers to follow suit. The
negative externalities caused by a weak link can have severe repercussions for everyone
in an interconnected system. If there is a way to induce a few key players to take
protective actions to reduce contamination of others sufficiently, this can lead to
cascading and tipping where everyone invests in protection. Tipping and cascade have
been documented in many contexts (Schelling, 1978; Dixit 2003; for a theoretical
framework see Heal and Kunreuther 2010a)

       The types of interdependencies are highlighted by the following scenarios which
require coordination between firms and/or nations:

Baggage Transfer Security. Consider the destruction of Pan Am flight 103 in 1988. In
Malta, terrorists checked a bag containing a bomb on Malta Airlines, which had minimal
security procedures. The bag was transferred at Frankfurt to a Pan Am feeder line and
then loaded onto Pan Am 103 in London's Heathrow Airport. The transferred piece of
luggage was not inspected at either Frankfurt or London, the assumption in each airport
being that it was inspected at the point of origin. The bomb was designed to explode
above 28,000 feet, a height normally first attained on this route over the Atlantic Ocean.
Failures in a peripheral part of the airline network, Malta, compromised the security of a
flight leaving from a core hub, London.




                                             8
Risk of Power Failures. Consider a utility that is part of a power grid. The utility wants
to determine whether to invest in additional capacity or security measures (e.g., trimming
vegetation near distribution lines) to reduce the chance of a power failure. In such a
highly interdependent system, there is a systemic tendency to under-invest in reliability.
As a consequence of the interdependency, part of the cost of a failure, perhaps a large
part, is passed on to competitors and their customers. In the case of the August 2003
power failures in the northeastern U.S. and southeastern Canada, the costs of a failure at
an Ohio utility, were passed on to other utilities and customers in the grid (Feinstein
2006).

Meltdown of a Nuclear Reactor. Consider a group of small adjacent countries (for
example, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg, or Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia) so that a
meltdown in a nuclear power plant in one of those countries will lead to massive
radioactive contamination in all of them. It is reasonable to assume, then, that the loss
to any country from a meltdown is catastrophic and would not be worsened by an
additional nuclear reactor accident.

         The presence of another country that has not invested in reactor safeguards
reduces the incentive to protect one’s own reactor because a meltdown elsewhere can
damage a country as much as a meltdown at home. However, this is relevant only if the
country does not suffer a loss as a result of its own reactor’s failure. By investing in
protection a country reduces the risk it faces domestically, but increases the chance of
damage originating elsewhere from countries that have not invested in reactor safeguards.



Risk Management Strategies

Individuals’ behavioral biases and misperception of the risks, combined with negative
externalities caused by interdependencies, may be ameliorated by private-public
partnerships designed to deal with catastrophic risk. Several such options are discussed
below.




                                            9
Multi-Year Contracts with Well-enforced Regulations and Short-Term Incentives

As discussed above, individuals significantly discount long-term future returns, leading to
a reluctance to invest in costly risk-reducing measures, because the upfront costs far
exceed the short-run benefits. Short-term economic incentives may encourage long-term
planning to manage extreme events. Some examples are :

       (1) Well-designed and well-enforced regulations to reduce the likelihood of a
catastrophic event and to ensure preparedness for recovery. If British Petroleum had
adhered to the regulations by the Minerals Management Service (U.S. Department of the
Interior), the 2010 Gulf Coast disaster may have been avoided or mitigated. If building
codes had been well enforced in Florida, over one-third of the damage from Hurricane
Andrew in 1992 could have been averted.

       (2) Long-term financial responsibility for investing in mitigation. Decision-
makers will have a greater economic incentive to invest in mitigation if the results of
these investments are measured over time. These incentives could take the form of
contingent bonuses, reduced taxes and/or subsidies for several years.

       (3) Short-term incentives to reward individuals and firms for taking these
measures. This could take the form of reduced insurance premiums coupled with loans
for undertaking a protective measure.

       One area that might benefit from such incentives is the challenge in managing the
risk of flooding in hazard-prone areas where residents show little interest in either
purchasing insurance or investing in loss reduction measures.

       A multi-year insurance contract attached to the property, not to the individual,
would provide property owners currently residing in flood-prone areas with a fixed
inflation-corrected annual premium for a designated time period (e.g., five, ten, or twenty
years). If long-term loans for flood mitigation were offered by banks, then individuals
with multi-year flood insurance policies might be encouraged to invest in cost-effective
loss reduction measures. Those measures could reduce future losses and hence insurance
claims, providing a rationale for lower premiums over the length of the insurance




                                            10
contract. If the loss reduction measures were cost-effective, then the reduction in the
annual insurance premium would be greater than the annual cost of the loan.

       For example, if a property owner with a 10-year flood insurance policy were able
to obtain a 10-year home improvement loan to invest in risk-reducing measures, the result
could be a reduction in catastrophic losses. Supporting mechanisms would be important
as well, such as inspections by qualified third parties to make sure that the mitigation
measure is undertaken .

Coordination Policies to Deal with Interdependencies

Coordination between individuals and/or firms is important to deal with problems of
interdependencies. The form of coordination will differ depending on the nature of the
risk and the type of interdependency. With respect to baggage transfer security, a trade
association can play a coordinating role by stipulating that all members must follow
certain rules and regulations, including the adoption of security measures. Prior to 9/11,
the International Air Transport Association (the association to which most airlines
belong), could have required all bags to be checked through a formal screening process.
Each airline could have agreed that it would not accept in-transit bags from airlines that
did not adhere to this regulation. Of course, following 9/11, airports undertook the role
of coordinating baggage security, although there still may be weak links in the system.

       With respect to chemical accidents, a study by the National Academy of Sciences
(2005) focused on reducing vulnerabilities in the chemical infrastructure when there are
weak links in the system and there is the possibility of contamination by others. More
specifically, the passage of Section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of
1990 required facilities to perform a hazard assessment, estimate consequences from
accidents and submit a summary report to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) called the Risk Management Plan (RMP). Regulatory agencies, such as the EPA,
are struggling as to how to encourage compliance with these regulations given their
limited personnel and funds for auditing facilities.

       Chemical firms, particularly smaller ones, have little financial incentive to follow
centralized regulatory procedures if they estimate that the likelihood of their being
inspected by a regulatory agency is very small and/or they know the fine will be low. In


                                             11
such cases, they may be willing to take their chances and incur the fine should they be
caught violating the existing rules. This is analogous with the decision on whether to put
money in a parking meter. If you know that the chances of a meter being checked are
very small and the fine is relatively inexpensive, then you might think twice before
parting with your quarters.

           Delegating part of the inspection process to the private sector through insurance
companies and certified third party inspectors would create a means though which the
low-risk units can speak for themselves. If units which are inspected receive a “seal of
approval,” that unit ought to be rewarded with a lower insurance premium than one not
managing its risks. If a unit chooses not to be inspected by certified third parties, it is
more likely to be a high-risk rather than a low-risk one, and the regulatory agency can
devote its limited resources to auditing these facilities (Kunreuther, McNulty and Kang,
2002). As the probability of being audited by a regulatory agency increases, there is an
incentive for the high-risk firm to adopt risk management plans for much the same reason
that parking meters become more effective if one knows the likelihood of being fined is
high.



Liability and Insurance for Dealing with Nuclear Risks 3

In the United States, the Price-Anderson (P-A) Act provides insurance coverage to public
utilities and transfers significant liabilities from a nuclear power plant accident to the
Federal Government. If the use of nuclear power expands in the next decade, as may be
the case, then these liabilities could increase further. Although it is clear that the
contingent federal liabilities associated with P-A are large, it is hard to be precise about
them.

           There are, however, certain things that are clear. One is that to some degree. the
risk is under the control of the Federal Government via the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission if it enforces safety standards and influences the siting of nuclear reactors in
remote areas. There is empirical evidence that the NRC does not aggressively pursue and

3
    This section is based on Heal and Kunreuther (2010b).



                                                     12
penalize mismanagement of nuclear power stations, and that Federal authorities are not
sensitive to the increase in potential costs associated with siting near densely populated
areas. There is scope for better management of this aspect of Federal financial risks,
possibly by the use of third-party safety auditors to supplement the NRC. In addition, the
premiums charged to utilities under the P-A Act do not reflect their facilities’ safety risks:
this would be another way of reducing the risk of a disaster. Currently, there are few
incentives for a utility to improve its safety record.

           There do seem to be compelling reasons for thinking that Federal intervention is
necessary if the risk of nuclear disaster is to be adequately insured. Typical of this risk
and others where there is a potential for catastrophic losses, a first insurance layer is
covered by private insurance markets, with government coverage of losses in excess of
the private risk cap. This is true of terrorism insurance and earthquake insurance in
California. In the case of the P-A Act, the private coverage is just $300 million per
incident, with a pool insurance vehicle covering the next $10 billion. There is no explicit
statement of the government’s role and liabilities. The $300 million surely does not
exhaust the private sector’s available capital for covering losses from a nuclear power
plant accident. More of the nuclear risk could surely be met through the private sector,
which would not only reduce the Federal liability but also provide increased incentives
for risk management, sadly lacking under the current regime.



Using Alternative Risk Transfer Instruments for Covering Catastrophic Losses4

To deal with catastrophic losses, some governments are considering the use of dedicated
financial products to supplement traditional insurance and reinsurance products. The
development of alternative risk transfer (ART) instruments grew out of a series of
insurance capacity crises in the 1970s through the 1990s that led purchasers of traditional
reinsurance coverage to seek more robust ways to buy protection. Although ART
instruments comprise a wide range of products, we focus here on the use of catastrophe
bonds that transfer part of the risk exposure directly to investors in the financial markets.


4
    This section is based on Michel-Kerjan, Zelenko, et al. (2011).


                                                       13
This financial instrument has increased in volume in recent years and is likely to continue
to grow as the world experiences more costly catastrophes in the coming years.



How Do Catastrophe Bonds Work? Catastrophe bonds (“cat bonds”) can enable a
country, a company or any organization to access funds from investors if a severe disaster
produces large-scale damage. Consider a country, Proactive, which would like to cover
part of its exposure against catastrophes. To do so, it creates a company, BigCat, whose
only purpose is to finance the disaster costs of Proactive. Notably, BigCat is not a
government-run company but an independent company. In that sense, BigCat is a single
purpose insurer (also called a special-purpose vehicle, or SPV) for Proactive. When the
insurance contract is signed, the sponsor (Proactive) pays premiums to BigCat. SPV
BigCat raises the capital to support its insurance policy by issuing a bond to investors.
Premiums collected from Proactive will be used to provide the investors with a high
enough interest rate to compensate for a possible loss of their principal should a disaster
occur. Figure 2 provides the structure of a typical government cat bond.




                                                   Potential Investors


             Payment of interest and
             principal of the cat bond (at
             maturity; no disaster)                  Investment in the
                                                    dedicated cat bond


                                Contract with Special Purpose Vehicle BigCat (Issuer)
                                             (principal invested in safe investments)



                                                                                        Disaster claims
                                                                                        (investors lose their investment)


                              Premiums



                                              ProactiveCountry (Sponsor)

                                      Provide the government with rapid capital post disaster
                                      High value if rigid budget procedures
                                      Fast financial aid to victims of disasters




          FIGURE 2. SIMPLIFIED STRUCTURE OF A GOVERNMENT CAT BOND



                                                                 14
                                       Source: Michel-Kerjan et al. (2011)



How a government benefits from a cat bond. There are several ways the payment of a
cat bond can be triggered. First, all the stakeholders can agree at the execution of the
contract on an external trigger for the insurance payment, independent of the actual level
of losses the country has suffered, but easily verifiable, similar to the rainfall trigger on
index-based insurance. This is called a parametric trigger. The data for this parameter
can be collected at multiple reporting stations across a given geographical area. It is also
possible to agree on a certain level of the actual economic losses incurred by Proactive
from a disaster or series of disasters over the maturity of the cat bond. This is an
indemnity trigger. 5 The main advantage of an indemnity trigger is that the payment
received by Proactive will be much closer to its actual loss but it could create moral
hazard problem by having the country overstate the loss it has incurred. Parametric cat
bonds are more transparent and simpler to use and hence have been the preferred type in
lesser developed countries.

Advantages of using a cat bond. There are several advantages of using a cat bond to
provide protection against a catastrophic disaster. They are:

    (1) Multi-year coverage and price stability. Insurance and reinsurance contracts are
typically issued for one year and are subject to price increases particularly after a large-
scale disaster. 6 Cat bonds offer an important element of stability for their users by
guaranteeing a predefined price over several years. As of 2008, more than 170 cat bonds
had been issued since 1996, and their average maturity has been three years with a few



5
  This form of cat bond trigger is more analogous to a traditional insurance policy with its loss settlement
process. Other triggers are on modeled losses or industry losses. For modeled losses, instead of dealing
with Proactive's actual losses, an exposure portfolio is constructed for use with catastrophe modeling
software. When there is a disaster, the event parameters are run against the exposure database in the cat
model. If the modeled losses are above a specified threshold, the bond is triggered. For industry losses, the
cat bond is triggered when an entire industry loss from a certain peril for the insurance industry doing
business in this country reaches a specified threshold.
6
  The Guy Carpenter Rate-on-Line index shows a 30 percent annual volatility over the past ten years.
Premiums also differ markedly among perils that increase the concentration of risk to the reinsurers and
perils which provide diversification. And it is not unusual to see reinsurance prices in a region increase by 20
to 50 percent after a major disaster. Catastrophe reinsurance prices in Florida increased by nearly 100 percent
the year after Hurricane Katrina (Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan, 2009, chapter 7).


                                                       15
bonds being as long as five or ten years. Longer bonds reduce upfront costs by allowing
fees to be amortized over a longer period of time (Michel-Kerjan and Morlaye, 2008).

    (2) Guaranteed expedited payment. Another key advantage of a cat bond is that the
money can flow to the government in just a few weeks. By design, the capital of the
bond is commonly invested in risk-free assets, such as U.S. Treasury money market
funds, so there is limited credit risk.7

    (3) Potentially easier to manage politically than a government reserve. A typical
financial policy tool for governments is to build up a reserve of money over time to be
used in the case of a catastrophe. However, a catastrophe could occur in the very first
years so that the fund simply does not have enough money to pay for the losses. If the
country does not suffer major losses for a long period, attention fades and the reserves
may be transferred to other programs particularly when budgets are tight.8 It is difficult
to have a long-term perspective on these issues for reasons discussed above (Michel-
Kerjan and Slovic, 2010). Cat bonds overcome these challenges, since the catastrophe
portion of the risk is transferred to financial investors who serve as third parties.



Conclusions

Individual decisions regarding risk-reducing measures are influenced in fundamental
ways by a set of biases and the behavior of others. In particular, the reliance on pure
private market solutions that depend solely on individual initiatives may fail in these
environments. Multi-year contracts and short term economic incentives may encourage
decision-makers to invest in protective measures to reduce the losses from catastrophic
risks. To address issues of interdependencies, coordinative mechanisms through trade
associations and sharing best practices could promote actions that enhance individual and
social welfare., Private sector initiatives, such as third-party inspections and insurance,


7
  Note that some reinsurers now provide collateralized reinsurance treaties as well, but those are more
expensive than traditional reinsurance treaties.
8
  This was suggested in the United States for the Hurricane Relief Fund in Hawaii in 2009. Another
example relates to the U.S. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. In the 1990s there were interest groups
lobbying the PBGC to reduce premiums because they were “too high,” as evidenced by the fact that the
PBGC was running a surplus.


                                                   16
can be combined with actions taken by the public sector, such as well-enforced
regulations and standards, to induce firms to adopt risk-reducing measures.

       These could be important steps for reducing our vulnerabilities to potential
catastrophes -- floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, terrorism threats, financial crises, oil
spills and other extreme events waiting on the horizon.




                                            17
REFERENCES

Camerer, C., Kunreuther, H. (1989). ‘‘Decision Processes for Low Probability Events:
    Policy Implications.’’ Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 8: 565–592.

Dixit, A. (2003). “Clubs with Entrapment.” American Economic Review 93:1824-29

Feinstein, J. (2006). In: Seeds of Disaster, Roots of Response: How Private Action Can
     Reduce Public Vulnerability. P. Auerswald, L. Branscomb, T. LaPorte, and E.
     Michel-Kerjan, (eds.) (2006) New York: Cambridge University Press.

Heal, G., Kunreuther, H. (2007). “Modeling Interdependent Risks” Risk Analysis, 27(3):
     621–634

Heal, G., Kunreuther, H. (2010a). “Social Reinforcement: Cascades, Entrapment and
     Tipping” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(1): 86–99

Heal, G., Kunreuther, H. (2010b). “Environment & Energy: Catastrophic Liabilities” In:
      Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk. D. Lucas (ed.) University of
      Chicago Press, 2010.

Hogarth, R., Kunreuther, H. (1995). “Decision Making Under Ignorance: Arguing with
    Yourself,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 10: 15-36.

Huber, O., Wider, R., Huber, O. (1997). “Active Information Search and Complete
    Information Presentation in Naturalistic Risky Decision Tasks,” Acta Psychologica, 95:
    15-29.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (2000). Choices, Values and Frames. New York: Cambridge
    University Press.

Kunreuther, H., Heal, G. (2003). “Interdependent Security" Journal of Risk and
     Uncertainty, Special Issue on Terrorist Risks, 26: 231-249.

Kunreuther, H., Meyer, R., Michel-Kerjan, E. (in press). “Overcoming Decision Biases to
     Reduce Losses from Natural Catastrophes,” in E. Shafir (ed.), Behavioral
     Foundations of Policy, Princeton University Press.

Kunreuther, H.C., McNulty, P.J., Kang, Y. (2002). “Improving Environmental Safety
     Through Third Party Inspections.” Risk Analysis, 22(2): 309-18.

Kunreuther, H., Michel-Kerjan, E. (2004). “Challenges for Terrorism Risk Insurance in
     the United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(4): 201-214.


                                            18
Kunreuther, H. Michel-Kerjan, E. (2011). At War with the Weather, MIT Press.
     (Paperback Edition)

Kunreuther, H., Onculer, A., Slovic, P. (1998). “Time Insensitivity for Protective
     Measures” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 16: 279-299.

Kunreuther, H., Pauly, M., McMorrow, S. (in press). Insurance and Behavioral
     Economics: Improving Decisions in the Most Misunderstood Industry. New York:
     Cambridge University Press.

Loewenstein, G., Prelec, D. (1992). Anomalies in intertemporal choice: Evidence and an
    interpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 573-597.

Magat, W., Viscusi,K. W., Huber, J. (1987). ‘‘Risk-Dollar Tradeo¤s, Risk Perceptions,
    and Consumer Behavior.’’ In Learning About Risk, W. Viscusi and W. Magat
    (eds.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 83–97.

McClelland, G., Schulze, W., Coursey, D. (1993). “Insurance for Low-Probability
    Hazards: A Bimodal Response to Unlikely Events,” Journal of Risk and
    Uncertainty, 7: 95-116.

Michel-Kerjan, E., Morlaye, F. (2008). “Extreme Events, Global Warming, and
    Insurance-Linked Securities: How to Trigger the ‘Tipping Point’.” Geneva Papers
    on Risk and Insurance, 33(1): 153-176.

Michel-Kerjan, E., Slovic, P. (2010) The Irrational Economist. New York: Public
    Affairs Books

Michel-Kerjan, E., Zelenko, I., Cardenas, V., Turgel, D. (2011). “Catastrophe Financing
       for Governments: Learning from the 2009-2012 MultiCat Program in Mexico”
       OECD Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions. DOI:
       10.1787/20797117

Munich Re (2012). Topics Geo Natural catastrophes 2011, Analyses, assessments,
    positions. http://www.munichre.com/publications/302-07225_en.pdf

National Academy of Sciences (2005). Assessing Vulnerabilites Related To The Nation’s
     Chemical Infrastructure. Washington DC, The National Academies Press

Oberholzer-Gee, F. (1998). “Learning to Bear the Unbearable: Towards and Explanation
     of Risk Ignorance.” Mimeo, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Roy, A.D. (1952). “Safety First and the Holding of Assets” Econometrica, 20:431-449


                                            19
Schade, C., Kunreuther, H., Koellinger, P. (2011). “Protecting Against Low-Probability
     Disasters: The Role of Worry.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
     DOI: 10.1002/bdm.754

Schelling, T. (1978). Micromotives and Macrobehavior New York: Norton.

Thaler, R. (1999). “Mental Accounting Matters” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
     12:183-206.

Tversky, A., Shafir, E. (1992). “Choice under conflict: The dynamics of deferred
     decision,” Psychological Science, 3, 6, 358-361.

World Economic Forum (2012). Global Risks 2012 (Seventh Edition)




                                           20
