                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          "GETTING THE BIGGEST BANG FOR THE BUCK IN FISCAL POLICY"

                                            Miles S. Kimball

                                         Working Paper 18142
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18142


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012




I would like to thank Robert Barsky, Chris Carroll, Daniel Murphy, Matthew Shapiro, and Noah Smith
for their encouragement and perspectives, and participants in discussions at the Federal Reserve Board
for useful comments. I bear sole responsibility for the views expressed here. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Miles S. Kimball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
"Getting the Biggest Bang for the Buck in Fiscal Policy"
Miles S. Kimball
NBER Working Paper No. 18142
June 2012
JEL No. E6

                                              ABSTRACT

In ranking fiscal stimulus programs, it is useful to focus on the ratio of extra aggregate demand to
extra national debt that results. This note argues that (because of repayment after the end of a recession)
“national lines of credit”–that is, government-issued credit cards with countercyclical credit limits
and favorable interest rates—would generate a higher ratio of extra aggregate demand to extra national
debt than tax rebates. Because it involves government loans that are anticipated in advance to involve
some losses and therefore involve a fiscal cost even after efforts to minimize losses, such a policy
lies between traditional monetary policy and traditional fiscal policy.


Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu
1. Introduction. In the wake of the intense financial crisis in 2008 and its
macroeconomic after‐effects, many economists have wished for more powerful tools
of monetary and fiscal policy than those that seemed ready to hand. But since in
principle it is possible to dramatically increase the dosage of monetary and fiscal
treatments, a wish for more powerful tools of monetary and fiscal policy only makes
sense in the context of a concern for costs and side effects of such treatments.

For example, for monetary policy, the nature and extent of the ultimate costs and
side effects of the Federal Reserve’s large purchases of assets other than Treasury
bills is unknown. Fear of those unknown costs and side effects is likely to have been
a key reason that the Federal Reserve did not decide in late 2010 to purchase
several trillion dollars worth of long‐term bonds in late 2010 instead of only $600
billion worth (dubbed “QE2” by the press). To clarify this issue, research on the
actual costs and side effects of large purchases of assets other than Treasury bills
has been, and will continue to be, a high priority on the part of many economists.

Given the reluctance to chance larger doses of non‐traditional monetary policy,
renewed attention has turned to fiscal policy. For fiscal policy, it seems clear that
the main concern preventing the use of larger doses is the addition to the national
debt caused by tax cuts and additional government spending—the two traditional
methods of fiscal stimulus. In this note, I examine programs designed to stimulate
aggregate demand through the lens of the following ratio: the addition to aggregate
demand per dollar added to the national debt.

I am particularly interested in using this criterion to examine a possible policy
measure that has not received much attention. The particular set of policy measures
that I consider could be labeled “federal lines of credit” or “national lines of credit.”
The essence of this policy is that in those situations in which general tax rebates have
been used in the past, the government could provide a much larger line of credit to
almost all adult citizens, which they could draw on, or not, as they saw fit. To the
public, this would look like a government‐issued credit card, but with the key
proviso that the credit would be provided in a countercyclical way, unlike
commercially provided credit, which tends to be procyclical. Such a general, large‐
scale provision of lines of credit by the government for the purpose of fiscal stimulus
may have been discussed previously, but does not seem to be part of the recent
policy discussion.

Standard analysis suggests that national lines of credit would have a smaller effect
on aggregate demand relative to the headline size of the program than a tax rebate
would, but the fact that much of the money would ultimately be repaid would
dramatically reduce the ultimate addition to the national debt. Thus, given the
government budget constraint, the headline size of a program of national lines of
credit could be much larger than the headline size of a program of tax rebates.
Examples below clarify this point. The comparison to tax rebates is important. For
a clear comparison, think of the timing for issuing such national lines of credit as
similar to what in the past has been the timing for tax rebates.



                                                                                       2
Where would such a policy of issuing national lines of credit fall on the spectrum
between traditional monetary and traditional fiscal policy? Because they involve
loans, but also involve some ultimate fiscal cost, they probably like somewhere
between traditional monetary and traditional fiscal policy. I call national lines of
credit “fiscal policy” first because they are expected to add to the national debt
(though at a relatively high ratio of additional aggregate demand to addition to
national debt) and second because national lines of credit are not within the current
legal authority of the Federal Reserve or most other central banks.

The lack of legal authority for central banks to issue national lines of credit is not set
in stone. Indeed, the “inside lag” of deliberation about such a program would
probably be shorter if the Fed or other central bank were authorized to choose the
timing and (up to some limit) the magnitude of issuance. The outside lag should
also be relatively short, since households could begin borrowing and spending as
soon as they received the national credit card. Therefore, if the Fed had this
authority the total inside plus outside lag for federal lines of credit could easily be
shorter than the relatively long outside lag for monetary policy.

2. Possible Details of National Lines of Credit. To clarify the argument, it is
helpful to have a concrete specification of national lines of credit. Suppose, for
example, that each adult citizen who files a tax return or pays Social Security taxes is
mailed a national credit card that allows him or her to borrow (either as cash or in
conjunction with a purchase) up to $2000, with the eligibility date staggered by the
last digit of her or his Social Security number (implying that there would be a
statistical instrument for econometric evaluation). As for the timeline, consider
first the terms for those individuals who draw on the entire line of credit
immediately. In what yields an overall countercyclical structure to the program,
think of the repayment period as long enough that most of the required repayment
is after the end of the recession that triggers the issuance of the lines of credit. For a
normal downturn or slowdown, a 5‐year repayment period might be answer to this
description. But Reinhardt and Rogoff (2009) have argued that economic
slowdowns following a serious financial crisis tend to last much longer than after an
ordinary recession. In such cases, there might be a longer repayment period, say
even as long as 10 years.

In a move in the direction of minimizing the fiscal cost, think of repayment as
enforced through the tax system. For the typical taxpayer, think of the payments as
made by payroll deduction as an addition to tax withholding. Otherwise, the
payments might be made as an addition to quarterly or annual tax payments. I am
assuming that‐‐as is now the case with student loans‐‐that the debt to the
government would not be extinguished by bankruptcy. I am imagining an interest
rate set in line with the Treasury bond rate for the appropriate term (five to ten
years) or perhaps modestly higher.

What about those who do not draw on the full line of credit immediately, or repay
more quickly than required? Given the likely importance for consumers not only of



                                                                                         3
current borrowing constraints but also fear of possible future borrowing constraints,1
the duration of ability to draw on the line of credit matters. To be specific, think of
the credit limit as declining exactly in line with what the size of the declining
balance would be if all the funds had been drawn on immediately. The fact that the
credit limit does decline is what makes the policy countercyclical: reducing
aggregate demand in times of strong demand as well as increasing aggregate
demand in times of weak demand. Having the credit limit decline also avoids having
the issuance of national lines of credit in successive recessions ratchet up
households’ levels of debt more and more. Having the credit limit decline gradually
induces extra consumption due to households worrying less about possible future
borrowing constraints. Note that this extra consumption can arise even for
households who, in the event, do not draw on the national line of credit at all.
Having the credit limit decline gradually also means there is less chance of a sudden
drop in aggregate demand as the program concludes.

3. Household Finance Considerations. From the perspective of Household
Finance (see Campbell, 2006), national lines of credit might tempt some households
to get in over their heads in debt. If this was a key concern, policy‐makers might
choose to make the size of the credit lines smaller for those with low incomes (as
determined by income tax returns and Social Security tax records). Note that the
effective transfer from the program would go up less with income since on average
those with lower incomes might benefit more per dollar of credit from the relatively
low interest rate on the national lines of credit. It is also worth pointing out that, in
principle, a close substitute for national lines of credit from a macroeconomic
stabilization point of view would be a program of “national rainy day accounts” that
involved a modest level of forced saving in times of high demand, with the funds
from these “national rainy day accounts” released to households in time of recession
(and also perhaps in the case of one of a well‐defined list of documentable personal
financial emergencies).

One other Household Finance aspect of national lines of credit would be giving those
who currently do not have credit cards, nor in many cases, even bank accounts,
greater access to the financial system. It is possible that some individuals of modest
means would keep their national lines of credit mostly paid off so that they could
use their national credit cards for transactions. The main point to be made here is
that any such effect would need to be sharply distinguished from the
macroeconomic stabilization aspects of national lines of credit. If the national lines
of credit are not allowed to fully expire, they would only be countercyclical if at least
for many households the credit limits on these accounts in times of high demand
were much lower than in times of low demand. Having national lines of credit fully
expire in due course for all of those who under normal circumstances are able to
obtain commercial credit would result in relatively little direct competition between
national lines of credit and commercial lines of credit.



1   I was reminded of the importance of possible future borrowing constraints by reading Nagel (2012).


                                                                                                    4
4. Aggregate Demand Effects and Budgetary Costs of National Lines of Credit.
Consider again the criterion of addition to aggregate demand compared to ultimate
addition to the national debt. One complication in assessing this ratio is that the
stimulus provided by additional aggregate demand may itself affect the ultimate
level of the national debt through the effect of this stimulus on taxes and transfers.
But since two fiscal programs that have the same aggregate demand effects will
have the same indirect effects on taxes and transfers, ranking them by which one
has the lowest direct budgetary cost will be equivalent to ranking them by the ratio
of additional aggregate demand to the total effect on the national debt.2 I emphasize
the ratio as opposed to comparisons at the same level of aggregate demand stimulus
since as a matter of political economy, the political system might easily choose a
different scale of aggregate demand effect for national lines of credit than it would
choose for tax rebates.

Another complication in assessing the ratio of additional aggregate demand to
ultimate effect on the national debt is determining the overall aggregate demand
effect generated by each dollar of additional consumption after accounting for
multipliers and crowding out. In the main, this translation between additional
consumption and overall additional aggregate demand should be similar for tax
rebates and national lines of credit and so should not affect the overall ranking
according to the ratio of extra aggregate demand to extra national debt. One
exception to this approximate equivalence of the two policies in the translation from
consumption impact to aggregate demand impact is that by loosening borrowing
constraints, national lines of credit might lower the Keynesian multiplier. However,
it would be hard (though not theoretically impossible) for national lines of credit to
have a powerful effect on the Keynesian multiplier by loosening borrowing
constraints without being powerful in their direct stimulus effects through that
loosening of borrowing constraints.

From here on, I will focus on the ratio of extra consumption to direct budgetary cost.
In this spirit, tax rebates have inspired a substantial line of research about what
fraction of tax rebates are spent reasonably soon as opposed to saved or used to pay
down debt. (See for example Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003, 2009; Sahm, Shapiro, and
Slemrod 2010, forthcoming; Johnson, Parker and Souleles, 2006; and Agarwal, Liu
and Souleles, 2007.) In the context of tax rebates, for which the direct budgetary
cost is equal to the headline size of the tax rebate, this and the macroeconomic
effects of additional consumption are the key issues. Based on this literature, 1/3
might be a reasonable estimate of the ratio of extra consumption to budgetary cost
for tax rebates (with most of the debate being between that value and lower values).

For national lines of credit, the present value of the direct budgetary cost and the
consumption impact are both key unknowns. A key aspect of national lines of

2If indirect effects on taxes and transfers actually make the national debt smaller after a fiscal
stimulus, the mathematical ratio of additional aggregate demand to this negative number will be
confusing in its direction. In this case, a corresponding criterion would again be to look at budgetary
cost for a given level of aggregate demand effect.


                                                                                                      5
credit is that many of the factors that would reduce a household’s extra
consumption due to the line of credit would also reduce the present value budgetary
cost of the national line of credit. Thus, the uncertainty about the ratio of extra
consumption to budgetary cost could be proportionally lower than the uncertainty
in either the numerator or the denominator. In general, the salience of whether
someone will spend the line of credit or not is muted by the fact that if not spent it is
less likely to result in a de facto loan loss.

Consider some examples. Suppose a household decides to use funds from the
national line of credit to pay off other debt. The reduction in other debt would make
that household more likely to be able to repay the government. As another example,
take the extreme case of a household that does not use the line of credit at all. Any
extra consumption in this case is only from reduced worry about possible future
borrowing constraints, which may be a modest effect, but the direct budgetary cost
is zero! At the other extreme, some households will have almost no ability to repay
the government, but most of these households will spend the bulk of the line of
credit, yielding a ratio of extra consumption to direct budgetary cost for these
households close to one. One of the highest ratios of extra consumption to
budgetary cost would occur in the case where a household uses the national line of
credit to put together a down payment for a consumer durable. This could generate
extra consumption stimulus to aggregate demand greater than the headline amount
while also providing some level of equity in a consumer durable to add to the
probability the government gets repaid. Although the purchase of consumer
durables would yield a high ratio in the case of tax rebates as well, the larger size of
the line of credit as compared to an equally costly tax rebate opens up a wider range
of consumer durables to this kind of purchase.

The inability to extinguish these debts through bankruptcy implies that there would
be no de jure loan losses. There would be de facto loan losses, since one cannot get
blood out of a stone, but collection through the tax system (including withholding)
could lead to relatively low levels of de facto loan loss. One of the main factors in the
level of de facto loan losses would be the extent to which the size of the lines of
credit goes up with income. Despite the reduction in additional aggregate demand
per headline size of the program that might be occasioned by conditioning on
income, de facto loan losses would probably decline by a greater proportion,
meaning that conditioning on income might improve the ratio of extra consumption
to budgetary cost.

Of course, evaluating the ratio of extra consumption to budgetary cost for national
lines of credit should ultimately be an empirical matter. A priori considerations
given here make it seem likely that this ratio would be much higher for national
lines of credit than for tax rebates. At some point there might be an experiment
with national lines of credit. The “experiment” might be either full‐scale nationwide
implementation in one instance, or a smaller‐scale experiment in which some
randomly chosen households were singled out to take part. It should be possible to
secure relatively high levels of cooperation in such a smaller‐scale experiment.



                                                                                       6
Determining the ultimate budgetary cost may require a relatively long period of
time, since some households that initially could not repay would later become able
to repay. Another possible experiment would be having half of all households
randomized to receive a $200 per adult tax rebate, while the other half of all
household received a (ten‐times larger) $2000 per adult line of credit.

5. The Relationship Between Short‐Run and Long‐Run Fiscal Policy. Even
before the financial crisis that crescendoed with the fall of Lehman in September
2008, most advanced economies faced key long‐run fiscal issues centering on the
level of government spending (both purchases and transfers), the level of taxation
with its attendant distortions, and fiscal sustainability. The financial crisis and the
Great Recession brought these long‐run fiscal issues to the fore at the same time
that it introduced severe short‐run fiscal issues. The European debt crisis in
particular has brought fiscal sustainability concerns to the fore. The short‐run
fiscal issues came in the form of low levels of aggregate demand at a time when
traditional forms of monetary policy had reached the zero lower bound on short‐
term interest rates.

Given the effects of low aggregate demand on government revenues and
expenditures, raising aggregate demand has an effect on fiscal sustainability, but the
direct budgetary cost of a program also has an effect on fiscal sustainability.
Combining austerity and traditional fiscal stimulus involves the two‐step of
spending more or taxing less now while promising to spend less or tax more in the
future, which might not be credible. By contrast, it might be credible to combine an
immediate or relatively‐quickly‐phased‐in austerity program with the issuance of
large national lines of credit that would counteract the negative aggregate demand
effects of the austerity program. (Some countries may be close enough to being shut
out of credit markets themselves that they would only be able to issue national lines
of credit to their citizens if they received an outside loan.) Politically, these lines of
credit might be explained as a way to cushion the blow of an austerity program on
household budgets as well as providing macroeconomic stimulus.

In general, the existence of ways to stimulate aggregate demand that do not add too
much to the national debt allows long‐run fiscal issues to be separated from short‐
run stabilization issues. From this point of view, one of key characteristics of
monetary policy is that monetary stimulus does not ultimately add much to the
national debt. On the high‐cost end of monetary stimulus, the assets a central bank
purchases during times of low aggregate demand can be sold in times of higher
aggregate demand at some capital loss, and then only when restraining an economy
above the natural level of output leads to selling of assets before their maturity.
National lines of credit are somewhat similar to monetary policy in ultimately
adding relatively little to the national debt.

In Europe, monetary policy is limited not only by the zero lower bound on the
nominal interest rate, but also by having only one monetary policy for the entire
Eurozone. Like other forms of fiscal policy, national lines of credit would allow for
greater stimulus for particular countries or regions in the Eurozone. Though there


                                                                                          7
would be spillovers, households would be likely to do a substantial fraction of their
extra spending on nontradables within their own region, so national lines of credit
should have an especially strong effect on aggregate demand within their region of
issuance.3

6. Comparison to Other Possible Policies. There are other policies that lie
somewhere between traditional monetary and traditional fiscal policies that might
stimulate aggregate demand at relatively low budgetary cost. One such policy that
might be within the Federal Reserve’s legal authority would be using discount loans
to support the provision of consumer credit or home equity lines of credit. This
would only loosen borrowing constraints for some households, but might have very
little budgetary cost, even implicitly. Another policy that is like monetary policy in
stimulating “investment” is investment in infrastructure projects. However, here
the experience of the last few years has shown how difficult it is to get
infrastructure projects to happen quickly. Unless these projects are queued up in
advance with all the details worked out‐‐waiting for the “go” signal at the beginning
of a recession‐‐a normal recession might be over before serious employment of
resources begins on a project. A countercyclical investment tax credit has similar
issues, since firms also need a fair amount of preparation before serious
employment of resources on a project‐‐unless the project has been queued up in
advance, waiting for a recession to lower costs. By contrast, once national lines of
credit are triggered, the details of spending are worked out through the household
decision‐making process, which is relatively nimble compared to corporate and
government decision‐making processes.

                                                References

Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles (2007). “The Reaction of
Consumer Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates—Evidence from Consumer Credit
Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6), 986‐1019.

Campbell, John Y., 2006. “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance LXI, 4 (August),
1553‐1604.

Johnson, David, Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles (2006). “Household
Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001.” American Economic Review,
95(5), 1589‐1610.

Nagel, Stefan, 2012. “Macroeconomic Experiences and Expectations: A Perspective
on the Great Recession,” working paper, Stanford University.

Reinhardt, Carmen M., and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009. This Time is Different: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press.




3   In principle, a state in the U. S. could obtain additional stimulus in an analogous way.


                                                                                               8
Sahm, Claudia R., Matthew D. Shapiro and Joel Slemrod, 2010. “Household Response
to the 2008 Tax Rebates: Survey Evidence and Aggregate Implications,”Tax Policy
and the Economy 24 (2010) 69‐110.

Sahm, Claudia R., Matthew D. Shapiro and Joel Slemrod, forthcoming. “Check in the
Mail or More in the Paycheck: Does the Effectiveness of Fiscal Stimulus Depend on
How It Is Delivered?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod, 2009. “Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate
Spending?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99 (May), 374‐379.

Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod, 2003. “Consumer Response to Tax Rebates”
American Economic Review 93 (March), 381‐396




                                                                                    9
