                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A PRECAUTIONARY TALE OF UNCERTAIN TAIL FATTENING

                                         Martin L. Weitzman

                                        Working Paper 18144
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18144


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




I acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Precautionary Tale of Uncertain Tail Fattening
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 18144
June 2012
JEL No. Q5,Q54

                                               ABSTRACT

Suppose that there is a probability density function for how bad things might get, but that the overall
rate at which this probability density function slims down to approach zero in the tail is uncertain.
The paper shows how a basic precautionary principle of tail fattening could then apply. The worse
is the contemplated damage, the more should a decision maker consider the bad tail to be among the
relatively fatter-tailed possibilities. A rough numerical example is applied to the uncertain tail distribution
of climate sensitivity.


Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu
        A Precautionary Tale of Uncertain Tail Fattening
                                         Martin L. Weitzman∗

                                            March 10, 2012



                                                 Abstract

           Suppose that there is a probability density function for how bad things might get,
        but that the overall rate at which this probability density function slims down to
        approach zero in the tail is uncertain.     The paper shows how a basic precautionary
        principle of tail fattening could then apply. The worse is the contemplated damage,
        the more should a decision maker consider the bad tail to be among the relatively
        fatter-tailed possibilities.   A rough numerical example is applied to the uncertain tail
        distribution of climate sensitivity.



1       Introduction via Climate Change
A striking feature of the economics of climate change is that worst-case scenarios are both
highly unsure and non-negligible. Deep structural uncertainty about what might conceivably
go awry with the planet is coupled with essentially unlimited downside liability on the
ultimate extent of possible global damages. This can be a recipe for producing “fat tails” in
the extremes of critical probability distributions. There is a race being run in the extreme
tail between how rapidly probabilities are declining and how rapidly damages are increasing.
Who wins this race, and by how much, depends on how fat (with probability mass) the
extreme tails are. It is diﬃcult to judge how fat the tail of really bad climate change might
be because it represents events that are very far outside the realm of ordinary experience.
Motivated by the example of climate change, this paper proposes a framework for gaining
insight into some of the basic issues involved in conceptualizing the tail probabilities of
catastrophic events.
    ∗
   Department of Economics, Harvard University (mweitzman@harvard.edu). Without necessarily tying
him to the contents of this paper, I am grateful for useful critical comments to Antony Milner.



                                                     1
    The basic idea of this paper is along the following lines. Suppose that there is some
probability density function (PDF) for how bad things might get, but that this PDF itself
is uncertain. In particular, some aggregate measure of the overall rate of tail slimming of
the relevant PDF is itself a random variable. A Bayesian decision maker is then confronted
with a probability distribution over the degree of tail slimming of members of some family
of probability distributions. The basic insight of the paper is that the Bayesian aggregated
posterior-predictive PDF is then increasingly fat in its extremes (here the extreme “badness”
of the possible outcome). The deeper into the tail is the event being analyzed (the worse is
the possible outcome), the more relevant are the fatter-tailed probability assessments about
how slowly the tail might be slimming down. For the reduced-form aggregated PDF, the
posterior-predictive tail gets relatively fatter as it gets longer. A kind of precautionary
principle then applies for the probabilities of extreme events, since a decision maker should
then eﬀectively act as if the relatively fatter-tailed possibilities are correct.    In perhaps
overly colorful language, if you know a situation is bad, then it is likely worse than you
think.
    Technically, the mathematical model relies on some neat aggregation properties of linearly-
related members of the same family of hazard functions. Each member of such a family
diﬀers from each other member by a multiplicative constant representing the relative de-
gree of “slimming down” of the probabilities as the distribution goes deeper into the tail.
Some general insights into the process of posterior-predictive tail fattening are derived and
interpreted under this “proportional hazards” specification. By further imposing a gamma
distribution on families of hazard functions, the paper is able to obtain closed-form analytical
solutions.
    A numerical example of this approach is applied to empirically derived PDFs of climate
sensitivity as a kind of case study. While extremely crude and subject to many possible
criticisms, this application illustrates concretely some of the basic ideas of the paper and
conveys some rough sense of the magnitude of tail fattening that might be involved in an
important application.


2    The Hazard Function as a Tail Slimming Rate
Let  be a random variable quantifying something bad, like global warming temperatures.
Essentially,  represents the magnitude of any undesirable event. Depending on the context,
 might stand for mean planetary surface temperature changes, earthquake energy, tsunami
heights, dollars of loss, fatalities, injuries, environmental degradation, or any other measure
of something bad. The bigger is , the worse is the situation. Really large values of 

                                               2
represent really bad outcomes. Huge values of  indicate catastrophes.
    This paper is concerned with the behavior of the upper tail of the PDF of . More
specifically, the paper is interested in the rate at which the PDF of  declines towards
zero as  increases. In what follows, the parameter  (0    ∞) is conceptualized as
some aggregate measure of the overall rate of slimming down of the extreme tail, yet to be
specified. In this section, for the time being,  is quasi-fixed in the background and merely
carried along in the analysis as a “silent parameter.” (Later,  will be treated as a random
variable with its own PDF ().)
    Because the primary object of study of this paper is the distribution of the upper tail of
the random variable , it is then natural (and more elegant) to condition all probabilities on
 already being in the upper tail. Let  represent the “beginning” of the upper tail region
(for all ). Of course  is arbitrary to at least some extent, but such a sharp distinction
between the pre-tail lower part of the probability distribution and the post-tail upper part
of the probability distribution is a simplifying assumption that is analytically useful for
obtaining crisp results. Let the probability that  exceeds  (for given ) be denoted
 [ ≥ ]. (The square-bracket notation  [] stands for the probability of event , while
the square-bracket notation  [ | ] stands for the probability of event  conditioned on
event  having occurred.) Since the paper is ultimately concerned with an uncertain family
of post-tail PDFs, I merely assume that  [ ≥  ] is parametrically specified as some value
 for all .    Any desired value of  (0    1) can later be plugged into the model.
Throughout the rest of the paper we are dealing with the tail region, so  is any number
satisfying  ≥  and the paper works with conditional tail probability distributions of the
form  [ ≥  |  ≥  ].        If for some reason we desired to know it, the unconditional
probability distribution  [ ≥ ] could be recovered from  [ ≥  |  ≥  ] by the
relationship  [ ≥ ] =   [ ≥  |  ≥  ], where  ≡  [ ≥  ] is a quasi-constant of
the analysis that is treated as being fixed in the background.
    Tail “fatness” and tail “thinness” have mirror-image properties because fatness is the
inverse of thinness. They diﬀer only in polarity. For the mathematical purposes of this
paper, it is more elegant to use tail thinness as the basic primitive simply because it generates
neater aggregation formulas than tail fatness. Otherwise, there is no substantive diﬀerence
between the two concepts.
    To proceed further in this paper requires a formal definition of tail thinness. A natural
measure of tail thinness is what I will call the tail “slimming rate”
                                      ∙                           ¸
                                        [ ≤  ≤  +  |  ≥ ]
                          () ≡ lim                                                       (1)
                                   ↓0             



                                               3
which quantifies how rapidly the tail is slimming down locally within a neighborhood of
 = .
    The tail-conditional exceedance probability distribution   () is defined here as the func-
tion
                                   () ≡  [ ≥  |  ≥  ]                               (2)

which automatically incorporates the normalization   ( ) = 1 that corresponds to the con-
dition of  being in the tail. (In reliability theory,  −  would have the interpretation of
tail-conditional time to failure and the function   () would be called the tail-conditional
survival probability distribution.)
    Incorporating (2) into (1) and taking the limit shows, after some algebra, that the de-
finition of the “slimming rate”  () given by (1) is equivalent to the well known “hazard
function”
                                                  ()
                                         () =                                          (3)
                                                   ()
                                                                                0
where the tail-conditional PDF corresponding to (2) is  () = −  () (Conditioning or
not conditioning on  ≥  makes no diﬀerence to the value of  () when properly calculated
because the normalization constant  cancels from the numerator and denominator of formula
(3)).
    Throughout this paper I use the terms “hazard function” and “slimming rate” inter-
changeably.1
    From (3), any given hazard function  () implies a unique tail-conditional exceedance
probability distribution   () via the relationship

                                          () = exp (− ())                                       (4)

where the cumulative hazard function  () is defined as
                                                    Z   
                                          () ≡            ()                                  (5)
                                                    


Note that the cumulative hazard function  () is strictly monotone increasing in  provided,
as will be assumed, that the hazard function  () is positive. Note also that  ( ) = 0,
which corresponds to   ( ) = 1, and that in order for   (∞) = 0 to hold, it must be true
   1
    The “hazard function” standardly refers to a situation where the random variable  has the interpre-
tation of “time to failure” and the exceedance probability distribution has the interpretation of “survival
probability distribution.” Whether the random variable  is interpreted as the magnitude of damages
or interpreted as the time to failure is mathematically irrelevant because the two concepts are formally
isomorphic.



                                                    4
that  (∞) = ∞.
    What does it signify in the present context when the hazard function (or slimming rate)
 () is relatively small or relatively big? When  () is small (indicative of relatively fatter
tails) the bad tail is slimming down slowly, which means that if you know a situation far out
in the tail is bad, then it is likely much worse than you think. Conversely, when  () is big
(indicative of relatively thinner tails) the bad tail is slimming down rapidly, which means
that if you know a situation far out in the tail is bad, then it is likely not much worse than
you think.
    There are three major advantages to working with the hazard function  () as a measure
of the degree of tale slimming. First, it has all of the right intuitive properties and is not
inferior in this regard to any other single function as a measure of how rapidly a tail is
slimming down.         Second, the hazard function is familiar from probability theory, with
well-known properties that have been studied intensively and widely applied. Third, as
this paper will show, using  () can bring to bear an elegant mathematical structure for
rigorously analyzing an important set of issues involving precautionary tail fattening.


3     A Model of Tail Slimming Uncertainty
Because (3) is mathematically identical with (4) and (5), hazard functions and probability
distributions are two sides of the same coin. Usually the probability distribution is concep-
tualized as being given first, while the hazard function is then defined in terms of it by (3).
Here the order in which they are introduced is decisively reversed. Because this paper is
focused on uncertain tail thinness, it begins with the tail hazard function as a given primitive
measure of tail thinness, while the corresponding tail probability distribution is then defined
in terms of the tail hazard function by (4), (5).
    If the tail hazard function (aka tail slimming rate) were known to be  () (i.e., if the
value of the parameter  was known), then the problem this paper is trying to address would
not exist. The problem here is that the rate of tail slimming is not known exactly because
observations of low-probability high-impact extreme events are rare and diﬃcult to interpret
— or they do not even exist for many situations of interest (in which case they must somehow
or other be extrapolated from what is known).
    One cannot proceed fruitfully when the hazard function specification remains in the
general form  (). To go further with the analysis, one simply must specify more precisely
how  is supposed to represent tail thinness.       It is diﬃcult to obtain crisp neat results
without tying  crisply and neatly to some intuitive measure of the overall rate of tail
slimming.      Crisp neat results can be obtained if the tail slimming rates (aka tail hazard

                                                5
functions)  () are assumed to be multiplicative shifts of each other, with  representing
the multiplicative shift parameter. This multiplicative-shift specification is now introduced
and henceforth adopted throughout the rest of the paper.
   The main given primitive in this setup is some “parent” hazard function (), which can
be any positive function satisfying the regularity requirement
                                      Z    ∞
                                               ()  = ∞                                (6)
                                       

   A family of hazard functions is then generated by imposing the specification that each
“child” hazard function is of the linear form

                                       () =  × ()                                   (7)

which is an instance of what is called in the reliability literature the “proportional hazards”
assumption.
    The positive parameter  in (7) represents the relative thinness of the tail probabilities
of a child hazard function within the family of all child hazard functions whose parent is
(). By assuming the multiplicatively-separable form (7), one can obtain fairly crisp and
neat results having an intuitive interpretation. Assumption (7) follows a long tradition in
economics of analyzing changes via parametric shifts of critical curves or functions. But
the “proportional hazards” assumption (7) is an imposed restriction nevertheless, which
amounts to assuming a uniform degree of relative tail thinness for each child distribution of
the same parent hazard function. I note for the low-probability extreme-event situations
relevant to this paper that there might typically be considered to be a lot of variability in
the shift parameter  because the appropriate degree of relative tail thinness might typically
be considered to be highly uncertain.
    The cumulative parent hazard function is
                                                 Z    
                                     () =               ()                          (8)
                                                  


    From (5) and (8), specification (7) implies that the cumulative hazard function for given
 is of the form
                                       () =  × ()                                  (9)

   Plugging (9) into (4) gives

                                     () = exp (− ())                               (10)


                                                     6
    Before continuing on with developing the abstract model of this section, I want first to give
insight into the general approach by way of three specific examples based on three especially
simple functional forms for (). These three examples illustrate concretely how particular
hazard-function families satisfying the proportional hazards condition (7) conjugate with
their implied probability-distribution families via (4). Because the probability-distribution
families in these examples are more or less familiar, the examples should serve to strengthen
intuition about the general approach.
    Example 1 The prototype example here is the exponential distribution. This example
serves as a template throughout the rest of this paper because, as the paper will show, tail-
fattening behavior in the exponential case readily translates into tail-fattening behavior in
the more general case (7). For the exponential family the given primitive parent hazard
function is
                                           () = 1                                        (11)

From (7), the child hazard functions in the exponential case are of the form  () = . The
cumulative hazard function (9) here is  () =  ( −  ). From (10), the tail-conditional
exceedance probability distributions for the exponential family are of the form

                                    
                                     () = exp(− ( −  ))                              (12)



   Example 2 The second example is the Pareto (or power) distribution. For the Pareto
family the given primitive parent hazard function is

                                                         1
                                              () =                                      (13)
                                                         

From (7), the child hazard functions in the Pareto case are of the form  () = . The
cumulative hazard function (9) here is  () =  (ln −ln  ). From (10), the tail-conditional
exceedance probability distributions for the Pareto (or power) family are of the form

                                         
                                                    ³  ´−
                                          () =                                          (14)
                                                     

   Example 3 An interesting third example begins with the given primitive parent hazard
function being of the form
                                     () = −1                                  (15)

for some non-negative constant . When  = 1, then (15) implies  () =  () = 1.
When  = 0, then (15) implies  () =  () = 1. This third example is interesting


                                                 7
because the family of probability distributions having parent hazard function (15) subsumes
as special cases both the exponential family (12) for  = 1 (each member of which is a
prototype thin-tailed distribution) and the Pareto family (14) for  = 0 (each member of
which is a prototype fat-tailed distribution). From (7), the child hazard functions here are
of the form 
              () = 
                        −1
                            . The cumulative hazard function (9) here is  () =  ( −  )
for   0 (and  () =  (ln  − ln  ) for  = 0). From (10), the tail-conditional exceedance
probability distributions for this family are of the form
                                                 µ µ       ¶¶
                                                     − 
                                    ()   = exp −                                       (16)
                                                       

which is describing a family of probability distributions having similar form and properties
to a corresponding family of Weibull distributions.


4     Insights and Implications
I return now to the broader situation where () represents any parent hazard function (not
just the special examples of last section where  () = 1 or  () = 1 or  () = −1 ).
    In the last section,  was treated as given and fixed. Throughout the rest of this paper
 is viewed as a random variable having prior PDF ().
    Making use of (4) and (9), the posterior-predictive tail-conditional exceedance probability
distribution, denoted b(), is then
                              Z   ∞                       Z   ∞
                    b() ≡             () ()  =           exp(− ()) ()      (17)
                              0                           0


   From diﬀerentiating (17) and (8) with respect to , the corresponding posterior-predictive
hazard function (aka posterior-predictive tail slimming rate) is
                                            ∙R ∞                          ¸
                  b      −b0 ()                  exp (− ()) () 
                  () ≡          =           R∞
                                              0
                                                                            × ()         (18)
                          b()                 0
                                                   exp (− ()) () 

    A more elegant way of seeing what (18) is trying to tell us comes from decomposing it
into three simpler parts. Viewed this way, (18) is equivalent to

                                            b
                                            () = b
                                                   () × ()                             (19)

where
                                             b
                                             () = (())                                (20)


                                                     8
and the function () is defined by the equation
                                      R∞
                                            exp (− ) () 
                                () = R0 ∞                                                  (21)
                                         0
                                            exp (− ) () 

    In analyzing the above trio of equations (19), (20), (21), notice that (19) is of the identical
form as the child hazard function (7) (with both sharing the same parent ()), except that
b
() in (19) replaces  in (7). This signifies that, for any given , we are allowed the mental
convenience of conceptualizing the appropriate posterior-predictive rate of tail slimming as
if it were the child hazard function having the relative thinness parameter value b     (). The
next issue to be investigated is the behavior of b() and what it depends upon.
    From (20), () depends on  in the particular nested form b
                b                                                      () = (()).       From
(8), the function () is strictly monotone increasing in  with derivative  0 () = ()  0.
Therefore, if we can understand the basic properties of () as  increases, then we will
understand (up to a monotone transformation) the basic properties of b      () as  increases.
    To see in sharp relief the behavior of () as a function of , rewrite (21) as the weighted
average                                     Z         ∞
                                       () =              (; )                        (22)
                                                  0

where the non-negative weights are

                                             exp (−) ()
                                 (; ) ≡ R ∞                                               (23)
                                            0
                                               exp (−) ()
                             R∞
which sum to one because 0 (; )  = 1.
    The behavior of () as a function of  can then be understood by examining the behavior
of the aggregation weights (; ) as joint functions of  and . It is readily apparent that,
as  increases for given , the exponential term exp (−) in (23) places less -weight on
relatively high values of  and places more -weight on relatively low values of . Therefore,
from (22), () is a declining function of , and consequently b    () = (()) is also a
declining function of , beginning for  = 0 or  =  at the mean value of 
                                  Z    ∞
                                            ()  = (0) = b
                                                              ( )                          (24)
                                   0

and approaching asymptotically as  → ∞ or  → ∞

                              inf { | ()  0} = (∞) = b
                                                          (∞)                               (25)

   Further insight into the behavior of () can be gained by diﬀerentiating (22), (23) with

                                                      9
respect to , which, after rearranging terms, gives
                                         Z    ∞
                               0
                              () = −            ( − ())2 (; )                     (26)
                                          0


Note from (26) that the rate at which () declines is proportional to the weighted variance
of the distribution of . Other things being equal, a weighted-mean-preserving spread of 
accelerates the decline of () with respect to .
    The reason why () decreases in , or why b      () = (()) decreases in , runs deep
in the nature of the underlying problem. Other things being equal, tails that slim down
at a relatively faster rate also have tail exceedance probabilities that are relatively smaller.
As one moves further out in the tail, therefore, the posterior-predictive distribution is in-
creasingly dominated by the relatively higher survival probabilities of the relatively fatter
sub-distributions corresponding to lower values of . In a sense, the thinner-tailed child
distributions are discounting their own relevance out of existence, leaving the field to their
fatter-tailed siblings. A corollary is that the rate of slimming down of the posterior-predictive
distribution decreases further out in the tail. The posterior-predictive tail becomes fatter
as it gets longer, reflecting the higher survival rates of its fatter-tailed sub-distributions.
Equations like (22) and (26) are merely formulas that express these basic ideas concisely.
    The results of this section indicate that as  increases by going deeper into the tail,
then, for any given parent hazard function (), the posterior-predictive hazard function
b
() declines monotonically relative to () from the “average” child hazard function cor-
responding to (24) towards the fattest possible child hazard function corresponding to (25).
In this sense the posterior-predictive tail gets ever fatter for ever larger  within the class of
child hazard functions derived from any given parent hazard function. To say more precisely
than this what exactly is the posterior-predictive probability distribution requires further
restricting the PDF () to some analytically tractable form.


5     Gamma Tail Fattening
The gamma probability distribution is ideally suited for further analysis here because of the
neat way it integrates to simplify various complicated formulas involving proportional hazard
functions. Henceforth I assume the PDF () is of the gamma form

                                                   1
                                    () =              −1 −                           (27)
                                                 Γ()




                                                    10
with positive parameters  and . I presume that the reader has (or can acquire) a basic
knowledge of the gamma PDF. In this and the next section, repeated use is made of the
formula                        Z ∞
                                    −1 −  =   Γ()                        (28)
                                   0

for various values of   0 and   0.
    Plug (27) into (17). Then use the formula (28) for  =  and  = 1[1 + ()]. Re-
arrange terms to derive the closed-form expression for the posterior-predictive tail-conditional
exceedance probability distribution

                                       bΓ () = [1 +  ()]−                             (29)

where () is the cumulative parent hazard function (8).
      It is striking to compare equation (29) with equation (10). The child probability dis-
tribution (10) is exponential in (). The posterior-predictive distribution (29) is poly-
nomial in (). The eﬀect of imposing a gamma PDF (27) is to fatten the tail of the
posterior-predictive distribution by moving () from an exponential distribution class into
a polynomial distribution class.            For the exponential parent (11), (12), the eﬀect is to
                                                               
change the exceedance probability from the form   () = exp(− ( −  )) to the fatter-
tailed form bΓ () = [1 + ( −  )]− . For the Pareto parent (11), (12), the eﬀect is to
                                                             
change the exceedance probability from the form   () = ( )− to the fatter-tailed form
bΓ () = [1 + (ln  − ln  )]− .
      Further insight can be obtained by noting that the mean of the gamma PDF (27) is
 = , while the variance of the gamma PDF (27) is  2 = 2 . Inverting these expressions,
(29) can be rewritten as
                                     bΓ () = [1 + ()  2 ]−  
                                                                  2  2
                                                                                              (30)

    It can readily be shown that expression (30) increases with . The greater the variance
of  for a given mean, the greater is the posterior-predictive exceedance probability. In the
limit  → 0, the expression (30) becomes exp(− ()), which is of the same form as (10).
With no variance, the posterior-predictive exceedance probability reverts to the unfattened
child distribution having the point value  = .


6     A Numerical Application to Climate Sensitivity
There are so many sources of uncertainty in climate change that a person almost does not
know where or how to begin cataloging them. In this section I make an extremely crude


                                                  11
attempt to apply the model of this paper to a particular numerical example concerning
one particular aspect of climate-change uncertainty. For specificity, I focus here on the
uncertainty of so-called “equilibrium climate sensitivity.”
    “Equilibrium climate sensitivity” (hereafter denoted  to conform with previous no-
tation) is a key macro-indicator of the eventual temperature response to greenhouse gas
changes. It is defined as the global average surface warming that follows a sustained dou-
bling of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ), after the climate system has reached a new
equilibrium.2 Calculating the actual time trajectory of temperatures is a complicated task
that requires sophisticated computer modeling based on general circulation models with
hundreds of parameters and variables. The human mind being what it is, however, there
is a compelling need to reduce such a complicated dynamic reality to some comprehensible
aggregate indicator. This is a simplistic reduction that overlooks important temporal and
spatial aspects of climate change. Temporally, really high atmospheric warming would take
a very long time to equilibrate because the oceans must first absorb tremendous amounts of
heat (which itself might be considered a scary proposition). Spatially, regional climate ef-
fects are far more unpredictable than global average warming. Despite many complications,
the concept of equilibrium climate sensitivity can still serve as a useful aggregate proxy for
the overall severity of the climate change problem.
    The economics of climate change consists of a very long chain of sometimes tenuous
inferences fraught with big uncertainties in every link. It should be understood clearly that
under the rubric of “equilibrium climate sensitivity” I am trying to aggregate together a large
suite of uncertainties. Empirically, it is not the fatness of the tail of the climate sensitivity
PDF alone, or the reactivity of damages to high temperatures alone, or the degree of relative
risk aversion alone, or the rate of pure time preference alone, or any other factor alone, that
counts, but rather the combination of all such factors in determining the upper-tail fatness
of the PDF of the relevant measure of overall expected welfare. So climate sensitivity as a
random variable  is to be understood here as a prototype example or a metaphor, which
is being used primarily to illustrate much more generic issues in the economics of highly
uncertain extreme climate change. The insights and results of this paper are not intended
to stand or fall on the narrow issue of accurately modeling uncertain climate sensitivity per
se.
   2
    In scientific jargon,  is a so-called “fast equilibrium” concept based upon “fast feedbacks” (geologically
speaking). The concept omits slower-acting feedbacks, such as changes in land albedo, changes in biological
sinks or sources, temperature-induced releases of carbon, and the like. So-called “earth system sensitivity”
includes slower-acting feedbacks and is presumably larger, perhaps significantly so. For a time horizon on
the scale of a century or so, it is not implausible that “earth system sensitivity” might be the more relevant
concept. Greater details are available, e.g., in Hansen et al (2008). See also the useful survey article of
Knutti and Hegerl (2008).


                                                      12
    The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in its IPCC-AR4 (2007) Executive
Summary explains climate sensitivity this way: “The equilibrium climate sensitivity is a
measure of the climate system response to sustained radiative forcing. It is not a projection
but is defined as the global average surface warming following a doubling of carbon dioxide
concentrations. It is likely to be in the range 2 to 4.5◦ C with a best estimate of 3◦ C, and
is very unlikely to be less than 1.5◦ C. Values substantially higher than 4.5◦ C cannot be
excluded, but agreement of models with observations is not as good for those values.” Using
the IPCC definition of “likely” a fair interpretation might be that  [ ≥ 45◦ C] ≈ 17%.3
Overall, the IPCC statement might be construed as saying that the upper tail of the PDF
of  has a disturbingly large amount of total probability mass (and that the IPCC also
“thinks” that, whatever is the total probability mass in the tail, there is a disturbingly large
amount of uncertainty about how this probability mass is actually distributed throughout
the tail region  ≥ 45◦ C).
    For further background and motivation on the unsure degree of fatness of the upper-tail
PDF of , along with some data, this paper relies on a recent study that conducted personal
interviews with 14 leading climate scientists, using formal methods of expert PDF elicitation
(Zickfeld et al 2010). The 14 experts were listed by name in the study, but the association
of numbers with names was not published in order to protect the anonymity of respondents.
    There are so many serious problems and diﬃculties with the way I am using numbers
from this study that, in the interest of brevity, I simply move along without attempting to
justify each step in detail. The only possible overall justification of my quick and dirty
approach is that the underlying issue is important and superior data for the purposes of
this paper simply do not exist. What I am presenting here, then, should merely be seen
as a suggestive numerical example that illustrates concretely some of the basic ideas of this
paper and conveys, however crudely, some rough sense of the magnitude of tail fattening
that might be involved in an important application. I claim nothing more than this.
    In the part of the (Zickfeld et al 2010) study most relevant to this paper, the 14 scientific
experts were asked to enumerate their 25% and 5% upper confidence levels for high values
of equilibrium climate sensitivity, denoted here, respectively, by 25% and 5% . In the
notation of this paper, expert  (for  = 1 2  14) believes that  [ ≥ 25%
                                                                                   ] = 25 and
 [ ≥ 5%  ] = 05.      Results of this part of the (Zickfeld et al 2010) survey of expert
opinions are reproduced in Table 1 below.4 The last row of Table 1 gives what might be
  3
     The study of Zickfeld et al (2010), for example, reads the IPCC definition as signifying  [ ≥
  ◦
45 C]=17%.
   4
     I am indebted to Karen Zickfeld for providing the spreadsheet upon which the numbers in my Table 1
are based. These numbers were not given explicitly in the published paper (Zickfeld et al 2010).




                                                  13
                                                                                           15
called empirical estimates of the “tail one-fifth-life” in degrees centigrade,                 ≡ 5%   25%
                                                                                                     −    .

        =      1       2     3 4        5     6      7      8     9     10    11 12       13      14
        25%
               4.25 5.1 4 3.6 4.5 4.9 4.2 3.8 4                         4.1 5      4.5 3.9 5
        5%
               6       6.1 8 4.4 6.5 7               5.5 5        5.5 5.4 7        8      4.5 7.2
         15
              1.75 1        4 .8       2     2.1 1.3 1.2 1.5 1.3 2                3.5 .6         2.2

        Table 1: Expert estimates of tail probabilities for climate sensitivity (in ◦ C)


                                                                                     15
    From now on I concentrate just on the tail one-fifth-life estimates  (= 5% − 
                                                                                        25%
                                                                                            ) in
the last row of Table 1. This is my primitive data. (I do not know how representative
is this sample, but will later simply presume it is a representative sample of all scientific
                                            15
opinions.) I next attempt to force the { } numbers of Table 1 into the framework model
of this paper. I arbitrarily assume that the tail begins at  =4.5◦ C and condition all further
tail probabilities on being in this tail region. In the interest of plowing ahead, I make an
                                                          15
audacious assumption that the one-fifth-life estimate  applies uniformly all throughout
the tail region  ≥4.5◦ C. This amounts to postulating a thin-tailed exponential PDF, in
the spirit of Example 1, throughout the entire tail region. Thus, I am eﬀectively presuming
that
                             [ ≥  |  ≥  ] = exp(− ( −  ))                       (31)

    The next question to be addressed is: where do the { } come from? I assume that
the { } are a random sample of draws from the gamma PDF (10), which represents the
population distribution of scientific thought concerning .5 We do not observe realizations
                                                                              15
of  directly. The primitive data are considered to be the realizations of  from the
last row of Table 1, including their assumed-independent additive observation errors. The
random variable 15 is related to the random variable  by the relationship

                                                          ln 5
                                               15 =                                                   (32)
                                                           


    Making repeated use of (28), brute force calculations with the gamma PDF (27) applied
to (32) yields                                  ∙ ¸
                               £ 15 ¤           1        ln 5
                                     = ln 5      =                                (33)
                                                      ( − 1) 
    5
      This is not the only way of representing or interpreting expert opinion. For a discussion of some of the
relevant issues, see Clement and Winkler (1999).



                                                     14
and                                          ∙ ¸
                         £    ¤               1         (ln 5)2
                         15 = (ln 5)2        =                                       (34)
                                                  ( − 1)2 ( − 2) 
                             15
   The sample mean of { } denoted , is an unbiased estimate of the population mean
(33). The (corrected by dividing the sum of squared deviations by  − 1 = 13) sample
               15
variance of { }, denoted , is an unbiased estimate of the population variance (34).
Using these two sample moments in place of the two population moments allows (33) and
(34) to be inverted, yielding the values

                                                   2
                                           =2+                                           (35)
                                                   

and
                                                ln 5
                                       =                                                (36)
                                            ( + 2 ) 
                                                            15
    From the last row of Table 1, the sample mean of { } is calculated to be =1.8036 and
                                                15
the (corrected, unbiased) sample variance of { } is calculated to be =.9302. From (35)
and (36), the corresponding parameters for the gamma PDF (27) are =5.497 and =.1984.
    The calculated values =5.497 and =.1984 can be used to check how good is the fit of
                                                                                    15
the gamma population PDF (27) of  for generating the observed sample values of { }. In
Table 2 below are enumerated the population quartiles generated by the gamma PDF (27)
for =5.497 and =.1984, as transformed by (32) into corresponding population quartile
values of 15 . The last row of Table 2 gives the sample quartiles observed in the last row
of Table 1.

          quartile of 15   25%                50%                 75%
          population         15 = 118        15 = 157         15 = 214
          sample             10 ≤ 15 ≤ 12 15 ≤ 15 ≤ 175 21 ≤ 15 ≤ 22

           Table 2: A Comparison of Population and Sample Quartiles for 15
                                                                                   15
    As is evident from Table 2, there is a good quartile fit to the story that  =ln 5 ,
where values of { } are generated as iid draws from the gamma PDF (27). In this story
the gamma PDF parameters are =5.497 and =.1984, which have been determined by the
first two sample moments of {15 }.
                                                                    
    For the exponential tail exceedance probabilities of the form   () = exp(− ( −  )) in
(12), the cumulative parent hazard function (8) is () =  −  . Plugging values =5.497




                                              15
and =.1984 into (29) for () =  −  turns (29) into

                                bΓ () = [1 + 1984 ( − 45)]−5497                     (37)

    I now want to compare the posterior-predictive tail-conditional exceedance probability
distribution (37) with an “average” tail-conditional exceedance probability distribution of
the underlying exponential form (10). The mean value of the gamma PDF (27) is  = .
From (24), taking  =  ensures the normalization b    ( ) = , which means that both of the
two hazard rates from the two diﬀerent probability distributions are initialized to be equal
at the beginning of the tail region  = 45◦ C. Picking  =  therefore ensures a kind of
level playing field in the sense that the initial rate of tail slimming of this “representative”
child probability distribution is the same as the initial rate of tail slimming of the posterior-
predictive probability distribution.
    Using parameter values =5.497 and =.1984 gives  = 10908. For purposes of compar-
ison, I take this average value of  =  = 10908 as the “representative” child distribution
here. Then (10) becomes

                                   
                                   () = exp(−10908 ( − 45))                          (38)

    Table 3 below compares tail-conditional “representative” tail probabilities from (38) with
tail-conditional posterior-predictive tail probabilities from (37).

              =         5◦ C     6◦ C   7◦ C     8◦ C    9◦ C    10◦ C 11◦ C 12◦ C
                
                ()= 58% 19% 6.5% 2.2% .74% .25% .08% .03%
              bΓ ()= 59% 23% 11% 7.0% 3.0% 1.7% 1.1% .66%

            Table 3: Comparison of Tail-Conditional Exceedance Probabilities
                                                                                  
    The representative tail-conditional exceedance probability distribution   () given by
formula (38) is of the classical thin-tailed exponential form. The posterior-predictive tail-
conditional exceedance probability distribution bΓ () given by formula (37) is of the fat-
tailed polynomial form. The distinction between the two forms does not much show itself in
Table 3 for relatively low values of climate sensitivity  at the beginning of the tail region
                           
 ≥ 45◦ C. (Note that   (45) = bΓ (45) = 100% by definition.) However, Table 3 shows
that the degree of posterior-predictive tail fattening is quite pronounced at higher values of 
located further out in the tail. Rough as this numerical example is, it might be construed as
a crude warning that a kind of precautionary principle could apply to at least some critical
unknowns in climate change. The results of Table 3 are hinting that when probabilities of


                                                  16
extreme climate sensitivity are being considered in situations where the rate of tail slimming
is unknown, it might be wise to err on the side of caution by accepting fatter-tailed estimates
as being more appropriate for decision making.
    The numerical example of Table 3 illustrates the operation of a basic underlying tail-
fattening mechanism. Of course the underlying data are far from ideal, several challengeable
assumptions are being made, and the example is stretched, to put it mildly. Overall, this
numerical application is far more illustrative of underlying principles than it is directly
informative for policy advice. Nevertheless, basic principles are important and it is useful
to have an actual numerical example indicating how a principle might apply to a real-world
situation, even if it is a stretched application.


7    Concluding Comments
To this point, I think the paper largely speaks for itself. When there is some PDF for how
bad things might get, but the overall degree of tail slimming of this PDF is itself uncertain,
then the deeper into the tail is the event being analyzed, the more relevant are the fatter-
tailed probability assessments about how slowly the tail might be slimming down.            A
kind of precautionary principle then applies for the probabilities of extreme events, since a
decision maker should then eﬀectively act as if the relatively fatter-tailed underlying PDFs
are appropriate.
    To model and derive this version of a Bayesian precautionary principle, several assump-
tions were made throughout the paper. Some of these assumptions might legitimately be
challenged. Based on a linear family of hazard functions that quantifies the overall degree
of tail slimming, the paper shows that uncertainty about the overall degree of tail slimming
ends up fattening tails. It remains an open research question to what extent the kind of
relatively tractable results this paper derives can be broadened to encompass significantly
more general settings. In a sense the paper is more about a class of examples than it is
a general theory of tail fattening under uncertainty. I attempt to flag the limited scope of
this paper by characterizing it as a “precautionary tale” rather than trying to pretend it is
some broader-sounding general theory.
    The remaining remarks of this concluding section are a few brief reflections on what it
all might mean.
    The basic nature of uncertainty has long been a controversial subject. Situations where
it is diﬃcult to assign numerical probabilities are often characterized as having ambiguity.
Ambiguous situations often end up putting relatively more weight on the worst-case scenar-
ios, and in so doing eﬀectively promote the inclusion in decision making of some version of

                                              17
a so-called precautionary principle, which emphasizes avoiding the more scary or unpleasant
situations.6
    The economics of climate change constitutes one vast laboratory for trying out various
ideas about uncertainty. The primary purpose of this paper has been to show that a kind
of precautionary principle (in the form of posterior-predictive tail fattening) can emerge
naturally from a purely Bayesian setup focused on the uncertain rate of tail slimming of
bad events. Furthermore, this Bayesian posterior-predictive tail-fattening approach has a
suﬃciently operational component to generate some numerical implications in at least one,
admittedly greatly over-simplified, data-based situation pertaining to climate change.
    Whether this Bayesian reductionism is a good thing or not depends on one’s viewpoint.
For me it is useful because the Bayesian framework has an appealing overall rational consis-
tency and it is interesting to examine what it might have to say on the subject of this paper.
For those who believe that the principles of ambiguity aversion override Bayesian princi-
ples in situations with uncomfortably non-quantifiable probabilities, so that a precautionary
principle does not need to rely on a Bayesian foundation, there will be plenty of legitimate
criticisms that can be leveled at this paper and my interpretations of what it might mean.
In any event I think that an attempt to apply various theories of uncertainty to actual exam-
ples — here the economics of climate change — is bound to be a good thing generally because
without such applications it is diﬃcult to see what the theories might mean in practice and
the theories can therefore tend to become ingrown.
    The one thing that seems nearly certain is that a debate over the meaning and significance
of a precautionary principle will continue, and that it will continue to have relevance for the
economics of climate change.



References
[1] Clemen, Robert T., and Robert L. Winkler (1999). “Combining Probability Distributions
    From Experts in Risk Analysis.” Risk Analysis, 19, 2, 187-203.

[2] Etner, Johanna, Meglena Jeleva, and Jean-Marc Tallon. “Decision theory under ambi-
    guity” (July 13, 2010 working paper, forthcoming in Journal of Economic Surveys.)

[3] Hansen, James, Makiko Sato, Puskher Karecha, David Beerling, Valerie Masson-
    Delmotte, Mark Pagani, Maureen Raymo, Dana L. Royer, James C. Zachos. “Target
  6
    For more on various aspects of this subject, see Etner, Jeleva, and Tallon (2010), Henry and Henry
(2002), and Millner, Dietz, and Heal (2010).



                                                 18
   Atmospheric CO2 : Where Should Humanity Aim?” Open Atmos. Sci. J., 2, 217-231
   (2008).

[4] Henry, C., and M. Henry (2002). “Formalization and application of the precautionary
    principle.” Columbia University Department of Economics Discussion Paper Series.

[5] IPCC-AR4. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
    Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
    Change. Cambridge University Press, 2007 (available online at http://www.ipcc.ch).

[6] Knutti, Reto, and Gabriella Hegerl (2008). “The equilibrium sensitivity of the Earth’s
    temperature to radiation changes.” Nature Geoscience 1, 735-743

[7] Millner, Antony, Simon Dietz, and Geoﬀrey Heal (2010). “Ambiguity and Climate Pol-
    icy.” NBER Working Paper nol 16050.

[8] Zickfeld, Kirsten, M. Granger Morgan, David J. Frame and David W. Keith. 2010. Expert
    judgments about transient climate response to alternative future trajectories of radiative
    forcing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (38): 16129-16135.




                                             19
