NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE ROLE OF SCIENCE PHILANTHROPY IN AMERICAN RESEARCH
UNIVERSITIES
Fiona E. Murray
Working Paper 18146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18146

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

I would like to acknowledge the excellent research assistance provided by Sarah Wood and Kenny
Ching on this project as well as undergraduates Brooke Johnson and Juan Valdez. Funding for this
research came in part from MIT Sloan School of Management discretionary funds and from a NSF
Science of Science Innovation Policy grant. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Fiona E. Murray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Evaluating the Role of Science Philanthropy in American Research Universities
Fiona E. Murray
NBER Working Paper No. 18146
June 2012
JEL No. O31,O32,O43
ABSTRACT
Philanthropy plays a major role in university-based scientific, engineering and medical research inWKH
United States contributing over $4Billion annually to operations, endowment and buildings devotedWR
research. When combined with endowment income, university research funding from science philanthropy
is $7Billion a year. This major contribution to U.S. scientific competitiveness comes from private
foundations as well as gifts from wealthy individuals. From the researcher’s perspective, analysis in
this paper demonstrates that science philanthropy provides almost 30% of the annual research funds
of those in leading universities. And yet science philanthropy has been largely overshadowed by the
massive rise of Federal research funding and, to a lesser extent, industry funding. Government and
industry funding have drawn intensive analysis, partly because their objectives are measureable:
governmentsgenerally support broad national goals and basic research, while industry finances projects
likely tocontribute directly to useful products. In contrast, philanthropy’s contribution to overall
levels of scientificfunding, and, more importantly, the distribution of philanthropy across different
types of researchis poorly understood. To fill this gap, we provide the first empirical evaluation of
the role of sciencephilanthropy in American research universities. The documented extent of science
philanthropy andits strong emphasis on translational medical research raises important questions
for Federal policymakers.In determining their own funding strategies, they must no longer assumethat
their funding is the onlysource in shaping some fields of research, while recognizing that philanthropy
may ignore other importantfields.

Fiona E. Murray
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, e62-470
Cambridge, MA 02142
fmurray@mit.edu

I.

Introduction
This paper examines the place occupied by philanthropy in the funding of science in

American universities.

My practical goal is to illuminate this largely ignored but important

source of funding for leading edge research – in science, engineering and medicine – and its
growing importance to higher education today.

Recognizing that both the rate and the

direction of scientific progress is of central importance (Arrow 1962), this analysis will explore
both the level of philanthropic funding and its distribution – across fields, across universities,
and across the spectrum of fundamental-to-translational research.
The multi-billion dollar fund-raising campaigns launched by research-oriented
universities highlight the central importance of philanthropy to higher education, particularly
how universities depend on philanthropy for forging new research lines, new models of
knowledge production, and new research collaborations. The role of science philanthropy -gifts from wealthy individuals, grants from private foundations to scientific research, and
endowment income earmarked for research -- is an under-appreciated aspect of philanthropy in
higher education whose importance becomes clear by examining trends in funding university
research. Over the period 2005-2010, Federal funding to university research has grown less
than 1%, and State funding has declined.1 Industry contributions (usually regarded as the
alternative funding stream for university research) amount to less than 6% of university
research funding. In striking contrast, science philanthropy makes up almost 30% of
university research funding and has been growing at almost 5% annually.2
Conceptually, science philanthropy presents a puzzle for scholars interested in the
economics of science and innovation and for innovation policymakers. Broadly speaking, the
two canonical funders – public sector government funding and private sector funds – have clear
(but distinctive) incentives for contributing to university research that are well understood and
(often) complementary (David, Hall, O’Toole 1998).

In a simple economic framework,

governments fund the earliest stages of research and industry supports the later, more applied
stages (Nelson 1959, Arrow 1962, Aghion, Dewatripont and Stein 2008).

1

In contrast, the

See NSF Science and Engineering Statistics Report 2010 Chapter 5, p 10.
If we consider that up to half of all industry funding is contributed via tax-deductable gifts rather than formal
research contracts – thus being designated corporate philanthropy -- then the contribution of science philanthropy in
its various forms is over 30% of university research funding today.

2

1

factors driving philanthropic funding are more complex and highly variable. Grounded in the
preferences of wealthy patrons (and their foundations) that derive from the historical traditions
of patronage, science philanthropy is shaped by the legal arrangements that encompass
charitable giving (Fleishman 2007). It is also driven by negotiations between the “client-savant”
(as scientists were known in the Renaissance) and the funder (see David 2008, Gans, Murray
and Stern 2010, Gans and Murray 2012), which become doubly complex when patrons sit down
with today’s university administrators.3

Thus, few clear predictions exist regarding the

distribution of science philanthropy.
Two vignettes illustrate the complex relationship between science philanthropy, public
funding for research and the frontiers of scientific progress. Each one highlights the different
ways in which philanthropists interact with the funding choices made by Federal (and, to a
much lesser extent, State and industrial) funders.
Between 2002 and 2010, Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, and Nathan Myhrvold
(former CTO of Microsoft) donated over $30M to support a new telescope (to be referred to as
the Allen Telescope Array) at the Hat Creek Observatory. A partnership between UC Berkeley’s
Radio Astronomy Laboratory and the private SETI Institute4, its research purpose was to
advance SETI – the Search for Extra-Terrestrial intelligence – by looking for signals from
civilizations elsewhere in the galaxy.5 Controversial from the start, the project had always
suffered from difficulties in gaining robust, long-term government support. Myrhvold contrasted
his philanthropy to government funding, making the argument: "While the best scientific
estimates tell us the probability of intelligent life elsewhere in the universe is fairly high, there is
great uncertainty and some controversy in the calculation. One thing however, is beyond
dispute. That is, if we don't continue supporting projects like the Allen Telescope Array, our
chances of discovery will remain at zero. While it's impossible to predict exactly what we will
find with a new scientific instrument, we should remember that interesting science is not just
3

The extensive analysis of science patronage in the Renaissance and beyond by Paul David is one of the only pieces
of scholarly work in the economics of innovation literature dealing with philanthropy (P.A. David, 2008, The historical
origins of open sciences: An essay on patronage, reputation and common agency contracting in the scientific
revolution, Capitalism and Society, Vol 3(2): Article 5.
4 The SETI Institute is a not for profit research organization founded in 1984 by scientists from NASA's Ames
Research Center in California. It was managing the first phase of the High Resolution Microwave Survey under
contract to Ames, with funding from NASA.
5
At the time of the press release, the Paul G. Allen Charitable Foundation was described as being “dedicated to
promoting the health and development of vulnerable populations and to strengthening families and communities. The
Foundation invests in projects and programs that address social challenges and promote positive change”.

2

about the likelihood of end results -- it is also about the serendipity that occurs along the way."
The philanthropic funding of over $60M from Allen and others augmented the costs of
observatory operations traditionally supported from two other sources: “University Radio
Observatory” grants from the National Science Foundation and the State of California’s funding
of Berkeley’s Radio Astronomy Lab (Nature 2011).6 In 2008, when California state budget
deficits reduced funding to the Radio Astronomy Lab and Federal funding for the ATA was cut
(citing ATA's failure to reach its expected level of performance and its lower than expected
levels of sensitivity), Allen stepped into the gap to provide additional patronage.
In 2007, MIT announced a gift of $100M from David H. Koch, an alumnus with degrees
in chemical engineering.7 Half of the gift would form the funding base to construct the modern
David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, replacing (and renaming) the well
established MIT Center for Cancer Research (founded in 1969). The remainder of the money
was pledged to support research projects. While building on existing strengths at MIT in
understanding the basic processes of cancer biology, the aims of the Koch Institute gift followed
the impetus of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) towards supporting more applied, interdisciplinary approaches to cancer, as impatience spread among the general public about the
seemingly slow pace of cancer research (Groopman 2001). Although it was not funding clinical
work per se, the new Koch Institute was envisioned as having a network of relationships to the
surrounding medical schools and hospitals in the Boston area. The vision was underpinned by
considerable government funding; its designation as a National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer
center entitled it to core funding from NCI for shared laboratory facilities, and it received other
long-term NCI Grants. Faculty in the Koch Institute also had support from over 100 grants from
the NIH and NCI and a number of foundations, including the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
While closely following shifting Federal priorities in terms of the type and direction of research
activities, David Koch’s funding enabled the creation of a novel organizational design on
campus: the Institute housed both biology and engineering faculty – 40 labs in total -- to
facilitate interdisciplinary research.
The core thesis of this essay is that science’s modern day patrons play a unique,
significant and under-appreciated role in U.S. scientific competitiveness. Compared to
6

See http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110727/full/475442a.html
Much of this information is drawn from MIT Reports to the President 2007-2008: The David H. Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research at MIT. Accessed from http://web.mit.edu/annualreports/pres08/2008.06.10.pdf
7

3

government funding, however, whose purpose is broadly understood, and industrial funding
sources, which usually drives near term applications, the distribution of today’s philanthropic
funding cannot easily be theorized. While the historic role of science patronage in the U.S.
established (rather than followed) the norms and institutions for funding basic research at a
time when government only supported applied research (e.g. geological and coastal surveys
etc.), science philanthropists today make a richer set of choices about their funding. The two
gifts described above exemplify the different ways in which philanthropy supports U.S. science,
engineering and medicine today: the Allen/ Myhrvold gift focused on fundamental (and
controversial) research where government funds are limited and no industry support is likely to
be forthcoming, while the Koch gift funded an area with extremely high levels of government
and industry support and an established track record of research excellence. This suggests that
philanthropic dollars can be allocated along two dimensions: the first dimension maps the
research continuum from more fundamental to immediately translatable types of projects (for
any discipline). The second emphasizes where philanthropy is guided relative to perceptions of
overall levels of (government and industry) funding (for disciplines, institutions or overall).
To support this framework and fill the lacuna of systematic data, this essay uses a range
of quantitative and qualitative data sources to build up a coherent picture of the contribution of
science philanthropy to the leading U.S. research universities. The data come from four
sources: The National Science Foundation’s Science and Engineering Statistics, the Council for
Aid to Education’s Voluntary Support of Education (VSE) survey on gifts to universities, the
Foundation Center’s grantmakers database of individual foundation grants to universities
(derived from examining the tax returns of private foundations, which annually list key grants),
and the Chronicle of Philanthropy’s database of major individual gifts. From this we gain
insights into the overall levels of science philanthropy, and we address three unanswered
questions: what is the level of science philanthropy (relative to other funding sources), does
philanthropy provide funding mainly for fundamental research or for more mission-oriented
projects, and does it serve to fill gaps in public (or private) resources or to supplement wellfunded areas of research?

Using the framework as an organizing approach, the paper then

examines the patterns of philanthropy along two dimensions: Relative to Federal funding by
university and field and across the fundamental to translational continuum.
The empirical evidence of significant science philanthropy, particularly its high
concentration in areas of applied medical research and in a small number of schools, provides
4

the basis for a discussion of how Federal innovation policy could and should respond to
modern science philanthropy. By exploring the level and distribution of philanthropic
funding, it is possible to better understand whether Federal funding choices should be made in
the shadow of philanthropy. Should the availability of philanthropic capital in particular areas of
research or particular schools lead the Federal government to reallocate resources? These are
choices that must concern policymakers as they seek to optimize the allocative efficiency of
Federal funding. Moreover, the ultra-wealthy have the potential for influencing the path of U.S.
scientific, engineering and medical innovation and shaping agendas that were traditionally
considered to be the purview of government or scientists themselves. This challenges
policymakers as they consider how to balance the direction of research for the nation as a
whole compared to directions spurred by a few wealthy individuals, whose research preferences
may be highly idiosyncratic or not well matched with broader social goals.
The remainder of the essay proceeds as follows: Section II outlines the conceptual
framework within which to consider science philanthropy. Section III places contemporary
science philanthropy within its historical context by providing a brief overview of the traditions
of U.S. science patronage. It then outlines the modern legal context, emphasizing the (U.S.specific) rules and definitions that structure the legal scope of charitable giving to universities,
the role of individual versus not-for-profit foundation giving, and the rules within universities
regarding how philanthropic interests are be matched to research. Section IV provides detailed
empirical analysis of modern science philanthropy, while Section V concludes with a discussion
of policy implications.

II.

A Framework for Modern Science Philanthropy
The allocation of funding to university research can be considered along two critical

dimensions (see Figure 1). First and foremost is the traditional distinction between
fundamental research and research more clearly focused on translation of knowledge to solve
immediate and clearly defined problems. While Stokes highlights the fact that much research
considers both dimensions (1997), for the purposes of explicating a simple framework for
understanding science philanthropy it is appropriate to posit a simple continuum from earlystage projects that initiate research lines to those later stages that move ideas and projects
towards proof of concept and translation (see Aghion, Dewatripont and Stein 2008). A second
5

dimension salient to this analysis is the degree to which philanthropic funding of research
follows (or lags behind) high levels of non-philanthropic support, or whether it serves to lead
and highlight funding gaps. In other words, to what extent do today’s philanthropists fund
projects in areas with high levels of current funding – leading to a dynamic in which the wealth
elite enable the rich fields, universities and individuals to get richer, or whether philanthropists
explicitly step in to fill funding ‘gaps’ in particular disciplines or schools.

Level of Existing Funding

Research Continuum

Fundamental

Translational

HIGH

Howard Hughes
Patron extending
well-funded
knowledge
foundations

Milken
Mission-driven patron
amplifying existing
funding to accelerate
outcomes

LOW

Medici & Myhrvold
Patron filling gaps in
knowledge
foundations

Gates
Mission-driven patron
identifying critical
gaps in translation

Figure 1: Typology of Approaches to Science Philanthropy
The relationship between philanthropic contributions to a particular research area and
the existing state of funding highlights a long-term issue in the economics of science.
Specifically, it raises the traditional question of the ways in which one source of funding
(typically government-appropriated funds) crowds out other funding sources, such as funding
from industry, or whether instead government funding is a complement that drives the
contribution of additional money (for a thorough review see David, Hall and Toole 2000) - a
question notoriously difficult to assess effectively. Nonetheless, at least since Vannevar Bush’s
1945 “endless frontier” philosophy it has been seen as the responsibility of the Federal
government for funding the most fundamental research projects (within universities) on the
basis that industry will likely fund more applied, immediately useful and translational projects
where the link between funding and outcome is more certain and is easily specified (Arrow
6

1962). Placed in the context of philanthropic funding, this simple dichotomy ignores the
significant role of what David has referred to as other “differentiated institutions supporting and
shaping the conduct of scientific research” (David 2007, p. 2) – from scientists themselves, to
their patrons, scientific societies and universities. Most strikingly, scholars have failed to
document even the broad contours of the relationships between government (and industry)
funding on the one hand and philanthropic funding for research on the other.
Taken together these two dimensions suggest the existence of at least four distinctive
approaches to philanthropy. First and foremost is the traditional approach taken by historic
philanthropists such as Cosimo d’ Medici in the Renaissance: recognizing the importance of
fundamental intellectual enquiry and the ornamental power of individuals such as Galileo in his
court, powerful patrons such as Medici and others supported their “client savant” to pursue
fundamental new ideas (see David 2008 for more analysis of this period and Biagioli 2002).
Today, such patrons include Paul Allen’s support of SETI and Nathan Myhrvold’s extensive
support for underfunded areas such as paleontology.8 Myhrvold’s approach is clearly stated
when he argues that “Giving to the usual suspects has little impact”.9 The opposite extreme is
closely associated with the recent rise in funding for specific diseases by wealthy individuals and
their foundations such as Milken, who provide significant funding for translational research in
certain focused disease areas. While these types of funds certainly allow their recipients to
pursue new projects, they reinforce the high levels of government and industry support for
important diseases. However, in some cases, through novel funding mechanisms, they may
support distinctive organizational approaches to the same research areas.
A similar approach to reinforcing philanthropy in fundamental rather than translational
research has traditionally been pursued by the Howard Hughes Foundation (among others):
by providing unrestricted funding for fundamental biological research to promising young
scholars, these approaches reinforce government support (mainly through the NIH) of
foundational life science projects. Again, their unusual funding approach provides an important
point of distinction to the more traditional, investigator-driven grant making process (see
Azoulay, Graff-Zivin and Manso 2010). The fourth philanthropic model for research funding is
8
It is worth noting that Medici and other Renaissance philanthropists also asked those under their patronage to
engage in more useful activities including military technology, navigation devices, irrigation methods and maps.
9 It should be noted that Myhrvold is a highly unusual and active scientific patron- not only does he fund research
into dinosaur palaeontology, but he is also an active researcher: In 2000 he had a paper published in Nature on his
co-discovery of a bird-like tail bone from a non-avian dinosaur in Mongolia.

7

best exemplified by the extensive Gates Foundation funding provided in the area of malaria
research. While governments and other sources had provided low levels of funds, the Gates
funding explicitly and dramatically transformed the overall level of support in malaria research;
it clearly emphasized impact-oriented, translational research that would identify and fill
knowledge gaps in order to rapidly advance the field. The recent contributions of philanthropic
funds to human embryonic stem cell research in the absence of Federal funding, particularly by
those with specific disease-related interests, provides another contemporary example of Gateslike approaches to science philanthropy.
In the contemporary university, funding supports opportunities across the fundamentaltranslational continuum. To generalize, industry-derived funds support translational projects,
while (in the post-WWII era) scientists rely on the Federal government for fundamental
research support. Current science philanthropy, as outlined in the framework, provides
support across the research spectrum, although at levels significantly lower than overall Federal
funding. Patrons fill gaps where other sources are limited or alternatively contribute additional
funds in already well “provisioned” areas. The modern contours of philanthropy are shaped by
historical traditions of science philanthropy in the United States starting as early as 1850 and by
the contemporary legal context that structures giving to not-for-profit organizations including
research universities.

III. Context for Science Philanthropy
Historical Origins
Researchers have historically relied on charitable private patronage to a much greater
extent and with greater focus on fundamental research than today. The origins of science
philanthropy lies with princely Renaissance patrons, whose “client-savants” pursued their
interests in scientific progress in return for useful and ornamental service to the courts (David
2008, Biagioli 1989, Westfall 1985, Feingold 1984). For scientists in the United States, external
funding of any kind only developed in the mid 1800s. Compared to their European
counterparts, who by this time had strong and stable state – national - patronage), American

8

scholars lacked “a bounty for research”10 ; they often returned from training in Europe, only to
be discouraged by the lack of equipment and research support.11
Initial funding for U.S. researchers did not come from state patronage. Instead, they
were reliant upon the patronage of the commercial-industrial elite. In approaching their
prospective patrons, scientists hoped to persuade them that to subsidize science was to
undertake an act of patriotism enabling the U.S. to overtake their European counterparts in
science at a time when legislators had little interest in supporting new discoveries. 12 They also
linked to emerging American traditions of fundraising, which was remarked upon by de
Tocqueville. Conceptually, therefore, the early U.S. patrons served as nineteenth century
Medici, funding fundamental studies in astronomy, chemistry and biology. The government
reserved its funds for translational research of immediate value, such as coastal and geological
surveys whose outcome contributed directly to national industrial prosperity.
A critical starting point for science patronage in the United States was a bequest from
English gentleman-chemist James Smithson in 1820 to “found at Washington....an
Establishment for the increase and diffusion of knowledge”13. John Quincy Adams (in a move
that would closely reflect the norm for many bequests and foundations a century later)
proposed that the capital remain intact, with 6% of the income used for operations. He was
also a strong proponent of using the money for original investigations, conceiving the
“Smithsonian” as a research institution. In 1846, Joseph Henry (a professor of physical
sciences at Princeton) became the secretary, supporting research in areas from the physical
sciences to anthropology and regularly voicing his views over the importance of fundamental
enquiries. He also recognized a few critical gaps in the government’s support of applied
activities, funding an extensive system for meteorological observations.
Science patronage in the U.S. expanded as scientists became highly creative
entrepreneurs, building support for their research wherever and on whatever basis they could.
Given the intimate relationship between the study of the heavens and interest in theology, it is

10

Alexander Dallas Bache “On the Condition of Science in Europe and the United States”, available in the
Smithsonian Institution Archives, cited in Miller, ibid.
11
This part of the historical analysis draws heavily on Miller ibid; one of the few texts on scientific support during this
period of U.S. history.
12
Miller, Howard S. Dollars for Research: Science and Its Patrons in Nineteenth-Century America. Seattle: University
of Washington Press, 1970. Print.
13
Taken from J. Rhees, ed., The Smithsonian Institution, Documents Relative to its Origin and History, 1835-1899.

9

not surprising that much of the early patronage in the United States came through the support
of telescopes and observatories. The arrival of several comets in the Boston skies in 1843
provided an opportunity to gather public interest and raise funds for scientific equipment at
Harvard, sparking a public meeting to “consider the felt want in this community of a Telescope”.
While observatories remained popular philanthropic objects, Medici-like support also went to
research artefacts in other areas of fundamental scholarship, including a place to maintain the
specimens used by the charismatic and prominent palaeontologist and geologist, Louis Agassiz.
Agassiz was lured to Harvard from Europe with a guarantee of his salary -- not from Harvard
but from industrialist Abbott Lawrence.
By the 1880s, scientists realized the need for more stable support of research. Edward
Pickering, director of Harvard’s Observatory, sought to build an endowment whose income
might support ongoing research. At first, few patrons were interested in such a scheme;
lacking in ornamental promise or even clear practical application. Instead, wealthy self-made
men of commerce preferred to build more and greater observatories. (A few wealthy patrons
did show “Gates-like” sympathies, emphasizing the practical utility of astronomy in navigation
and insurance premiums). By the end of the century, with the support of an elite circle of
wealthy manufacturers and industrialists, endowments slowly grew sizable enough to provide
annual grants for fundamental research (based on decisions made by members of the
academies). This laid the basis for endowment-based research funding and the tradition of
grant-making familiar to us today; however, it remained small in scale, while government
continued to be focused only on translational projects.
Deeper funding support arrived at the start of the twentieth century with an
organizational shift that shapes science philanthropy to this day: the emergence of the
professionally managed “foundation” devoted to funding science (among other activities). For
example, the Carnegie Institute of Washington’s $22M endowment funded the “exceptional
men” of science with the goal, as Andrew Carnegie put it, to “change our position among
Nations” in science .14 In doing so, the Institute selected fundamental research areas with little
or no government funding: geophysics, geomagnetism, plant biology and embryology as well as
support for several observatories.15 By 1925, at least a dozen large foundations sponsored
14

Andrew Carnegie was a Scottish-American industrialist, businessman, and entrepreneur who led the enormous
expansion of the American steel industry in the late 19th century.
15
Nielsen, Waldemar A. The Golden Donors. New York: Truman Talley Books, 1985. Print.

10

academic research on a large scale: between 1918 and 1925, the Rockefeller Foundation via the
General Education Board invested $20 million in astronomy, physics, chemistry, and biology.16
Growing philanthropic largess was not adequate for university scientists to build
consistent, broad-based support for fundamental science.17 However, it was only with the
incursions of government into science during the First and Second World Wars that more stable,
Federal funds for U.S. science became a reality. Leading scientists used the aftermath of WWII
to put government funding on a large and more stable footing with a fundamental orientation.
In 1945 Dr. L.C. Dunn, Professor of Zoology at Columbia University argued:
The war ... brought into high relief an important fact which has been dimly recognized
for many years: there has been in the United States no orderly means for the continuous support
of fundamental scientific research, and no policy or method for the deliberate utilization of
science by our society. Science has been a hardy plant which grew where and how it could,
thriving in the comfortable greenhouse of a research institute, or turning ample fertilizer into real
fruit in an industrial laboratory, or in the more usual case struggling for sustenance in the thin
soil of colleges and universities, occasionally enriched by temporary growth stimulants from a
foundation or private donor. Except in the case of certain industrial developments and in a few
government departments, the support of science in the United States has not been the result of
decision but of chance, operating in a milieu [that] contained good scientists and a good deal of
fluid wealth.18

Vannevar Bush sounded a similar note when he presented his call for government support of
fundamental research in Science, The Endless Frontier, his report to the President.19 These
sentiments laid the groundwork for a funding landscape that creates the funding context
today’s scientists and for modern science philanthropists. With the 1950 passage of the
National Science Foundation Act, whose stated mission was "to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and to secure the national
defense," government funding was established to support fundamental research. In addition,
other specialized agencies with a remit to support translational research had budget growth
including the National Institutes of Health (medical research), the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission (nuclear and particle physics) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

16

Ibid (Kohler)
Kohler, Robert E. "Philanthropy and Science." Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society Mar. 1985: 9-13.
JSTOR. Web. 1 Nov. 2011. http://www.jstor.org/pss/986975.
18
Organization and Support of Science in the United States. Dunn. Science 30 November 1945: 548-554.
DOI:10.1126/science.102.2657.548
19
United States. Office of Scientific Research and Development. and Bush, Vannevar, Science, the endless frontier.
A report to the President by Vannevar Bush, director of the Office of scientific research and development. July 1945
U.S. Govt. print. off., Washington, 1945.
17

11

(DARPA). Together these agencies provide the strong Federal support for university research
across the fundamental to practical continuum that continues today (see Gans and Murray
2012).
It is against the historic backdrop of science philanthropy in the U.S. and the
contemporary Federal funding for research that science patrons provide their support to U.S.
research universities in the twenty first century. While U.S. philanthropic traditions in science
patronage emphasized fundamental enquiries in astronomy and biology, the complex interests
of patrons in both fundamental and translational issues suggest that scientists can (and do) find
patrons willing to fund projects across the research continuum. Moreover, with the expansion
of governmental support, even patrons following in the footsteps of Medici or Smithson find it
difficult to support only philanthropic projects in areas with explicit and obvious gaps; thus they
also move into areas crowded with other funding sources.

Legal Context
The precise ways in which patrons fund university researchers are structured by the
modern legal context of philanthropy broadly and by the ways in which universities have
structured their own internal response to philanthropic research contributions. Since the 1960s,
science patrons have also been guided by a set of legal rules that tightly shape the incentives,
boundaries and contracts of their giving. The tax incentives for philanthropy encompass giving
to many different organizations pursuing a range of social purposes: religious, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational purposes. Nonetheless, these rules, coupled with the legal
and institutional rules guiding universities, intimately shape science philanthropy.
The legal foundations of American philanthropy can be traced to the English Statute of
Charitable Uses, enacted in 1601 to provide a mechanism to make trustees accountable for the
appropriate administration of charitable assets, which in turn would encourage increased private
charity for the relief of poverty.20 Certain charitable beneficiaries were favored and others
disadvantaged to promote and focus private sector resources for public problems, an approach
ultimately adopted in the United States through individual tax incentives to philanthropists.21

20

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1486
See A History of Philanthropic Foundations, Randal Givens, http://grantprofessionals.org/professionaldevelopment/journal/journal-articles-past-articles/77-gpa/267-a-history-of-philanthropic-foundations
21

12

For the purposes of this essay it is useful to understand the legal context for U.S.
science philanthropy as providing rules both for the “patron” i.e. the donor of wealth, and for
the “client organization” i.e. the recipient of such contributions who in turn carry out the
charitable work (particularly given that for the purposes of scientific progress, patrons are
generally giving indirectly to the “client savant” via a university).
The legal arrangements shaping the tax treatment of patron -- the wealthy with money
to contribute to charitable client -- were defined in 1917, only four years after Federal income
tax was first imposed. With the Federal rate raised to 77%, the individual income tax deduction
for charitable donations was intended to encourage taxpayers’ donations to charitable (taxexempt) entities (Wallace and Fisher 1977).2223 In 1936, the federal government further
expanded the universe of possible patrons by permitting corporations to deduct charitable
donations from income. The legal framework for the “client” has a longer history and focuses
on the definition and scope of organizations whose purpose allow them, under a provision in
the 1894 Revenue Act (later formally ratified in the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution in 1913), to be tax exempt.24 These client organizations (typically referred to as
charities) are defined in the U.S. code as organizations with charitable, religious, or educational
purposes as exempt from Federal income tax.25 Research-based organizations including
universities are included at clients least in part because contributions to science are assumed to
have a public purpose: increasing the level of knowledge and the speed of technological
progress.
In 1969, the government turned its attention to another organization engaged in
charitable giving: the private foundations: organizations first established by the first great

22

It is use to outline the calculus of charitable giving under this regime: The deduction subsidizes giving by lowering
the price that people must pay privately to support charitable organizations. A charitable contribution of one dollar
that is deducted from taxable income lowers the donor’s tax bill and thus decreases the price to less than a dollar.
For example, if a donor’s marginal tax rate is 30 percent, a deductible one-dollar cash gift to charity will reduce the
donor’s taxes by 30 cents, so the price of the gift to the donor will only be 70 cents.
23
Types of deductible contributions include cash, financial assets, and other noncash property such as real estate,
clothing, and artwork. http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxtopics/encyclopedia/Charitable-Deductions.cfm
24
In 1874 the Massachusetts charities statute extended property tax exemptions to any “educational, charitable,
benevolent or religious purpose” including “any antiquarian, historical, literary, scientific, medical, artistic,
monumental or musical” purpose; to “any missionary enterprise.”
25
See 26 USC § 501 - Exemption from tax on corporations, certain trusts, etc. including any organization “operated
exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster
national or international amateur sports competition (but only if no part of its activities involve the provision of
athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of
which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.” (i.e. 501(c)3).

13

American industrialists to formalize their philanthropy. As Rockefeller described, they were
intended to “make it a life work to manage, with our cooperation, this business of benevolence
properly and effectively.”

2627

Rather than act directly as “client” carrying out charitable

activities, today they are tax-exempt, non-operating vehicles that give to other organizations
consistent with the foundation’s charitable mission, while their tax exempt status allows patrons
to transfer assets on a tax deductable basis.
Until the mid-1960s, U.S. foundations had operated on an ad hoc basis but their public
standing was reaching a low point; far from altruistic change agents, it appeared that wealthy
families often formed foundations only to avoid paying taxes. Patrons’ reluctance to discuss
their activities made private foundations “symbols of secret wealth which mysteriously used the
levers of power to promote obscure, devious, and even sinister purposes” (Commission on
Foundations and Private Philanthropy). Government intervention followed: US Congressman
Wright Patman instigated a Senate Finance Committee hearing.28 The 1969 Tax Reform Act
established elaborate rules including the “lessening of interlocking relationships among
foundations, donor companies, and donor families” and gave the Tax Exempt & Government
Entities Division of the IRS authority to police all private foundation activities.29 Their status is
derived Section 501(c)3 defining tax exempt organizations, but with a clear understanding that
by not soliciting the public for funds they are private foundations rather than public charities
(who generally derive their funding primarily from the general public, receiving grants from
individuals, government, and private foundations and few undertake grant making activities
(although in science philanthropy public charities such as the Juvenile Diabetes Research
Foundation does give grants (and is a charity inspire of its name!).30 Importantly, while all

26

Cite speech to University of Chicago 1899
In a 1909 decision, the $100M Rockefeller Foundation became one of the first formal tax-exempt foundations in
the U.S., granted a (New York) state charter for activities combining grant making & charitable involvement.
28
Examples of his accusations include: 1) overvaluing property contributed to foundations, 2) falsely claiming gifts
never made to foundations, 3) no reporting of self-dealing, 4) speculative investments made by foundations without
downside risk, 5) excessive expenses made by foundations administration, and 6) foundations influencing the
outcomes of elections with tax-shielded dollars.
29
Nielson, W.A., 1985. The Golden Donors: a New Anatomy of the Great Foundations First. E.P. Dutton, eds. New
York, NY: Truman Talley Books.
30
A private foundation is a nonprofit organization having a principal fund managed by its own trustees. Every U.S.
and foreign charity that qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Service Code as tax-exempt is a
"private foundation" unless it demonstrates that it falls into another category. A private foundation usually derives its
principal fund from a single source - individual, family, or corporation. http://www.grantspace.org/Tools/KnowledgeBase/Funding-Resources/Foundations/Private-foundations-vs-public-charities
27

14

charitable organizations are expected to permanently dedicate their assets to charitable
purposes, private foundations must distribute 4% of the foundation’s income annually.
Against this legal backdrop, a patron of science hoping to contribute to research
undertaken in a university has two well-defined of paths to using their funds for science
philanthropy: The first is to make a direct, tax deductable contribution to the university, the
second is to make a tax deductable contribution to a private (individual or family foundation)
and then have the foundation contribute to the university. While similar in outcome, these two
paths are traced separately by universities themselves, listed differently in tax documentation
(foundation contributions are listed in their 990 tax filings), and thus must be accessed through
distinctive data sources. As the client acting on behalf of individual researchers, the university
also has significant leeway to shape the ways in which gifts for research are controlled and
structured. Over time, a variety of distinctive channels have arisen for contributions:
1. Contributions to capital in the form of buildings; these can be expressly
designed and designated for research; for example, much of the Koch Institute
gift was earmarked for building new laboratories.
2. Contributions to capital in the form of endowment; the most widespread mode of
giving to many universities, endowment gifts build the underlying wealth of the
university and generally only the income on the endowment is spent. These
contributions can be designated for research via funding of faculty (i.e. Endowed
chairs), for research grants or for broad departmental support.
3. Contributions to so called “current operations,” which generally flow to
supporting yearly activities on campus. These can be designated for research,
either for specific projects or for the use of particular faculty in the form of
research projects or more unrestricted gifts.
While individuals are free to make use of all three categories, they most commonly
support research through the first two types of giving. For example in 2002, successful
entrepreneur “Desh” Deshpande gave MIT gift to create a center that would enhance
translational research opportunities for MIT faculty. Structured to support the running of the
center as well as so-called “proof of concept” research grants (that might otherwise not receive
government funding – being too applied in nature), much of the gift provided (designated)
endowment. Other more traditional individual approaches to science philanthropy include
15

endowed chairs in particular research fields. In pursuing either approach, individuals can
contribute directly or use their private foundation as the vehicle for the gift. This has a number
of advantages; the foundation allows the patron time to make decisions regarding charitable
contributions and can employ staff to assist the patron in selecting particular scientific areas
and defining the landscape of possible funding opportunities. It is more common for large-scale
foundations (particularly those with a professional staff engaged in grant making) to use the
third approach and structure their philanthropy in the form of research grants made to current
operations. Such grant-making activity typically (although not always) requires a large and
expert staff to sort through grant applicants and make choices. Moreover, grants tend to be
more structured and focused on narrow programmatic activities.
Taking into consideration the different ways in which science patronage can come into
the university from the patron, for internal purposes universities as clients often distinguish
between gifts and grants (see Table 1). This often has important implications for the internal
control over the funds and the broader organizational context in which the money is solicited:
Gifts are generally managed through so-called Resource Development offices who work to
cultivate the interests and altruism of wealth individuals. Grants from professional foundations
are often managed through similar channels as government or industry grants, although
universities have increasingly put in place mechanisms to manage foundation relationships.
Insert Table 1 about here
In fact, no legal designation between gifts and grants exists within the tax code. From the
perspective of universities, philanthropy must be received so as not imperil their charitable
status. This means providing clarity over the degree of control and oversight – specifically the
lack thereof – allowed the patron. In general, gifts offer little control for the patron except for
the initial designation of the uses to which the gift can be placed, reflecting a limited sense of
exchange i.e., gifts provide no formal or documented “benefits” to the patron and simply serve
to reflect the creation of public goods and private benefits in the form of altruism,
ornamentation or social capital. On the other hand, grants are more transactional and are
meant to provide explicit scientific outputs in return for the grant.
Favourable tax structures for philanthropy, together with a tradition of philanthropy
providing of public goods with private wealth, have led the United States to boast the most
robust charitable sector in the world. Researchers in universities have benefitted from this
16

context more than any other nation, and can turn to science philanthropy for projects,
equipment and infrastructure across the fundamental to translational spectrum of projects and
in well funded and somewhat overlooked field. Casual empiricism on campus suggests that this
philanthropic landscape is more robust than ever and has grown in significant in the past
several decades. To the extent that such observations are grounded in systematic empirical
evidence, they suggest that public policymakers should seriously assess the magnitude and
distribution of philanthropic funds as they make their own funding allocation decisions. In what
follows, this paper provides the first systematic evidence of science philanthropy as a set
towards informing policy decision-making.

IV.

Evaluating Trends in Science Philanthropy
Giving to tax-exempt organizations totalled almost $290 billion in 2010, with over 1.6

million tax-exempt organizations as the recipients (of which 1 million are public charities,
including universities and colleges. 31 The greatest portion of charitable giving, $211.77 billion,
was given by individuals -- 73 percent of all contributed dollars (charitable bequests make up
another 8 percent and corporate giving another 5%). After individual giving, private foundations
are the next largest contributors, giving over $40 billion annually on an asset vase of about
$620Billion (see Figures 1a & 1b for details on levels of Foundation giving and assets over the
past decade). 32 Around $45Billion of the $290 Billion in philanthropy went to educational
purposes in 2010, of which about $32B went to higher education. The Top 50 researchoriented PhD granting universities received about $11Billion of this total each year to support
both research and educational missions.
<Insert Figures 1a and 1b about here>
Science philanthropy is only a small fraction of all charitable giving and is not explicitly
tracked by any of the philanthropy-oriented data sources. This analysis provides the first
serious estimate of the philanthropic contribution to major U.S. research universities, focusing
specifically on the top 50 universities (by overall R&D expenditures). In total, the data suggest
that science patrons actively contribute around $4Billion each year for current

31

Charitable Giving and Universities and Colleges: Internal Revenue Code Section 170. Association of American
Universities. May 2011. Web. 16 Nov. 2011. http://www.aau.edu/WorkArea.
32
Figure derived from Giving USA.

17

research, endowment or buildings devoted to science, engineering and medicine (to
the Top 50 universities). In other words, 36% of the $11Bn in philanthropy to these top
research organizations is restricted specifically for research!! In magnitude, this is a lower
bound estimate as it excludes all universities below the Top 50, as well as giving for research,
endowment and buildings at advanced medical centers, whose research is reported separately
from the affiliated university (i.e. Harvard Medical School is included in the data but the
Massachusetts General Hospital is not). As previewed by the discussion of the legal context,
giving comes from two sources – private foundations’ grant making and individual giving.
According to data compiled for this project from the Foundation Center, private
foundations contribute around $2Billion of the $4B through grant-making to the Top 50 U.S.
research universities (although this data fluctuates with endowment earnings – see Figure 2).
<Insert Figure 2 about here>
This accords with an estimate in Science magazine that 5% of grant volume from the nation’s
private foundations goes to science and engineering (in other words around $2 Billion in 2010),
although some put this figure closer to 10% - with the rise in very large foundations such as
the Gates Foundation, which have a strong orientation towards medicine). Although large in
magnitude, a 1999 survey of the 8,000 foundations in the Foundation Directory suggests that
foundations giving to science and engineering are highly concentrated – only about 300 have a
primary interest in science and engineering.33 Considering grants of more than $50Million, ten
of the top 50 (in the past decade) were directed to building the research capabilities of specific
universities. Others also contributed (indirectly) to universities e.g., grants to the Global Health
Initiative and the Medicines for Malaria Venture.34
Individual contributions to research at leading U.S. universities made up the remaining
$2Billion per year over the past decade (see Figure 2).

Although data is less systematic,

analysis of major gifts (over $1M) listed by the Chronicle of Philanthropy suggests that gifts to
Top 50 universities amounted to more than $23BN in the period 2005 to 2011 i.e. $3Billion a
year. Of this amount, gifts to university science, engineering and medicine constituted about
50% - approximately $1.5-$2Billion per year (see Figure 2b for data over the decade).35

33

http://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/topic/excellence_in_philanthropy/the_scale_of_private_support_for_science
This data is from The Foundation Center Statistics Information Service table on Grants of > $50M (1973-2010).
35
Statistics compiled from the Chronicle of Philanthropy database on major (over $1M) individual gifts.
34

18

Science Patrons’ Funding in the University Context
Science philanthropy is a simple concept to describe and appreciate, but tracing its flow
from its sources into the university and then into laboratory expenditures requires more careful
accounting and the triangulation of data from a variety of sources. The overall flows are
illustrated in Figure 3.
<Insert Figure 3 about here>
In the first stage, as noted above, science philanthropy comes from individuals in the
form of gifts and private foundations (typically in the form of grants) – data that can only be
gleaned from tax statements or press announcements.
The second stage is to account for the funds as they enter the university. From the
perspective of a major research university, according to the Council on Aid to Education (CAE) 36
Voluntary Support of Education (VSE) Survey, philanthropic giving is allocated in terms of
contributions to three categories - current operations, capital for endowment and capital for
buildings.37 For the purposes of this analysis, I define science philanthropy as philanthropic
giving whose purpose is explicitly restricted to research i.e. dedicated to pursuing the
knowledge frontier. Again, three elements are considered: current operations funding restricted
to research (which is dominated by foundation giving), endowment funding restricted to science
(e.g. restricted to support academic divisions, faculty and research) and building support (of
which I assume that 50% goes to research buildings -- an estimate guided by CoP data).
CAE data suggest that annual science philanthropy amounts to $85M per Top 50
university (broken down into $45 M for current research operations, around $20 M in capital to
research-related buildings and at least $20 M in annual contributions to research endowment expanding the research-restricted endowment at about 2% annually). However, this varies
across universities. The Top10 receive a much higher fraction of their philanthropic gifts in the
form of science patronage. For them, over 40% is science philanthropy explicitly directed
towards research related activities. As they receive more than $269M annually in philanthropy,
this provides them with over $108M annually in science philanthropy alone.

36

The Council for Aid to Education (CAE) is a nonprofit established in 1952 for policy research on higher education. It
is a key source of data on private giving to education through the Voluntary Support of Education (VSE) survey.
37
While the VSE does not explicitly categorize research-restricted giving over all, it has various measures that I use
to isolate science philanthropy from more general philanthropic support of higher education.

19

The third stage for tracing movement of philanthropic capital into research is to examine
how it flows into research funding. In addition to determining how it contributes to developing
the research infrastructure and buildings that characterize the modern American university
campus today, science philanthropy can be traced to documented annual research expenditures
by examining two clear categories tracked by the National Science Foundation:


“Institutional” funds are defined by the NSF to encompass (1) institutionally financed
research expenditures and (2) unrecovered indirect costs and cost sharing. A close
analysis of university philanthropy suggests that this in part derives from individual
gifts for current operations coming into the university from restricted to research
purposes. It is also the case that institutional funds may sometimes be taken from
the endowment for research– typically from gifts that have been designated as being
strictly for research activities (around $4Billion a year).



“Other” funds are defined by the NSF as including, but not limited to, grants and
contracts for R&D from nonprofit organizations and voluntary health agencies. It
can be thought of as grants largely made through Foundations for specific research
projects (as described above) (around $2Billion a year).

In aggregate, contributions to university R&D from science philanthropy constitute
$6Billion of the costs of annual research expenditures for the Top 50 research
universities when considered to be the sum of NSF designated categories – Institutional funds
and Other funds. Of the $6B total, around $2Billion is passed through directly from private
foundation giving to universities designated for current research operations (and defined as
“Other” by the NSF) while the additional $4Billion is the amount that universities contribute to
research from their own funds (either from individual gifts or income from restricted
endowment etc). Thus, when combined with the additional $1Billion contributed towards
buildings, science philanthropy contributes over $7Billion each year to U.S. research in science
engineering and medicine (outside the academic medical centers).

Science Philanthropy versus Federal Funding
How important is science philanthropy relative to the large amount of government
funding for university science and engineering research and compared to the much-discussed
contributions from industry? To address this question we have compiled statistics on the
contribution of philanthropy to scientific research at leading U.S. universities in the past decade,
20

focusing on the top 50 research universities in the United States (henceforth referred to as

Top50 or as Top10 and Top10-50 respectively when universities ranked in the top 10 or 10 to
50 only are analyzed separately) - as defined by the National Science Foundation on the basis
of their total annual level of science and engineering R&D spending.
In the past decade, the combined R&D expenditures of U.S. universities grew to over
$50Billion a year in 2009 (in 2009 dollars). In real terms this means about a fourfold increase
from 1972 (when spending was only $2Billion in total), with a particularly sharp increase in the
late 1990s to the end of 2009. From the perspective of an individual research university, the
decade 2000-2009 saw dramatic growth in university R&D expenditures from average R&D
expenditures of $47M in 2000 to $79M per university in 2009.38 The average statistics mask a
striking feature of this increase -- the divergence in resource levels for the top 50 university
recipients of R&D funding compared to all others (i.e. the remaining 900 of so universities).
Among the Top1039 S&E universities, average spending per university has increased to almost a
billion dollars a year for science and engineering R&D. (To put this into a global context, the
annual Singapore government R&D spending is $2BN - for all university and research centers in
the country!) The Top10-50 spend $480M, while the remaining universities have seen almost
no increase in real terms with expenditures of only $45M annually in 2009 (see Figure 4 for a
breakdown by different university type from 1970 to 2009).
<Insert Figure 4 about here>
R&D Expenditures in universities come from a wide range of sources. The National
Science Foundation considers five of these sources in its statistics: Federal, State, Industry,
Institutional and “Other”. Federal, together with State/Local funding, constitute traditional

public support of research. (State/Local funding responds to local research needs and to the
desire to support local, especially public universities, as examplied by the State of California’s
funding for the SETI telescope efforts). Industry funding is generally understood to be the
dominant private source that funds research in order to reap corporate benefits, while the
relationship between public and industry (private) funding is the focus on attention among

38

Research and development expenditures are defined as including all direct, indirect, incidental, or related costs
resulting from or necessary to performing R&D by private individuals and organizations under grant, contract, or
cooperative agreement.
39
Top10 include 1) Johns Hopkins University, University of Michigan, University of Wisconsin, University of California,
San Francisco, University of California, Los Angeles, University of California, San Diego, Duke University, University of
Washington, Pennsylvania State University and University of Minnesota.

21

observers of university research funding. The two final categories -- Institutional and Other -have not been closely examined. As noted above, they provide a useful lower bound estimate of
the contribution of science philanthropy to S&E research expenditures.
Taken together, Other and Institutional philanthropic funds provide almost 30% of
annual science and engineering expenditures in the nation’s leading universities. The
breakdown for the Top10-50 (Top10) in 2009 shows that after Federal funding at 59% (63%),
Institutional funds and Other (foundation) sources constitute 18% (17%) and 9% (10%) (see
Figures 5a and 5b). In aggregate terms this amounts to total contributions to the Top50 of
$15BN from the Federal government, Institutional funds of $4.3BN, Other (foundation) funds of
$2.4BN, Industry $1.7BN and states $1.5BN. It should also be noted that according to CAE
data, corporate funding in the form of (tax-exempt) giving has grown in significance. This is an
under-examined aspect of industry giving (as captured by the NSF categorization), suggesting
that current notions of industry funding as reflecting private benefits may overlook the
countervailing tax treatment of gifts and philanthropic contributions in kind.
<Insert Figures 5a & 5b and Figure 6a & 6b about here>
Dynamic trends are also notable; while totally decoupled from the national debate on
scientific competitiveness, and linked to individual rather than national views on the importance
of science, philanthropic funds have kept pace with the rapid increase in government funding
during the period from 2000 to 2009. (See Figure 6a & 6b). In particular, Institutional funds
(largely derived from individual giving and endowment income) have increased steadily from
12% in 1972 to 19% in 1991. They have remained at roughly that fraction since then.

Science Philanthropy across research fields
In this final section of the analysis, we emphasize how science philanthropy is allocated
across the two by two matrix outlined in the introductory sections of the paper. The horizontal
dimension captures where funding is allocated across the research line from fundamental to
translational. The vertical dimension captures allocations relative to Federal funding.
Science Philanthropy Across the Research Continuum: From an empirical
perspective, systematic data on the distribution of science philanthropy across different types of
research is more difficult to determine than overall levels of research support. To provide some
insights into allocation across scholarly research fields we examined data from the Chronicle of
22

Philanthropy covering major gifts. This data captures gifts of over $1M to all charities from
2005 onwards. From the data we extracted gifts to universities and then coded all those
focused on science according to the research field: fundamental fields included life sciences,
computer science, physical sciences (including mathematics) and social sciences, while
translational fields included medicine, engineering, and energy. A final category was used for
“interdisciplinary” gifts that covered research in a variety of fields. As noted earlier, between
2005 and 2011 total gifts over $1M to universities amounted to $23 Billion. Of this, over $19B
was given in gifts over $10M that could be categorized. The $19M was broken down into $9B
for non-research and 10B for science philanthropy (around $2Billion a year). (See Figure 7).
< Insert Figure 7 about here >
While annual ratios vary, an average of 70% is directed towards translational research in
medicine, engineering and (to a much lesser extent) energy. This figure underscores the
degree to which today’s science patrons act in the Milken and Gates “quadrants”, giving to
practical research focused on meeting specific needs and solving problems of personal interest.
In particular, medicine gathers an average of 53% of the translational philanthropy each year.
With regards to the 24% devoted to fundamental research, an average of 12% is given to life
sciences (a surprisingly small fraction, but one that reflects the greater appeal of medicine as a
context for philanthropy). The remaining 6% is focused on inter-disciplinary or cross-campus
research. Interestingly, 2011 saw three of the largest gifts to higher education in US history –
each one to support broad cross campus initiatives focused largely on bolstering the
foundations of research and education. Two of these gifts came from William S. Dietrich II,
who gave $225M to Carnegie Mellon University and $125 to the University of Pittsburgh (of
which he is an alumnus) in support of the College of Humanities and Social Sciences and
College of Arts and Sciences, respectively. They are among the top 10 gifts to higher education
in U.S. history. The third such gift was from David and Dana Dornsife: $200M to the University
of Southern California – an unrestricted gift to the College of Arts, Letters and Sciences.
Like individual giving, private foundations seem to provide a larger fraction of their
science patronage to translational research activities. To determine their allocation across the
continuum, we reanalyze data from the Foundation Center on grants from major foundations to
the Top 50 research universities. These data are gathered from the 990 Tax Filings of each of
the foundations and generally can only be gathered by year at the dyadic foundation-university
23

level; as a result, discipline-based coding is complex. To overcome this challenge, we rank the
top 10 foundations by cumulative funding over the period 2000-2009 to the Top 50 universities
– over $5Billion of the $20B total for the period. The leading foundations are listed in Table 2.
< Insert Table 2 about here >
As can be seen, while individual grants are likely to be for a wide range of activities, 7 of the 10
(including the Gates Foundation, which is the largest grant-maker to Top 50 universities at
three times the size of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation) focus on translational, mainly
medically-oriented research. Of course, notable exceptions exist, including the Andrew W.
Mellon and Annenberg Foundations, which focus on the arts, media and journalism.
Science Philanthropy Relative to Federal Funding: The distribution of
philanthropic gifts (and grants) contrasts sharply with Federal funding allocations to different
research areas. (See Table 3 for a detailed comparison of individual gifts versus Federal funding
to Top 50 universities by research discipline).
< Insert Table 3 about here >
These comparative statistics (which only illustrate that part of science philanthropy devoted to
major gifts over $10M designated to specific fields) emphasize the contemporary focus of
philanthropy away from fundamental fields and towards translational fields, both in absolute
terms and when compared to the Federal government – 73% versus 56%. In particular, the
data suggest a deepening emphasis of science patronage on medicine – with over 57% of large
individual gifts designated to medicine versus 35% for the distribution of Federal funding. This
number should be interpreted carefully because independent academic medical centers are not
included in the data. Interestingly, both the physical sciences and life sciences are
underrepresented compared to Federal funding levels (4% versus 14% for physical sciences
and 15% versus 26% for the life sciences). It should be noted that given the lack of
completeness of the philanthropic data encompassed by large gifts (compared to, for example,
Foundation grants), the relative allocation is more interesting than the fraction of overall
funding provided by philanthropy compared to Federal funding. However, the data suggest
that at least for fundamental research, philanthropists are not stepping in as modern Medici to
fill gaps left by the Federal government in areas such as physics or chemistry. Instead, patrons
follow and reemphasize patterns of translational funding that have come to increasingly
dominate (non-defence) government research allocations at leading research universities.
24

V.

Conclusions & Policy Implications

Conclusions – Challenges & Opportunities
Overall, the analysis of science philanthropy suggests a number of important patterns.
First, compared to the patrons of science who first supported the emergence and
professionalization of research in the United States in the mid- to late-eighteen hundreds, most
of today’s patrons generally work to supplement Federal funding across fields rather than filling
gaps where there is limited or no funding. In doing so, their actions are much more consistent
with the patterns developed by Hughes or, more recently, Milken than those of Medici or Gates.
A case in point is funding for the physical sciences, particularly mathematics, physics and
computer science; not only do these fields receive limited funding from the Federal
government, but compared to traditions of the past where philanthropists stepped in to fund
telescopes, mathematicians (see David 2008) and chemists, today such philanthropy is the
exception rather than the rule. There are of course some noted exceptions to this trend. For
example, in 2001 placed a hold on all funding of hESC proposals solicited by the NIH that had
been solicited by the prior administration based on a recent legal ruling on the legality of such
research projects.40 In August 2001, President Bush introduced his administration’s policy:41 It
offered federal support for hESC research, subject to significant limiting conditions on research
materials, but placed no restrictions on the use of private, philanthropic or state funding for
hESC research purposes.

In a clear gap from the researcher’s perspective, universities turned

to private philanthropists to secure what they saw as much-needed additional funding, and
funding with many fewer restrictions on their activities. Harvard research scientists turned to
wealthy individuals to provide philanthropic support for their research, creating the Harvard
Stem Cell Institute (HSCI), whose 2005 Annual Report argued that “we will need individuals to
fill the fiscal gap left by a government that views science through a political lens. And that
indeed provides a unique philanthropic opportunity.“42

They had already been supported by

science philanthropy of over $40M, including a $5 million commitment to launch HSCI by
40 This shift from prior NIH funding policies was based on an opinion provided by Harriett Rabb, then General
Counsel at the DHHS, to Harold Varmus as Director of the NIH, concluding that funding research that uses hESCs not
derived with federal funds would not violate the Dickey Amendment (Rabb, 1999; NIH, 1999).
41 The Bush policy was met with negative reactions from both the right and left of the political spectrum (Wertz,
2002) and substantial disappointment within the scientific community (Clark, 2001; McGinley and Regalado, 2002).
Proponents of hESC research argued that limitations on federal funding would inhibit scientific advances and retard
medical improvements (Wertz, 2002).
42 From “Harvard Stem Cell institute Annual Report 2005, page 20.

25

Howard and Stella Heffron in the form of a challenge grant that created the momentum to
reach $40 million in philanthropic support in less than two years.
Having established that science philanthropy generally follows Federal government
patterns across fields rather than looking for gaps (with notable exceptions), it is important to
understand the extent to which philanthropy is highly concentrated to a greater degree than
Federal funding in two arenas: across schools and across the fundamental to practical
continuum. With regards to schools, philanthropy, particularly from individuals, is
disproportionately garnered by the Top10 schools for their research activities and certainly by
the Top50. Secondly, philanthropy not only maps to Federal funding trends, but it also
emphasizes them, particularly with regards to translational applied research: 73 cents in every
dollar of science philanthropy goes to translational research, particularly medicine, compared to
less than 55 cents from the Federal government. To the extent that this reflects individual
interests in specific problem areas, it does suggest that philanthropists highlight areas that they
consider to be “underfunded” by the Federal government. A few exceptions to this pattern are
clearly evident. First, the massive inflow of funding into malaria research by the Gates
Foundation suggests that in some areas data on broad funding trends (such as life science
funding) fails to capture micro-level trends, such as when philanthropists try to fill funding
gaps; tropical medicine is a case in point (see Gaule and Murray 2012).

Policy Questions
The analysis presented here confirms the starting hypothesis in this essay -- that science
philanthropy is an overlooked but critical aspect of the funding landscape for leading U.S.
research universities. While much attention has been paid to the impact of rising industry
funding, philanthropists constitute a much bigger contributor to fundamental and translational
research taking place in academia. Consequently, both the rate and direction of research are,
at least in part, shaped by the desires of a relatively small number of individuals whose
approach to resource allocation at the scientific frontier is entirely different from the archetypal
Federal funding agency. If we also consider the contributions made by patrons of science to
the construction of new laboratory facilities and the places of science, then the role of
philanthropy on campus is even more substantial. Indeed, both the physical and intellectual
space of many of our leading research universities have been transformed by philanthropic
generosity. It is not surprising then to find that universities have developed a complex and
26

sophisticated infrastructure – generally referred to as the Office of Development - through
which to solicit gifts and to engage with foundations. This little-examined part of university
institutionalization is clearly as important as the more frequently analyzed Offices of Technology
Transfer when it comes to shaping the nature and direction of campus research.
What then are the policy implications of contemporary science philanthropy? The most
obvious question relates to the proposed changes in tax deductions for charitable contributions.
Last changed in 2002/2003, the proposals would reduce deductions only for the wealthiest
contributors. While a variety of general analyses have been done to estimate the impact of
such changes, the composition and scale of individual giving to research universities is quite
distinctive to other types of giving – being highly skewed towards larger gifts. Thus it would be
timely to more carefully analyze the distribution of research gifts by size and to examine their
sensitivity to changes in tax rules. It is also important for foreign governments seeking to
emulate the U.S. science funding infrastructure to focus not only on Federal funding, but also
on philanthropic funding and the tax incentives, which contribute to how science philanthropy
has come to play such an important role in the university. The tax structure is certainly an
important inducement for supporting the frontiers of knowledge in academia.
The second and most pressing set of policy issues relate to how Federal funding
agencies must react to and engage with science philanthropists – an issue of particular
importance in the light of dramatic proposed budget cuts for Federal research spending. With
regard to the relationship between Federal and philanthropic funding, their interaction is
complex, and the missions, orientations and approaches of these sources are not always
complementary. Moreover, the empirical evidence in this paper provides little support for the
proposition that science patrons usually fill “gaps” left by Federal funding. While a century ago
patrons did support fundamental science, filling the lacuna left by government, patronage
cannot provide adequate funding to substitute for the extensive role of the government. In
addition, few philanthropists appear to seek to identify such gaps. This fact is underscored by
one key fact about philanthropy – philanthropists are more concentrated in their giving to
specific (translational) fields than the government, suggesting that with few exceptions – such a
Nathan Myrvold’s desire to support “stuff other people don’t” in palaeontology -- patrons add
support to already well funded wealthy fields instead of filling gaps. In addition, the lack of
allocative efficiency and coordination among patrons makes comprehensive funding strategies
impossible leaving researchers at the whims of particular individuals. How should these
27

insights influence today’s Federal giving? The data presented above suggest that current
Federal trends towards funding concentration in leading fields should be examined in the light
of the high concentration of philanthropy in these same areas. In addition, the skew towards
translational research by the patrons of science reemphasizes the need for the Federal
government (and patrons themselves) to assess their commitment to fundamental research.
While provocative, this discussion must be supported by a deeper understanding of the
relationship between Federal funding and philanthropic dollars by university, field and project.
While the interaction among funding sources is crucial, perhaps the most important role
of philanthropy could be to serve as a locus of learning for Federal agencies; philanthropists
who experiment with new modes of selecting, organizing, and structuring research provide
important insights for the management of research. Andrew Carnegie (followed later by
Hughes and the MacArthur Awards) led the way in funding individuals of genius and potential
rather than specific projects. More recently, philanthropic gifts have emphasized different types
of research funding. More generally, such philanthropic experiments should be more
systematically analyzed by government agencies; they may provide a path towards the more
effective allocation of funding to enable both high-risk/high-return projects and projects that
are more likely to effectively contribute to economic growth and prosperity. Alternatively,
perhaps philanthropists could fill that high risk/reward gap, leaving the Federal government to
allocate their research portfolio across a broader range of universities and fields.
Taken together, the analysis of science philanthropy presented in this paper argues for
much greater attention to the role of science patronage on campus. Prior scholarship has
explored the role of philanthropy as a critical and distinctive element of the U.S. culture and
institutions (going back as far as the observations of de Tocqueville) and has examined the
impact of philanthropy in higher education broadly. However, the influence of science
philanthropy in sustaining leading U.S. research universities has not been well documented. To
fill this gap, this paper presents an initial approach to combining data sources, presenting some
provocative descriptive statistics and laying out a series of policy challenges. Together they
suggest the need for a robust research program grounded in both quantitative and qualitative
analyses of the role of philanthropy in the laboratory.

28

VI.

References

Aghion, P., M Dewatripont & J. Stein, 2008. "Academic freedom, private‐sector focus, and the
process of innovation," RAND Journal of Economics, RAND Corporation, vol. 39(3), pages
617‐635.
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. R. Nelson, ed.
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
609‐25.
Azoulay, P., J Graff Zivin, and G Manso, “Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the Howard
Hughes Medical Investigator Program” Working Paper.
Biagioli, Mario, The Social Status of Italian Mathematicians, 1450‐1600 , History of Science,
27:1=75 (1989:Mar.) p.41
Biagioli, Mario. Scientific Authorship: Credit and Intellectual Property in Science. London: Taylor
and Francis Books, 2002.
Bush, V. (1945). Science: The Endless Frontier, A Report to the President. Washington, D.C., U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Clark, J. (2001, August 31). Squandering our technological future. New York Times, p. A19.
David, P.A. 2008. The Historical Origins of ‘Open Science’: An Essay on Patronage, Reputation
and Common Agency Contracting in the Scientific Revolution. Capitalism and Society.
3(2): Article 5.
David, Paul A. & Hall, Bronwyn H. & Toole, Andrew A., 2000. "Is public R&D a complement or
substitute for private R&D? A review of the econometric evidence," Research Policy,
Elsevier, vol. 29(4‐5), pages 497‐529, April.David, 2007
Fleishman, J. L. The foundation: A great american secret. 2. New York, NY: 2009.
Gans J., & Murray, F. (2012). Public funding restrictions and their impact on the rate and
direction of scientific research. In J. Lernerand S. Stern (Eds.), Rate and direction of
inventive activity, revisited (pp. 51–103). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gans, J.S., F. Murray and S. Stern. 2010. Contracting over the Disclosure of Scientific Knowledge:
Intellectual Property and Academic Publication. mimeo., MIT.
Groopman, J.2001. “The Thirty Years’ War,” Annals of Medicine, The New Yorker, June 4, 2001,
p. 52.
Hamer, John. Letter. American Journalism Review Dec. 2006/Jan. 2007: 7. Print.
Kohler, Robert. "Philanthropy and Science." American Philosophical Society. 129.1 (1985): 9‐13.
McGinley, L., & Regalado, A. (2002, April 10). Cloning clamor grows. Wall Street Journal, pp. B1
Miller, Howard. "The Legal Foundations of American Philanthropy." (1961).

29

Nelson, R.R. 1959. The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research. Journal of Political
Economy 67(3), 297‐306.
Nielsen 1985 Commission on Private Philanthropy and Public Needs
NIH. (1999). Fact sheet on stem cell research. Bethesda, MD: Author.
Rabb, Harriet. Letter. National Institute of Health Jan. 1999.
Stokes, Donald. 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.
Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Waldrop, Michael. "The search for alien intelligence: SETI is dead — long live SETI." Nature. 27
007 2007: 442‐444.
Wertz, D. C. (2002). Embryo and stem cell research in the United States: History and
politics. Gene Therapy, 9, 674–678.

30

Table 1:
University designation of Gifts vs. Grants

Indicator

Indicative of a GIFT

Indicative of a GRANT

Individuals
Government Agencies
Non Profit Organizations
Voluntary Health Organizations (American Cancer Society
Corporations
or American Heart Association)
Corporate Foundations
Source
Non Profit Organizations
Donor Advised Funds
Corporations
Family foundations are generally treated as
Corporate Foundations
individuals
"Contribution "
"Exchange transaction"
Description
(unconditional transfer of cash which is voluntary
(each party receives commensurate value)
and non‐reciprocal)
Directly related to recipient's mission, indirectly Directly related to sponsor's business activities, may or
Relatedness to provider
may not be directly related to recipient's mission
related to donor's business
No nominal value for funding provided
Indirect benefits such as tax advantages, business
Particular value to provider, may include reports, IP
Value Exchange
or personal goodwill, and benefits derived from
rights, publication rights, data, etc
donor club status are immaterial
Timing of cash inflow
Money received up front
Award Letter
Paperwork
Gift Agreement
Grant Agreement
U.S. Dept of Health & Human Services "indirect cost rate"
Overhead charged
None
(~68%)
Control over expenditure
None
High
Reporting requirements can include research reports,
No obligatory reporting restrictions
Details of how, when, and to whom funds were
progress reports, budget reports, and reprots of unused
Reporting
disbursed can be used for donor stewardship
funds
Use timing
N/A
Specified time period of use
Matching for government‐funded project
Research, program operation, curriculum development,
training, community service, planning, or other specific
Uses
N/A
activity
Activities that use University facilities
Excess Funds
N/A
May be required to return to sponsor
Penalties may exist for failure to reach milestones or use
Penalties
N/A
funds
Synonyms
Unrestricted, Donation
Awards, Sponsorship

31

Table 2:
Top Ten Foundations Contributing to Top 50 Research Universities

2003-2011
Grants Total to
Top50

Focus Area

Translational - Life science
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

1,529,707,386
Translational - Public health

The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
The Duke Endowment

559,068,171
527,574,253

Translational - Healthcare,
environment, educational access
Other - Liberal arts

The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation

380,906,505
Fundamental - Life sciences

Lilly Endowment Inc.
The William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation
The Annenberg Foundation
W. M. Keck Foundation
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
The David & Lucile Packard Foundation

361,008,584
280,369,859

Translational - Energy &
environment, education, arts

250,313,519

Other - Journalism,
communication, arts

240,523,977

Translational - Medical, science and
engineering

217,549,545

Translational – Environment &
Fundamental sciences

200,010,378

Translational -Conservation,
reproductive health

32

Table 3: Comparison of Federal funding obligations to academia by research field (2008) to
Major Philanthropic gifts (>$10M) by field (2005-2011 average) for the period 1999-2009 in
US$ millions (taken from the NSF Science and engineering Statistics 2012)

Federal %

Philanthropy
Big gifts $M
(avg 20052011)

Philanthropy%

7,907
4,215
1,447
4,705
1,826
10,757

26%
14%
5%
15%
6%
35%

183
50
98
152
51
713

15%
4%
8%
12%
4%
57%

13,569
17,288

44%
56%

332
916

27%
73%

Federal
$M
(2008)
Life Science
Physical Sciences (+Math &CompSci)
Social Science
Engineering & Architecture
Energy & Environment
Medicine
Fundamental
Translational

33

Figure 1a:
Trends in Philanthropy – Foundation Giving 2000-2010

43

Figure 1b:
Trends in Philanthropy – Foundation Assets 2000-2010

44

43

Figure taken from the Foundation Center: Trends in Foundation Giving 2011 report available from
http://foundationcenter.org/gainknowledge/research/pdf/fgge11.pdf
44
Figure taken from the Foundation Center: Trends in Foundation Giving 2011 report available from
http://foundationcenter.org/gainknowledge/research/pdf/fgge11.pdf

34

Figure 2: Initial estimate of annual giving in US$ Millions to Top 50 Research Universities for
Research-focused activities (Foundation data from Foundation Center, Individual Gifts estimated
from Chronicle of Philanthropy)

Research‐focus Giving to Top 50 U.S. Universities
by Source in $ Millions
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Individual Gifts

2006

2007

2008

Foundation Grants

35

2009

2010

2011

Figure 3: Schematic of Flows of Science Philanthropy from sources to the university
and into science and engineering R&D Expenditures on campus (data for 2009)

36

Figure 4:
Average Total R&D Expenditures for Different Groups of US Universities

37

Figure 5a
Breakdown of R&D Expenditures by Source in year 2009 for Top10-50 Universities

7%
18%

7%
State

9%

Industry
Other
Federal
Institution
59%

Total Expenditure: $16.3BN
Average Expenditure per University: $479M
Figure 5b
Breakdown of R&D Expenditures by Source in year 2009 for Top10 Universities

3%
17%

7%
10%

State
Industry
Other
Federal
Institution

63%

Total Expenditure: $9.6BN
Average Expenditure per University: $961M
38

Figure 6a:
Trends in composition of R&D Funding by type of Source for Top10 research universities
(Federal + State, Industry, “Other” and Institution) from 1970 – 2009 in $000s.

Figure 6b:
Trends in composition of R&D Funding by type of Source for Top10-50 research universities
from 1970 – 2009 in $000s.

39

Figure 7:
Major Individual gifts to science philanthropy by subject in Millions $ (adapted from Chronicle of
Philanthropy data)45

Individual Giving by Gift Focus in Millions $
3000
2500
Interdisciplinary
2000

Social Science
Physical Sciences

1500

Life Science
Medicine

1000

Engineering & Architecture
Energy

500
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

45

2011

The subject analysis has only been completed for science philanthropy gifts over $10M. These amount to $19BN
in individual gifts for the period 2005-2011 of which $10B are categorized as science philanthropy. NOTE: the
category “interdisciplinary” is for gifts to support research across the entire campus.

40

