NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF FRIENDSHIP
Paul Gompers
Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Yuhai Xuan
Working Paper 18141
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18141
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We thank Ben Esty, Lauren Cohen, Josh Coval, Fritz Foley, Zhenyu Lai, Chris Malloy, Rick Ruback,
Andrei Shleifer, David Smalling, Jeremy Stein, Emily Weisburst, Eric Zwick and seminar participants
at the Harvard Business School for helpful discussions and comments. Support for this research was
provided by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business School. Daniel Kim provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Paul Gompers, Vladimir Mukharlyamov, and Yuhai Xuan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Friendship
Paul Gompers, Vladimir Mukharlyamov, and Yuhai Xuan
NBER Working Paper No. 18141
June 2012
JEL No. G02,G24,G3,L14,L2
ABSTRACT
This paper explores two broad questions on collaboration between individuals. First, we investigate
what personal characteristics affect people’s desire to work together. Second, given the influence
of these personal characteristics, we analyze whether this attraction enhances or detracts from performance.
Addressing these problems in the venture capital syndication setting, we show that venture capitalists
exhibit strong detrimental homophily in their co-investment decisions. We find that individual venture
capitalists choose to collaborate with other venture capitalists for both ability-based characteristics
(e.g., whether both individuals in a dyad obtained a degree from a top university) and affinity-based
characteristics (e.g., whether individuals in a pair share the same ethnic background, attended the same
school, or worked for the same employer previously). Moreover, frequent collaborators in syndication
are those venture capitalists who display a high level of mutual affinity. We find that while collaborating
for ability-based characteristics enhances investment performance, collaborating for affinity-based
characteristics dramatically reduces the probability of investment success. A variety of tests show
that the cost of affinity is not driven by selection into inferior deals; the effect is most likely attributable
to poor decision-making by high-affinity syndicates post investment. Taken together, our results suggest
that non-ability-based “birds-of-a-feather-flock-together” effects in collaboration can be costly.
Paul Gompers
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu
Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
mukharly@fas.harvard.edu

Yuhai Xuan
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 347
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
yxuan@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
People collaborate with each other in different settings. Construction of the Panama
Canal and group hunting of mammoths are independent examples of mutually beneficial
cooperation. Collaboration enables groups to achieve what cannot be accomplished as a result
of a solely individual effort. Joint work can also increase the efficiency of individual production
as in the celebrated example of the multi-stage production of pins. The division of labor, which
such collaborations entail, drives economic progress and great productivity (Smith, 1776). In
spite of the tremendous importance of collaborations, we lack a complete understanding of how
people select their future working partners and whether there are any economic implications of
different selection strategies.
In this paper, we explore two related questions on collaboration using the venture capital
industry as the laboratory. First, we ask what personal characteristics influence individuals’
desires to work together in venture capital syndication. Second, given the influence of these
personal characteristics, we ask whether this attraction enhances or detracts from investment
performance. We find that people are more likely to collaborate with those who share similar
characteristics with them.

Such similarities can be divided into two broad classes–those

characteristics related to ability (e.g., whether both individuals in a dyad obtained a degree
from a top university) and those characteristics related not to ability but, instead, to affinity
(e.g., whether individuals in a pair share the same ethnic background, attended the same school,
or worked for the same employer previously).

We find that individual venture capitalists

collaborate with other venture capitalists for both ability- and affinity-based characteristics.
We then show how ability-based and affinity-based similarities between members of a group
affect its performance.

In particular, collaborating for ability-based characteristics enhances

investment performance while collaborating for affinity-based characteristics dramatically
reduces investment returns.
The tendency of individuals to associate, interact, and bond with others who possess
similar characteristics and backgrounds has long been viewed as the organizing basis of networks
(e.g., McPherson et al., 2001). The principle of homophily shapes group formation and social
connection in a wide variety of settings, such as school, work, marriage, and friendship, in which
1

similarity between dyad or group members is observed across a broad range of characteristics
including ethnicity, age, gender, class, education, social status, organizational role, etc.

For

example, positive assortative mating along observable inheritable traits (e.g., intelligence, race,
and height) discussed by Becker (1973) in the context of a marriage market can be viewed as
the micro foundation of homophily in which choosing a partner with similar characteristics
increases the certainty about the quality of one’s offspring.

Currarini et al. (2009) provide

theoretical foundations for the pattern of homophily in social networks using a search-based
model of friendship formation and conclude that biases towards same-types in both individual
preferences and the matching processes affect pairing outcomes.
Despite growing evidence that people do indeed tend to partner with similar individuals,
the success implications of this bias remain unclear.

One conjecture is that the more

characteristics a pair of individuals has in common, the better performance the dyad is likely to
demonstrate.

This better performance may result from easier communication, the ability to

better convey tacit information, or the ability to make joint decisions in a timely and productive
manner (e.g., Ingram and Roberts, 2000; McPherson et al., 2001; Cohen et al., 2008; Gompers
and Xuan, 2010). Moreover, homophilic selection based on ability-related characteristics can
lead to the formation of high-ability pairs that demonstrate superior performance.
On the other hand, however, homophily may induce social conformity and groupthink
that may lead to inefficient decision making (e.g., Asch, 1951; Janis, 1982; Ishii and Xuan, 2010).
Individuals in homophilic relationships often have an enhanced desire for unanimity and ignore,
or insufficiently consider, the disadvantages of the favored decision as well as the advice from
experts outside the group. Furthermore, individuals may lower the expected return hurdle and
due diligence standards on a project (consciously or unconsciously) for the opportunity to work
with similar others because they derive personal utility from the collaboration. Consequently,
under an alternative hypothesis, collaborations based on characteristics unrelated to ability
might suffer from a “cost of friendship” and induce a negative relationship between affinitybased similarities and performance.
We test these hypotheses in the venture capital syndication setting, analyzing individual
venture capitalists’ selection of co-investment partners in syndicated deals as well as the
2

associated performance implications. Venture capital syndication is an important and common
mechanism for venture capital investors to diversify their portfolios, accumulate and share
resources and expertise, and reduce asymmetric information concerning portfolio companies (e.g.,
Lerner, 1994; Hochberg et al., 2011). Although extant studies on syndication largely focus on
the characteristics of the partnership at the venture capital firm level (e.g., firm reputation and
investment scope), investment in venture capital is typically individual-led.

The individual

venture capitalist pursuing and initiating an investment in a portfolio company (the founding
investor) normally identifies other individuals at different venture capital firms with whom he or
she may wish to collaborate on this particular deal. In other words, consistent with the idea of
venture capitalists competing with each other for investment opportunities (Gompers and
Lerner, 2000), it is natural to think of a follow-on investor as being chosen by the founding
investor from a pool of potential co-investors. Both the founding and follow-on investors usually
serve on the board of directors of the portfolio company, representing the interests of their
respective venture capital firms and seeking to maximize the return on their investment.
Depending on the performance of the portfolio companies and the market conditions, venture
capitalists may use a variety of exit strategies, ranging from initial public offerings (IPO) to the
sale of shares back to the entrepreneurs or strategic investors. Although there are examples of
successful exits by venture capitalists by means of mergers and acquisitions, the consensus in the
industry and academia is that an exit via IPO is the best indicator of investment success, in
which venture capitalists achieve not only the highest returns but also wide recognition for their
abilities.1 The individual-led nature of the venture capital investing and syndication process,
the availability of rich biographic information on individual venture capitalists, the existence of
frequent collaborations between these individuals aiming for the same goal and making decisions
the outcome of which have significant economic consequences for the decision-makers, and a
clear-cut measure of success together make venture capital syndication an ideal platform to
study the factors that influence individuals’ choices to work together and the accompanying
value implications.
1

Prior research indicates that the return to venture investing is primarily driven by the small fraction of
investments that goes public (Venture Economics, 1988). Similarly, Gompers (1996) demonstrates that
venture capital firms are able to more easily raise new funds after exiting a portfolio company via an IPO.
3

Using a novel dataset of 3,510 individual venture capitalists investing into 11,895
portfolio companies from 1975 to 2003, we first examine the selection of co-investment partners
on syndicated deals. In particular, we are interested in determining a set of pairwise personal
characteristics based on which people are attracted to work with each other. For each venture
capitalist, we hand-collect detailed biographic information including gender, ethnicity,
educational background, and employment history.

To assess how these various personal

characteristics affect the likelihood of collaborations between individual venture capitalists, for
each pair of actual venture capitalist partners in syndication, we construct a plausible set of
counterfactual pairs each consisting of the actual founding partner and a potential follow-on
partner that was available for syndication but who was not selected by the founding venture
capitalist that originated the deal. We find that individual venture capitalists are more likely to
collaborate with others who possess similar characteristics and backgrounds. For example, two
venture capitalists that both hold degrees from top universities (potentially indicating high
ability) are 8.5% more likely to co-invest together than individuals not similar in terms of being
graduates of top academic institutions. An even stronger effect is documented with respect to
non-ability-related, affinity-based characteristics. A pair of venture capitalists who graduated
from the same university are 20.5% more likely to partner on a deal, and even more strikingly,
the probability of collaboration between two individual venture capitalists increases by 22.8% if
they are part of the same ethnic minority group. Partnership is also more likely to happen if
the two venture capitalists worked at the same company earlier in their careers. These results
on syndication decision represent strong evidence of homophilic selection in collaboration.
We then examine how ability-based and affinity-based similarities between members of a
venture capitalist dyad affect its performance by assessing the outcomes of the portfolio
companies in which the pair has co-invested. We find that the investment performance of a
venture capital dyad improves with the number of top school degree holders in the pair. The
first top degree holder in a pair increases the chance of its portfolio company going public by 9%;
the second top degree holder further increases the chance of success significantly by 11%.
Therefore, the decision of a top university graduate to syndicate with a venture capitalist who
also holds a degree from a top school does enhance investment returns.
4

To the contrary,

similarities between venture capitalists based on affinity-related characteristics worsen the
performance of a syndication dyad. Specifically, the probability of a successful exit outcome
decreases by 18% if two venture capitalists who previously worked at the same company partner
up in the syndication. The likelihood of success drops by 22% if co-investors attended the same
undergraduate school.
ethnicity.

The negative effect of affinity is even stronger when it relates to

Collaboration with someone from the same ethnic minority group comes at the

expense of a 25% reduction in performance.
We further explore the impact of similarities between collaborators on performance using
ability and affinity scores. We construct the simple-average ability score of a pair of venture
capitalists as the average of pairwise ability characteristics (measures indicating whether both
members of the pair hold top school degrees). The weighted-average ability score of a pair of
venture capitalists is the dot product of a vector of pairwise ability characteristics and a vector
of estimated coefficients on these characteristics in the syndication decision regression.

The

simple-average and weighted-average affinity scores are similarly constructed over the set of
pairwise affinity characteristics (measures indicating whether members of the pair are of the
same gender, in the same minority ethnic group, attended the same school, or previously worked
for the same employer).

The weighted-average ability and affinity scores are essentially

weighted measures of how alike the two venture capitalists in the dyad are in terms of ability
and affinity characteristics, respectively, with the weights representing how important each
similarity characteristic is in determining the collaboration decision.

When we examine the

relationship between these aggregate similarity scores and investment performance, we again
find that the more alike the partnering venture capitalists are in affinity-related characteristics,
the less likely their investment outcome is ultimately successful. We also find that the affinity
score of a pair of venture capitalists is significantly and positively related to the total number of
syndicated deals on which the pair collaborates. Therefore, affinity-based similarity not only
determines people’s attractions to work together for the first time, but also increases their
frequency of repeated collaborations.

5

Finally, we account for the potentially endogenous determination of the syndicate’s level
of affinity depending on the underlying investment quality of a deal and confirm the robustness
of results using a variety of tests. Although high-affinity venture capitalists do indeed pursue
joint opportunities of lower investment appeal at the time financing, the analysis shows that the
contribution of this effect to the empirical biases documented in the paper is at most weak. The
most likely source of the cost of affinity is a treatment effect, in particular, poor decision-making
by venture capitalists post investment.
To illustrate the effects of ability- and affinity-based similarities on the syndication
decision and investment performance, consider as an example from our data the co-investment
pattern of Mr. A through the lens of his background. Mr. A lived in Israel before moving to the
U.S. for school, and graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
actively involved in the Jewish communities in the U.S.

He was

During his career as a venture

capitalist at venture capital firm Z, Mr. A co-invested on fourteen deals from 1984 to 2001. An
MIT graduate, Mr. A co-invested on eleven deals with at least one other venture capitalist
having a degree from a top school. Out of these eleven deals, two deals also have syndication
teams characterized by the Jewish ethnicity commonality.

In the remaining three of the

fourteen co-investments, Mr. A’s syndication partners are characterized by similar ethnical
background only: they are all Jewish. Mr. A is a very successful venture capitalist: four of the
fourteen deals resulted in a portfolio company going public and are classified as successful in our
analysis; all of these four deals are syndications based on ability but not affinity.
The fourteen deals are represented in a two-by-two matrix in Table 1, in which each
dimension stands for the type of syndication: ability-based or affinity-based.2 Consistent with
the homophily bias of founders selecting a working partner possessing similar characteristics, Mr.
A had no joint investments with venture capitalists that he is unlikely to associate himself with
either based on ability or affinity. Moreover, all successful deals feature a venture capital team
with only ability-related characteristics in common. There is not a single successful deal among
affinity-based co-investments.

The unconditional success ratio of Mr. A is 28.6% (4/14);

2

A co-investment may be both ability- and affinity-based if a venture capitalist has both ability and
affinity similarities with the co-investment partners.
6

conditional on the co-investment being ability-based and not affinity-based, his success ratio
increases to 44.4% (4/9), whereas conditioned on affinity-based syndications, the success ratio
drops to 0% (0/5).

This illustrates the negative effect of affinity-based similarities within a

syndication dyad on its performance.
The findings of this paper relate to several literatures.

First, we contribute to the

growing evidence that preferences for homophily strongly affect the composition of working
groups.

In the venture capital context, for example, Bengtsson and Hsu (2010) show that

startup founders are more likely to be matched with partners at VC firms similar in terms of
ethnicity and education.
The second literature studies the success implications of social ties.

According to

Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), better-networked VC firms demonstrate significantly
better performance.

However, the evidence on the connection between the success and

composition of venture capital working groups remains mixed.

Data limitations leave

researchers with no choice but to measure the extent to which a syndicate is homogenous at a
firm level. The breadth of our data makes it possible to identify partners directly involved in
each particular deal arming us with a relevant and precise measure of syndicate-specific
homogeneity. This increases our ability to make inference about the relationship between team
composition and its success.
Third, we make a methodological contribution with respect to distinguishing between
two drivers of venture capital returns: selecting better deals vs. adding value to a portfolio
company post-investment. Tian (2012) demonstrates superior performance of entrepreneurial
firms backed by a venture capital syndicate and uses the Heckman (1979) selection model and
an instrumental variable approach to control for the fact that syndication may not be exogenous.
Sorensen (2007) overcomes endogeneity problems in estimating the outcome equation by
developing a two-sided matching model which controls for the sorting between portfolio
companies and venture capitalists — more promising entrepreneurial firms get funding from
investors with higher relative rankings.3 We implement the instrumental variable approach, the
Heckman two-step procedure and design a novel method which involves assessing the quality of
3

This method is analogous to the Heckman (1979) two-stage procedure.
7

the portfolio company at the time of investment using portfolio company characteristics and
examining the relationship between this ex ante quality measure and the affinity level in a
syndicate.
Fourth, our paper relates to the literature on the venture capitalists' ability to add value.
We demonstrate that investment outcomes are explained by observable characteristics of coinvestment partners controlling for the selection bias. Since the composition of a VC syndicate
matters for the success of a portfolio company, we indirectly document the ability of venture
capitalists to add value. Brander, Amit, and Antweiler (2002) argue that if the key reason for
syndication were the enhanced ability to select better portfolio companies, we would have seen
the formation of most syndicates on projects with ambiguous investment prospects. This is not
what we observe in practice, since syndicated ventures return more than standalone investment
projects.

Tian (2012) demonstrates that VC syndication creates both product market value

(e.g., better operating performance and more patents) and financial market value (e.g., more
successful exits, lower IPO underpricing, and higher valuation) for entrepreneurial firms.4
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and the
construction of variables used in the analysis.

Empirical results are presented in Section 3.

Section 4 investigates whether the cost of affinity on investment performance is attributed to
selection or treatment effects. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data
2.1. Sources of Data
The data used in this paper is derived from several different sources. We start with
VentureSource, a database that contains detailed information on venture capital investments.
For each portfolio company, VentureSource reports the identities of the venture capital firms
and individual venture capitalists that invested in the company as well as the date of each
investment.

4

See Tian (2012) for a discussion of recent papers on the venture capital value creation and the VC
syndication
8

For each individual venture capitalist in the data, we hand-collect through web searches,
SEC filings, and news articles a broad range of biographic information including past career
track, education history, and gender. For prior job histories, we record companies at which an
individual had worked in the past.

The education array includes data on the academic

institutions at which individuals obtained their academic degrees as well as the types of degrees:
undergraduate, postgraduate non-business (Ph.D., M.S., J.D., and M.D.), or postgraduate
business (MBA).

To determine whether an individual holds a degree from a top academic

institution, we classify as top universities the Ivy League schools (Brown University, Columbia
University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University, Princeton University,
University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University) as well as other top U.S. schools (Amherst
College, California Institute of Technology, Duke University, MIT, Northwestern University,
Stanford University, University of California, Berkeley, University of Chicago, and Williams
College).5
Venture capitalists’ genders are determined based on their first names. In the cases of
unisex names, we determine gender by reading news articles and web pages mentioning or
containing pictures of the individual venture capitalists.6 As for ethnical background, we use
the name-matching algorithm developed by Kerr and Lincoln (2010) to determine the most
likely ethnicities of venture capitalists based on their last names. Individual venture capitalists
are classified into five non-overlapping ethnic groups: East Asians, Indian, Jewish, Middle
Eastern, and all others. Although the limitation of the name-matching algorithm does not allow
us to identify all possible ethnicities such as African American, the groups that the algorithm
has been shown to successfully identify capture the most active ethnic minority groups in the
venture capital industry, and all have a strong sense of cultural identity.7

5

The results presented in the paper are robust to classifying only the Ivy League universities as top
schools as well as to adding top European universities (Cambridge University, INSEAD, London Business
School, London School of Economics, and Oxford University) to the list of top schools. See Appendix
Table 1 for more information.
6
Despite our best effort, we cannot determine the gender of 27 venture capitalists in our sample.
7
We use the information on the country/geographic region of a venture capitalist’s undergraduate
academic institution to determine ethnicity when the name-matching algorithm fails to do so.
9

We determine the investment outcome using VentureSource and Thomson Financial’s
SDC database, supplemented by Thomson Financial’s VentureXpert database. Although there
are examples of successful investments which did not result in IPOs, public floatation of a
portfolio company is the cleanest signal of the venture’s success. 8 We therefore consider an
investment to be successful if and only if it results in the IPO of the portfolio company. Finally,
we use the Pratt’s Guide to Private Equity and Venture Capital Sources to manually code the
locations of venture capital firm offices at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level and the
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level where a CSA is not available.

2.2. Variables
The data are used to construct two sets of variables: individual and pairwise. Individual
variables include personal characteristics of a venture capitalist that are fixed over time such as
education, ethnicity, and gender dummy variables.

The education dummy variables Top

College, Top Business School, Top Graduate School, and Top School equal one if a venture
capitalist holds, respectively, an undergraduate, business, graduate, or any degree from a top
university and zero otherwise. Ethnic Minority takes the value of one if a venture capitalist is
East Asian, Indian, Jewish or Middle Eastern. Dummy variables East Asian, Indian, Jewish
and Middle Eastern pin down a venture capitalist’s ethnicity; the dummy variable Female
identifies an individual’s gender.
Also included in the personal characteristics of a venture capitalist is a metric that
changes with each additional deal completed and measures his or her success up to the current
deal. The variable Performance measures the venture capitalist’s success ratio up to the current
deal, defined as the total number of successful investments made before the current investment
divided by the sum of the total number of investments.9 An investment is counted as successful
even if the portfolio company did not go public before the date at which the Performance
variable is evaluated. Venture capitalists may correctly predict the outcome of a successful deal

8

For example, in our data, the ambiguity of an acquisition as an indicator of success is evidenced by the
40% of investments that exited via acquisition.
9
For the first deal of a venture capitalist–when there is no investment track record by construction–the
Performance variable is set equal to 0. Our results are robust to dropping such observations from
specifications that rely on Performance as an explanatory variable.
10

long before the portfolio company sells its shares in a public offering. 10 In addition, the IPO
preparation itself normally takes at least six months, and the decision to conduct an IPO is
made even earlier. All results in the paper are robust to using an ex ante performance metric,
i.e., if we include in our calculation of Performance only deals which had gone public prior to
the date of the current deal.
We then construct pairs of individual venture capital investors that co-invested on
syndicated deals. For each deal, we use the investment dates to determine founding venture
capitalists, who are defined as the earliest investors in the deal, and follow-on investors, who
participate in subsequent rounds.11 Consistent with the idea that founding investors initiate and
lead the deal and make decisions to bring follow-on investors on board, we focus on pairs of
venture capitalists in which at least one member of the dyad is a founding investor. We focus
on the first co-investment between two individual venture capitalists since the decision to
collaborate for the first time is not colored by confounding factors such as experience of past
collaborations and allows us to better isolate the impact of personal characteristics similarities in
driving partnership decisions.12
For each pair of individual venture capital investors in the sample, two groups of
pairwise variables are constructed based on the individual variables. The first group uses the
qualifiers At Least One and Both. Values of such dummy variables depend on the number of
venture capitalists in a dyad that possess a given characteristic. For example, Top School: Both
takes the value of one if both venture capitalists in a pair hold degrees from top universities and
zero otherwise; Female: At Least One equals one if there is either one or two female venture
capitalists in a dyad and zero otherwise.

10

The financial success of Facebook, for example, had enabled its early-stage investors (e.g., Accel and the
Founders Fund) to label it as a successful investment long before the company officially announced its
IPO plans in February 2012.
11
We also consider venture capitalists who invested within a 100-day period after the first investment
date recorded founding investors to account for the possibility that the short interval between reported
dates may be due to different reporting practices at different venture capital firms even though they
invested in the same round. Our results are robust to considering only the venture capitalist with the
earliest investment date or to using a different window (e.g., 30 days) to determine the founding investor.
12
Our results are robust to including all pairs (first-time and repeated syndications) in the sample. Firsttime syndication pairs constitute about 93% of all pairs; the rest 7% are repeated collaboration pairs. We
analyze these repeated collaborations in Section 3.4.
11

A separate group of pairwise variables are constructed using the qualifier Same. Same

School equals one if the pair of venture capitalists attended the same academic institution and
zero otherwise. Same College, Same Business School and Same Grad School are defined in a
similar way but impose a requirement on obtaining degrees of the same type. Same Ethnic

Minority equals one if both venture capitalists in a dyad are part of the same ethnic minority
group and zero otherwise. Same Previous Employer is a dummy variable equal to one if two
venture capitalists worked at the same company earlier in their careers and zero otherwise. We
also define a dummy variable Same Location that equals one if the venture capitalists’ firms are
located in the same CSA and zero otherwise.
Our sample consists of 3,510 venture capitalists that invested into 11,895 different
portfolio companies from 1975 to 2003.

The distribution of their personal characteristics is

summarized in Table 2. 3,382 of these venture capitalists have co-invested at least once with
another venture capitalist in the sample. The pairwise data set contains 17,473 collaborations
between a pair of venture capitalists partnering for the first time.

2.3. Counterfactual Syndication Pairs
In order to understand which factors lead to the establishment of collaborations between
people, we construct a plausible set of potential partners that were available for syndication at
the time when a founding venture capitalist partnered with a different co-investor. This set of
counterfactual partners allows us to construct counterfactual pairs, essentially, a control group,
which, when contrasted with the set of actual pairs, enables us to assess the significance of
various personal characteristics in determining the likelihood of collaborations between people.
Central to the construction of the set of counterfactual partners and pairs, therefore, are the
assumptions on what makes a partner “available for syndication at the time of co-investment
but not selected by the founding investor”, i.e., counterfactual.
For each actual pair of venture capitalists syndicating on a deal, we generate all possible
counterfactual, or pseudo, pairs by letting the founding venture capitalist “choose” a
counterfactual partner that satisfies the following three criteria.

First, the counterfactual

partner and the founding investor must be from different venture capital firms. Second, the
counterfactual partner must have invested in the same industry within 30 days of the actual co12

investment between the founding venture capitalist and the actual follow-on partner.13 Third,
the counterfactual partner must not have ever co-invested with the founding venture capitalist.
The overall universe of counterfactual syndication pairs thus generated has roughly 2,000,000
pairs. We then draw a stratified random sample of 50,000 pairs controlling for the marginal
distribution of pairs by year and industry as our sample of counterfactual pairs. Our results are
robust to alternative methodologies for constructing the counterfactual syndication pairs,
including, for example, further requiring the counterfactual partner to come from the same firm
as the actual follow-on partner, or requiring four randomly chosen matched pseudo pairs for
each actual pair in the sample of counterfactual pairs. The condition for the counterfactual
partner to come from the same firm as the actual partner is a strong one and acknowledges that
the venture capital firm selected as a syndicate partner may have a special expertise relevant for
the deal.

The results being qualitatively and quantitatively similar under different

methodologies indicate that personal characteristics of a pair of individual venture capitalists are
of the first-order importance for predicting the likelihood of syndication as well as the
investment outcome.

3. Empirical Results
In this section we report empirical results of three major blocks of our analysis. First,
we are interested in determining the set of personal characteristics that affect the performance
of an individual venture capitalist.

Second, we examine interactions between personal

characteristics of two individuals and establish their impact on the likelihood of a pair working
together. Third, we study the performance implications of different kinds of similarities between
venture capitalists co-investing together. We use probit regressions to fit models with binary
dependent variables–whether an investment outcome is considered successful (in the first and
third blocks) and whether a pair of venture capitalists actually collaborate in syndication (in the
second block).

We cluster robust standard errors by portfolio company because different

individual venture capitalists and syndicates that invest into the same portfolio company share

13

If there were no other deals in the same industry within a 30-day window, we expand the window to
180 days.
13

the same realization of a random investment outcome as a dependent variable.

Portfolio

company’s industry and year of investment fixed effects are included in every specification to
capture differences in syndication patterns and in the investment success across different sectors
and over time.14 In addition, we analyze repeated collaborations between venture capitalists and
explore differences in pairwise characteristics between individuals that partner with each other
once and those who collaborate more frequently. Each of these analyses is discussed in turn.

3.1. Individual Success
The results of the analysis of individual success characteristics are presented in Table 3.
The unit of analysis is person-investment, where person is an individual venture capitalist. We
find that individual performance is persistent which is reflected in the positive and significant
effect of past investment success on the current deal’s success. Holding a degree from a top
academic institution also matters. For example, controlling for past performance, graduating
from a top college or getting an MBA from a top business school increases the likelihood of
investment success by 1.2 and 2.0 percentage points, respectively.

Given the overall sample

fraction of successful investments at 17.7%, these marginal effects are economically significant
and are equivalent to an increase of the probability of a favorable outcome by 6.8% and 11.3%,
respectively. Holding any degree from a top academic institution is a stronger and more precise
signal of individual ability than holding a particular kind of degree from a top university: the
point estimate of the Top School dummy variable is the largest among other ability parameters
and corresponds to a 14.1% boost of the probability of success.

Ethnicity and gender

characteristics do not consistently have any significant effect on individual performance. This
justifies the distinction between ability variables, which positively affect individual success, and
affinity variables, which are not ability-related and have no relationship with individual
performance.

3.2. Syndication Partnering Decision
We then explore the determinants of collaboration between people. Regression results
are summarized in Table 4.

The unit of analysis is a pair of venture capitalists, actual or

14

See Appendix Table 2 for a summary of the total number of deals and the number of successful deals
over time and across industries.
14

counterfactual. If the syndication pair is counterfactual, the dependent variable takes the value
of zero; if venture capitalists in a dyad are actual collaborators on a syndicated deal, the
dependent variable takes the value of one.
In specifications 1 to 6, we explore the explanatory power of three groups of pairwise
variables, school rank, same school, and same ethnicity, in isolation; fully specified models are
reported in columns 7 and 8.
working partners.

We find strong support for the homophily-driven choice of

Most ability- and affinity-based pairwise characteristics have positive and

significant point estimates. For example, two venture capitalists both holding degrees from top
universities are more likely to work together by 2.2 percentage points (Column 2), or by 8.5%
relative to the unconditional sample probability of collaboration.15 Finer classification of the
schools (Columns 1 and 7) suggests that syndication based on similar top ability characteristics
seems to be largely driven by top business school graduates.
An even stronger effect is observed with respect to affinity-based characteristics.
Getting a degree from the same school increases the likelihood of two venture capitalists
working together by 20.5% (Column 4).

Adding a restriction on the shared educational

background to be of the same type further raises the chances of collaboration between a pair of
individuals with such commonalities. For example, venture capitalists who attended the same
undergraduate school are 42.5% more likely to co-invest (Column 3).

Furthermore, the

likelihood of two individuals partnering is 22.8% higher if both belong to the same ethnic
minority group (Column 6).

The contributions of different ethnic groups are uneven.

For

example, East Asian venture capitalists display the greatest tendency to collaborate with
investors of the same ethnicity.

To be specific, a partnership between two randomly drawn

venture capitalists that are both East Asian is 74.5% more likely to happen. If both individuals
in a pair are either Indian or Jewish, the probability of them co-investing together increases by

15

The unconditional sample probability of cooperation is approximately 25.9%. This can be calculated
from the number of actual syndication pairs and the number of counterfactual syndication pairs used in
the regression. The number of actual syndication pairs and the number of counterfactual syndication
pairs as inputs to the regressions are, respectively, 17,473 and 50,000. The number of observations in the
regressions reported in Table 4 is less than 67,473, because gender information on 27 individual venture
capitalists is missing. As a result, 153 actual and 432 counterfactual pairs have the variable Both Female
unidentified.
15

52.1% and 18.9%, respectively (Column 5).16 All these effects remain strong and significant in
the fully specified models in Columns 7 and 8.
Venture capitalists also exhibit a strong preference to partner with individuals with
whom they share prior job histories. Having at least one common past employer increases the
probability of two people investing together by 64% (Column 7).
matters.

In addition, location also

Venture capitalists are much more likely to collaborate with each other if the

companies at which they work have offices in the same CSA.17
Finally, gender is another characteristic based on which homophily may potentially come
into play. We do not find a significant effect on the Female: Both parameter, likely because
there is not a sufficient number of co-investments on which women work together to estimate
the coefficient more precisely.18
Overall, our results on syndication partnering decisions show that individual venture
capitalists are more likely to collaborate with others who possess similar characteristics and
backgrounds, whether these characteristics are related to ability or not. The effects of these
similarities on collaboration likelihood are highly significant, both statistically and economically.

3.3. Investment Success: Pairwise Characteristics
Having found strong evidence for homophily in the syndication patterns of venture
capitalists, we next explore whether there are success implications of these biases.

Table 5

presents the estimation results. The unit of analysis is an actual pair of venture capitalists that
partnered on a syndicated deal.

We regress the investment outcome (a dummy variable

indicating success) on a set of pairwise individual characteristics. Some pairwise characteristics
are represented by two dummy variables with qualifiers At Least One and Both. The purpose
of having two types of variables is to understand whether a characteristic has an additive

16

Specifications do not include a dummy variable that captures the effect of two Middle Eastern investors
working on a deal together. There are 15 Middle Eastern venture capitalists in the data. The number of
deals on which they invest together is insufficient to estimate the effect of sharing the Middle Eastern
ethnicity on the syndication decision. Hence, we omit the variable Middle Eastern: Both in all
specifications.
17
Chen et al. (2010) study implications of distance between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.
18
The vast majority of venture capitalists in the dataset are male. 219 female venture capitalists invested
in 1,314 different portfolio companies, resulting in only 81 actual pairs of both female investors.
16

impact on success or whether it only matters if both individuals in a pair share it. We establish
two main results.
First, ability characteristics have a positive additive effect on the co-investment success.
Having an extra person with a degree from a top school in a pair of venture capitalists
consistently increases its chances of success on the investment. The unconditional success rate
of venture capital syndicates is 21.0%.

As reflected in columns 4 to 6, the first top degree

holder increases the probability of success by approximately 9%, while the second top degree
holder gives an additional 11% boost.

Similar to our results on individual success factors,

holding any degree from the top school–without considering college, business and graduate
school degrees separately–seems to more precisely indicate a person’s ability.

Our results

indicate that collaborating for ability-based characteristics improves investment performance.
On the contrary, collaborating for affinity-based characteristics severely worsens the
performance of a syndication dyad. In particular, syndication between venture capitalists who
are part of the same ethnic minority group or who worked at the same company in the past
have lower chances of success. For example, former co-workers have an 18% lower probability
of investment success when they co-invest with each other. Attending the same undergraduate
school is even more detrimental. Syndicate partners with degrees from the same college exhibit
a 22% lower success rate. 19 The cost of affinity is even greater for venture capitalists with
similar ethnic backgrounds.

Being part of the same ethnic minority group reduces the

probability of success by 25%. The effect is not evenly distributed across underlying ethnicities.
East Asian investors collaborating with each other exhibit the largest cost of affinity, 63%.
When two Jewish venture capitalists partner on a deal, the probability of investment success
drops by 20%. It is important to note that none of the affinity variables with a qualifier At

Least One is significant.

It is not the presence of an ethnic minority investor that drives

underperformance. Indeed, Table 3 shows that individual’s ethnicity is not related to success.

19

The insignificance of the estimated coefficient on Same School suggests that the cost of affinity is
amplified when two individuals have the highest likelihood of actually knowing each other and/or
associating with each other based on the educational experience of the same type (e.g., undergraduate).
The point estimate on Same College also displays the highest magnitude in the syndication partnering
decision model presented in Table 4.
17

Investment success is negatively affected when two investors being part of the same ethnic
minority group partner on a deal.
We

have

thus

established

a

dichotomy

between

ability-

and

affinity-related

characteristics. On one hand, people display greater inclination to work with similar others.
Similarities may be in terms of ability (e.g., whether individuals hold degrees from top academic
institutions) or affinity (e.g., whether individuals share the same ethnic background). On the
other hand, these two sets of pairwise characteristics affect performance in opposite ways.
Teams with more able participants are more likely to result in a successful investment outcome.
On the contrary, investments are more likely to fail when groups are formed based upon
similarities between members along characteristics having nothing to do with ability.
We bring the analysis one step further by introducing ability and affinity scores. We
construct the simple-average ability score of a pair of venture capitalists as the average of
pairwise ability characteristics (measures indicating whether both members of the pair hold top
school degrees). We construct the weighted-average ability score as the dot product of a vector
of pairwise ability characteristics and a vector of estimated coefficients on these characteristics
in the syndication decision regression, the marginal effects of which are reported in Table 4.
The simple-average and weighted-average affinity scores are similarly constructed over the set of
pairwise affinity characteristics (measures indicating whether members of the pair are of the
same gender, in the same minority ethnic group, attended the same school, or previously worked
for the same employer). The weighted-average ability and affinity scores of a pair of venture
capitalists are essentially weighted measures of how alike the two venture capitalists in the dyad
are in terms of ability and affinity characteristics, respectively, with the weights representing
how important each characteristic similarity is in determining the syndication partnering
decision.
The ability and affinity scores thus constructed can be used as aggregate independent
variables to explain the investment success of the syndication dyad. Results of the analysis at
the syndication pair level are presented in Table 6. Using these aggregate scores to measure
similarities between members of a pair, we again find that the more alike the partnering venture

18

capitalists are in affinity-related characteristics, the less likely their investment outcome is
successful.

3.4. Repeated Collaborations
Our analysis so far examines only first-time co-investments made by pairs of venture
capitalists. In this section we supplement the analysis by considering the total number of coinvestments a pair of venture capitalists makes together.

In particular, we explore whether

aggregate measures of ability- and affinity-based similarities between individuals–proxied by
the ability and affinity scores–can be used to predict the total number of collaborations in
which a pair of individuals engage.
We run Poisson regressions of the total number of co-investments by a syndicate on the
ability and affinity scores. Estimation results are presented in Table 7, with Columns 1 and 2
using simple-average scores and Columns 3 and 4 using weighted-average scores.

Results in

Columns 1 and 3 are based on the analysis over both actual and counterfactual pairs, whereas
results in Columns 2 and 4 are derived solely from actual pairs.

Counterfactual pairs, by

definition, have zero collaboration together. Since the distinction–in terms of pairwise personal
characteristics–between counterfactual and actual pairs is sharper than the difference between
actual pairs with unequal number of collaborations, Columns 1 and 3 bear estimates of greater
magnitudes.

The number of co-investments–among actual and counterfactual pairs–is

positively and significantly related to affinity scores.

Any positive relationship between the

number of co-investments a pair of venture capitalists made together and their ability score,
however, seems to be entirely driven by the contrast between counterfactual pairs with zero
collaborated deals and those pairs collaborating at least once. Among actual pairs only, we find
positive relationship only between the affinity score and the number of co-investments. This
pattern is captured in Figure 1, which presents the average values of ability and affinity scores
for dyads of venture capitalists grouped by the number of co-investments they make together.20
Collaborating individuals have both greater ability and affinity scores than non-collaborating
individuals. Frequency of collaborations–among actual syndicates–does not seem to be related

20

Figure 1 and tables that follow are based on the simple-average ability and affinity scores. Using the
weighted-average ability and affinity scores generates similar patterns.
19

to the ability score. It is, however, increasing in the affinity score. Therefore, affinity-based
similarity not only determines people’s attractions to work together for the first time, but also
increases their frequency of repeated collaborations.

4. Selection versus Treatment
Inferior performance of investments undertaken by venture capitalists with a high level
of affinity between them may be attributed either to selection or treatment effects. On the one
hand, collaboration with similar others may have value in itself.

In this case, a venture

capitalist may derive personal utility from the collaboration and consciously reduce the hurdle
rate if making the investment involves future cooperation with a syndicate partner sharing
common features. As a result, syndications based on affinity will have lower probabilities of
success because of less stringent requirements on portfolio companies at the time of investment.
Alternatively, it is possible that affinity makes it easier for one venture capitalist to convince
another that the investment is worthwhile. Consequently, if the attractiveness of an investment
opportunity is questionable and hence it is hard for a founding venture capitalist to reach out to
a wide set of potential syndication partners, it is more likely that a future co-investor will
display a high level of affinity with the original investor. Finally, entrepreneurs may prefer to
work with a diverse group of venture capitalists in order to reduce the likelihood of investors
colluding and making decisions not in the interests of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs of inferior
portfolio companies have considerably less bargaining power in terms of which venture
capitalists to bring aboard. Accordingly, the underperformance of deals on which high affinity
venture capitalists are among co-investors may also be explained by the inability of
entrepreneurs of low quality portfolio companies to push for a more diverse group of investors.
On the other hand, the negative effect of affinity may be due to treatment effects after
the investment was made. The dark side of homophily can lead to poor decision-making by
inducing social conformity and groupthink.

In contrast, differences in knowledge, skills, and

perspectives among team members may enhance creativity and innovation and elicit a
multiplicity of views, adding dimensions to problem-solving and decision-making processes as
well as eventually improving performance (William and O’Reilly, 1998; Jehn, et al., 1999).

20

Venture capital investors provide significant value-add to their portfolio companies beyond the
supply of capital. Post-investment, they make important decisions and offer invaluable advice
on a variety of issues: hiring and firing the CEO, the senior management team, and the board of
directors; identifying customers or partnering opportunities; and devising a viable overall
strategy, all of which are critical to moving the venture forward along the path to success.
Thus, any inefficient decision-making post investment induced by homophily among highaffinity venture capitalists will negatively impact the success of the portfolio company they
oversee.

In other words, the lower likelihood of success of co-investments between venture

capitalists that share similar characteristics is triggered by their making inefficient decisions or
even mistakes that they would otherwise avoid with more diverse boards.
Although similar in terms of empirical effects, the selection and treatment effects
explanations have different welfare implications. According to the selection story, the success of
a portfolio company is independent of the composition of the venture capital team once the
investment is made. As long as investors act rationally, i.e., all investments have nonnegative
ex ante expected returns, there is no efficiency loss post investment.

Potential losses are

incurred if some deals undertaken would not have been financed absent the affinity between coinvestors or if high-affinity deals crowd out better deals that should have been financed instead.
In the treatment story, however, the investment outcome is affected by whether syndication
partners exhibit high homophily or not.

To this end, there is scope for greater efficiency if

venture capitalists become more cautious in choosing to collaborate with investors possessing
similar traits.
It is clearly possible that both mechanisms take place in practice, and it is not entirely
obvious which effect contributes more to the empirical biases that we document. In the tests
that follow, we try to disentangle selection versus treatment effects. First, we show that our
results are robust to controlling for quality-related characteristics of portfolio companies known
to venture capitalists at the time of financing. The treatment story should be identifiable using
the right set of ex ante quality observables, allowing us to estimate the causal effect of affinity
in the reduced form regressions. Second, we instrument for the level of pairwise affinity between
a syndicate of venture capitalists involved in a deal with the level of affinity among their
21

respective colleagues not involved in the deal under consideration and refer to this measure as
the cross-firm affinity.

The structural form results support the treatment effect story.

The

direct analysis of the treatment effect would require us to study how decisions made by or the
amount of effort exerted by venture capitalists differ depending on the composition of the
investment team. This information is hard to document, let alone quantify, because of the tacit
nature of venture capitalists’ production function. The robustness of results to adding portfolio
company controls and to instrumenting for the affinity measure makes us confident that the
composition of the syndicate is an important causal driver of the ultimate investment success.
At the same time, the selection story cannot be ruled out; instead we also find evidence–both
indirect and direct–for its existence. The reduction in the magnitudes of point estimates on
the affinity score following the inclusion of portfolio company controls indicates that
approximately 17% of the negative effect of affinity stems from the fact that high affinity
syndicates choose to work on deals inferior at consummation, whereas the remaining 83% is due
to the detrimental nature of affinity post-investment. We confirm that venture capitalists that
display high levels of mutual affinity do indeed invest into portfolio companies of lower potential
investment success by constructing the measure of ex ante deal quality and showing that it is
negatively related to the affinity score. The economic effect of this bias, however, is small.
We also use the Heckman (1979) two-stage procedure to address sample selectivity issues.
Model identification comes from the variation in the co-investment frequency between VC firms.
For every syndication between individual venture capitalists–actual and counterfactual–we
calculate the number of past syndications between their two respective venture capital firms.
These co-investments may include partnerships between one of the venture capitalists in the
pair under consideration and colleagues of the other VC in a given dyad or joint deals
undertaken by their colleagues without either of the investors in a pair being involved. Since we
are examining exclusively the first syndications between individual venture capitalists, their past
collaboration history is non-existent by construction. The co-investment frequency (e.g., over
the previous 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years) between two firms is a strong predictor of whether
individual investors from these firms choose to partner on a deal. It is not, however, related to

22

the investment outcome.21 The inclusion and exclusion restrictions hold, and hence, the variable
is a valid instrument to be used in the Heckman selection equation from which the inverse Mills
ratio is computed. Including the inverse Mills ratio computed from the selection equation as an
additional explanatory variable into the pairwise investment success model does not affect the
qualitative nature of results reported in Table 5. This suggests that the biases we document are
not driven by the sample selectivity.
We present two sets of results in Table 8. First, we establish the economic significance
of ex ante characteristics of portfolio companies in predicting their ultimate performance
(Panel A). Second, we document that the cost of affinity is robust to accounting for portfolio
company controls in explaining the investment success of a syndicate (Panel B).
Panel A of Table 8 reports marginal effects on the investment success probability of each
of the portfolio company characteristics measured at the time of financing. The dependent
variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneurial firm eventually conducts an IPO.
The estimations are based on probit regressions with industry, year, and venture capital firm
fixed effects. In Column 1 of Panel A, we focus on whether the portfolio company was founded
by serial entrepreneurs by tracking the careers of founders and identifying those who had
already established a venture capital-backed business. An entrepreneur with a track record of
success is more likely to succeed that a first time entrepreneur (Gompers et al., 2010).

In

Columns 2 and 3, we examine the stage (e.g., Startup/Seed, Early Stage, Expansion, Later
Stage, and Buyout/Acquisition) at the time of fundraising and the financing round, respectively,
keeping in mind that earlier stages and rounds involve more risks and hence are less likely to
result in a successful outcome. Last, we account for the amount of attention that the media
paid to the portfolio company at the time of investment in Column 4. Deals that receive more
media presence prior to the first venture capital investment are ultimately more successful. We
use Dow Jones Factiva to identify portfolio companies which had news stories about them
released at the time of financing or just prior to it. Specifically, we search for publications with
the portfolio company name and the phrase “venture capital” in the time frame from six months
21

Frequent syndications between two firms over a long period of time in the past (e.g., 3 years or more)
make it more likely that individual venture capitalists from these firms will be more successful. This is
consistent with the idea that long-term partnerships are likely to be backed by superior performance.
23

before the investment until one month after.22 We then separate the investments into three
groups, those with no media coverage, those with moderate media coverage, and those with high
media coverage, and include two dummy variables, Moderate Media Coverage and High Media
Coverage, as independent variables in Column 4.23 All these variables display statistical and
economic significance in predicting the future investment outcome, separately as well as jointly
(as indicated in Column 5 when all the factors are included at once).

Having a serial

entrepreneur as a founder, for example, increases the likelihood of the portfolio company going
public by 3.8 percentage points from the unconditional IPO probability of 17.7%. Similarly,
compared with portfolio companies with no media coverage at the time of investment, portfolio
companies with moderate and high media coverage are significantly more likely to eventually be
successful. Overall, results in Panel A demonstrate that these characteristics are good indicators
of the ex ante quality of portfolio companies.
Panel B of Table 8 shows that the detrimental effect of affinity is not driven by the
selection of high-affinity syndicates into inferior deals based on observable characteristics of
portfolio companies discussed in Panel A.

The point estimate on the affinity score remains

negative, highly statistically and economically significant across all specifications.

The

corresponding marginal effect’s absolute value goes down by 17% from 0.237 to 0.197 following
the inclusion of portfolio company controls. This suggests that the relative contribution of the
treatment effect and the selection effect to the cost of affinity is roughly 83/17. On one hand,
this observation may be interpreted as indirect evidence for the selection story–the bias has
been eliminated following the inclusion of additional controls correlated with the treatment. On
the other hand, and most importantly, the reduction in magnitude of the affinity’s marginal
effect by only 0.040 from 0.237 following the inclusion of objective fundamental controls–highly
significant in explaining the future investment outcome–indicates that the major portion of the
negative side of affinity stems from the post-investment actions of the syndicate as opposed to

22

Our results are robust to using alternative windows such as six months before to six months after the
investment.
23
Investments with zero news articles covering them are grouped in the No Media Coverage category.
For investments covered by at least one news article, we separate them into Moderate Media Coverage
and High Media Coverage using the median number of articles covering the investment in that year.
24

the deal selection patterns. Naturally, real investment decisions are made based on a much
richer information set, which includes unobservable attributes of portfolio companies as well.
We use the instrumental variable approach to address endogeneity at this level.
The instrumental variable used to account for the endogeneity between the level of
affinity in a syndicate and the underlying quality of a deal is the cross-firm affinity score. It can
be thought of as the degree to which employees of two firms–excluding people involved in a
deal under consideration–are similar to each other. The measure is constructed in three steps.
First, for every employee of one firm–not staffed on that deal–we compute affinity scores visà-vis every employee of another firm–not staffed on that deal. Second, we take an average of
the scores by person, which gives us the extent to which a venture capitalist of one firm is
similar to a group of people working at another firm. Third and last, we average out these
individual similarity measures by firm and arrive at the cross-firm affinity score.24 Gompers et
al. (2012) show that new hires into venture capital firms tend to be very similar to VC partners
active at the time of their recruitment. This suggests that every employee should exhibit a high
level of affinity with other people working at a firm even if they are not involved in the same
deals. Since the cross-firm affinity score does not take into account people who participate in
the selection or execution of a deal under consideration, the measure cannot be directly related
to the ultimate performance of the portfolio company as well as to the ex ante quality of the
investment opportunity. These two facts hold in data and justify the use of this variable as an
instrument for the pairwise affinity measure.

The ability score is subject to the same

endogeneity concerns as the affinity score–high ability syndicates may choose to invest into
deals of superior quality at the time of financing.

We instrument for it with the cross-firm

ability score constructed in a similar way based on the above-mentioned procedure.
Table 9 presents the estimates obtained using the two-stage least squares method.
Reported in Panel A, structural form equations show that controlling for the endogenous
determination of a syndicate’s affinity level does not change the conclusion that greater
similarity between co-investment partners is associated with lower success rates.

24

The TSLS

Using the maximum operator instead of the average in computing the cross-firm affinity score leads to
results similar both qualitatively and quantitatively.
25

point estimates on the affinity score are negative and highly statistically significant across all
specifications. The increase in absolute values and standard errors of estimates on the affinity
coefficient compared to probit (Panel B of Table 8) and OLS (unreported) may be driven by the
noisiness of the instrument and heterogeneous effects. Interestingly, the opposite holds for the
ability score. Since the TSLS point estimate on the ability score is not statistically significant,
it might be the case that the positive reduced form relationship between the deal’s success and
the ability score is explained by the selection of high ability co-investment partners into
portfolio companies of ex ante superior quality.

Our confidence in the implemented IV

approach is supported by the first stage estimates reported in Panel B of Table 9.

Each

instrument displays significant statistical power in predicting the endogenous variable of interest;
the F-statistics on the excluded instruments are very large. The weakness of the selection story
is confirmed by the fact that none of the observable portfolio company characteristics prove to
be significant determinants of the syndicate’s level of affinity.
Table 10 provides additional evidence in favor of the treatment story.

Using the

estimates from Panel A of Table 8, we construct the predicted probability of success for each
investment as the summary measure for the ex ante investment quality.

We interact the

affinity score with high (low) investment quality dummies–equal to one if the investment
quality is above (below) the median investment quality of all deals in that year–and show that
the cost of affinity is most pronounced on deals which did have a high level of investment
appeal at the time of financing. This strongly suggests that the post-investment developments
are more important to the detrimental nature of affinity than the selection story which argues
that high-affinity syndicates choose to pursue low-quality investment opportunities.
Having documented direct evidence of the strong treatment effect, we cannot rule out
the selection story. The following tests show that venture capitalists with common traits do
indeed syndicate on deals with lower investment appeal. This effect, however, is by no means a
significant driver of the biases we document; the post-investment behavior of venture capitalists
with similar characteristics is the ultimate source of the cost of affinity.
Results of the Heckman two-stage procedure are reported in Table 11. The selection
equation (1) uses the number of syndications between two venture capital firms within 6 months
26

prior to a given syndication between a pair of individual investors as an instrument. Recent
collaborations between two firms make it much more likely that venture capitalists from these
firms will decide to partner on a deal. The fraction of counterfactual pairs of VCs that work at
firms with joint syndications in the preceding 6 months is under 5%, whereas around 16% of
actual pairs come from firms that do have recent co-investment history.

The number of

syndications by two VC firms in the past 6 months is uninformative with respect to investment
success of joint deals. Adding the instrument as an explanatory variable into the syndication
success regressions does not produce a significant coefficient and does not change the
magnitudes or significance of other estimates (unreported specification). Finally, we add the
Inverse Mills Ratio generated from the selection equation as an independent variable into the
success regressions (4) and obtain a negative point estimate on it. This suggests that there is
negative correlation between the residuals in the selection and outcome equations; pairs of VCs
that are more likely to work together have lower success potential. This supports the selection
story. However, since none of the values of coefficients change, the slight sample selectivity
cannot be responsible for the biases we document.
We also use an additional strategy to identify the selection effect.

According to the

selection story, venture capitalists with high affinity co-invest in portfolio companies that are of
low quality already at the time of financing.

A confirmation of this hypothesis in the data

would be a negative relationship between the syndicate’s affinity level and the ex ante quality of
investment. We do find evidence of mild selection by examining the relationship between the ex
ante quality of investment and the syndicate’s affinity level.

Regression results reported in

Table 12 demonstrate that the affinity score is indeed negatively related to the probability of
the portfolio company to go public assessed at the time of financing.

In spite of being

statistically significant, point estimates do not bear remarkable economic importance.

For

example, increasing the affinity score of a given syndicate by adding a weak social tie between
venture capitalists (i.e., allowing them to have gone to the same college, graduate school or
business school or have worked at the same company in the past or to belong to the same ethnic
minority group) reduces the ex ante quality of investment by less than 1 percentage point from
the average value of 18—20% depending on the specification. In contrast, as follows from Panel
27

B of Table 8, controlling for the investment attractiveness of the portfolio company at the time
of financing, a one-step increase in the affinity score lowers the chances of a portfolio company
to eventually go public by 2.5 percentage points from the unconditional average of 21.0%. This
suggests that the selection effect, albeit present, is not an economically significant driver of the
cost of affinity compared to the treatment effect. This finding is consistent with the results of
the Heckman two-stage procedure.

In addition, we examine the deals that successfully

conducted IPOs within six months (or one year) of investment as another proxy for ex ante
quality and find no significant relationship between ex ante quality and affinity (unreported).
Furthermore, we examine syndicates in which both venture capitalists join at the same time
versus syndicates consisting of one founding investor and one follow-on investor and find no
evidence that the latter exhibit higher levels of affinity.
We document the presence of both treatment and selection effects in the data. A variety
of tests discussed in this section–introducing a range of portfolio company controls, accounting
for the endogeneity using the instrumental variable approach, applying the Heckman two-stage
procedure to adjust the results for sample selectivity, and demonstrating that the affinity is
most detrimental on deals of highest quality at the time of financing–make us confident that
the contribution of the selection effect to the empirical biases documented in the paper is at
most weak. The treatment effect post-investment is the key channel through which the mutual
affinity of venture capitalists involved in a deal affects ultimate investment success.

5. Conclusion
Collaborative behavior between people is of great importance in different spheres of life.
We engage in brainstorming discussions with our colleagues at work to find an optimal solution
to a business problem. Companies we work at form partnerships with other firms to develop
creative products and enhance joint productivity. Our children form study groups with their
classmates to learn the material better.

Our countries collaborate with other nations upon

security and environmental issues. Living in a globalized world, we face great opportunities not
only in terms of what to work on, but also with whom to cooperate. The growth in the number
of projects that are being done in a team rather than individually makes it increasingly

28

important to understand the following questions. First, what personal characteristics are taken
into account when people select their working partners? Second, how does the influence of these
personal characteristics on the team composition affect performance?

We use the venture

capital syndication setting to answer these questions.
Conducting the analysis at the individual venture capitalist level with a dataset most
comprehensive of its kind to date, we establish a distinction between personal characteristics
which affect individual performance and those which do not.

Ability-related characteristics

include ranks of academic institutions which an individual graduated from. Holders of degrees–
undergraduate, graduate, and MBA–from top universities are more likely to make successful
investments. Personal characteristics not related to success and ability–after controlling for
past performance–include ethnicity and gender.
Consistent with the homophily literature, we conclude that investors who share similar
characteristics with each other are more likely to co-invest together. This finding applies to
both ability- and affinity-related pairwise characteristics. For example, top university degree
holders–highly able investors–are 8.5% more likely to work together at least once. Venture
capitalists exhibit an even stronger attraction to each other based on affinity-related
characteristics.

Graduates of the same university–not necessarily with the same type of

degree–are 20.5% more likely to co-invest with each other. Furthermore, being part of the
same ethnic minority group increases the probability of cooperation between two venture
capitalists by 22.8%.
The real effects of these biases are not unidirectional. On one hand, syndication based
on top ability characteristics improves performance of a group. On the other hand, investment
teams that exhibit a high extent of similarity between members over characteristics not related
to ability are less likely to succeed. The adverse effect of affinity based on prior employment,
educational background or ethnicity is economically and statistically significant, in some cases
lowering the probability of investment success by 25%. A variety of tests show that the cost of
affinity is not driven by selection into inferior deals; the effect is most likely attributable to poor
decision-making by high-affinity syndicates post investment.

We also find that venture

capitalists who collaborate most frequently with each other are precisely those who have a lot of
29

affinity-related characteristics in common.

In such groups, people partner because they

associate with each other, they share a bond, and perhaps they are even friends.
Our conclusion is that, to paraphrase Ralph Waldo Emerson, you cannot afford to be
stupid with old friends when you are venture capitalists co-investing together.25

25

The original quote from Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803—1882) is: "It is one of the blessings of old friends
that you can afford to be stupid with them."
30

References
Asch, Solomon, 1951, Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification and Distortion of
Judgment, in H. Guetzkow (ed.) Groups, Leadership, and Men. Pittsburgh: Carnegie
Press.
Becker, Gary S, 1973, A Theory of Marriage: Part I, Journal of Political Economy 81: 813—846.
Bengtsson, Ola, and David H. Hsu, 2010, How Do Venture Capital Partners Match with
Startup Founders? Working Paper.
Brander, James A., Raphael Amit, and Werner Antweiler, 2002, Venture-Capital Syndication:
Improved Venture Selection vs. the Value-Added Hypothesis, Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy 11, 423—452.
Chen, Henry, Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner, 2010, Buy local? The Geography
of Venture Capital, Journal of Urban Economics 67: 90—102.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The Small World of Investing:
Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns, Journal of Political Economy 116: 951—
979.
Currarini, Sergio, Matthew O. Jackson, and Paolo Pin, 2009, An Economic Model of Friendship:
Homophily, Minorities, and Segregation, Econometrica 77: 1003—1045.
Gompers, Paul, 1996, Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry, Journal of Financial
Economics 42: 133—156.
Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2010, Performance
Persistence in Entrepreneurship, Journal of Financial Economics 96: 18—32.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Money Chasing Deals? The Impact of Fund Inflows on
Private Equity Valuations, Journal of Financial Economics 55: 281—325.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2004, The Venture Capital Cycle, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
and London.
Gompers, Paul, Vladimir Mukharlyamov, and Yuhai Xuan, 2012, To Err is Human. To Forgive
is a Mistake, Working Paper.
Gompers, Paul, and Yuhai Xuan, 2010, Bridge Building in Venture Capital-Backed Acquisitions,
Working Paper.
Ingram, Paul, and Peter W. Roberts, 2000, Friendships Among Competitors in the Sydney
Hotel Industry, The American Journal of Sociology 106: 387—423.
Ishii, Joy, and Yuhai Xuan, 2010, Acquirer-Target Social Ties and Merger Outcomes, Working
Paper.
31

Heckman, James, 1979, Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica 47, 153—162.
Hochberg, Yael V., Laura A. Lindsey, and Mark M. Westerfield, 2011, Economic Ties: Evidence
from Venture Capital Networks, Working Paper.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, Whom You Know Matters:
Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance, Journal of Finance 62, 251—302.
Janis, Irving L, 1982, Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions, 2nd ed., Houghton
Mifflin Company.
Jehn, Karen A., Gregory B. Northcraft, and Margaret A. Neale, 1999, Why Differences Make a
Difference: A Field Study of Diversity, Conflict, and Performance in Workgroups,
Administrative Science Quarterly 44: 741—763.
Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln, 2010, The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention, Journal of Labor Economics 28: 473—508.
Lerner, Joshua, 1994, The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments, Financial Management
23: 16—27.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook, 2001, Birds of a Feather:
Homophily in Social Networks, Annual Review of Sociology 27: 415—444.
Smith, Adam, 1776, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
W. Strahan and T, Cadell, London, U.K.
Sørensen, Morten, 2007, How Smart Is Smart Money? A Two-Sided Matching Model of Venture
Capital, Journal of Finance 62, 2725—2762.
Tian, Xuan, 2012, The Role of Venture Capital Syndication in Value Creation for
Entrepreneurial Firms, Review of Finance 16: 245—283.
Venture Economics, 1988, Trends in Venture Capital (1988 edition), Venture Economics, Inc,
Needham, MA.
Williams, Katherine, and Charles A. O’Reilly, 1998,
Demography and Diversity in
Organizations, in Barry M. Staw, and Robert M. Sutton (ed.), Research in
Organizational Behavior, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

32

Table 1
Illustrative Example
This table presents co-investments of
categories depending on the types of
syndications are the ones on which Mr.
capitalist holding a degree from a top
background.

an Israeli venture capitalist in our sample, Mr. A, into four
similarities that he has with his co-investors. Ability-based
A, an MIT graduate, co-invested with at least one other venture
school. Partnerships are affinity-based if investors share Israeli

Affinity-based co-investment

Ability-based co-investment

Yes

No

No

Yes

Number of deals: 3

Number of deals: 2

Number of IPOs: 0

Number of IPOs: 0

Success Rate: 0.0%

Success Rate: 0.0%

Number of deals: 0

Number of deals: 9

Number of IPOs: 0

Number of IPOs: 4

Success Rate: N/A

Success Rate: 44.4%

33

Table 2
Summary of Personal Characteristics
This table summarizes the distribution of venture capitalists’ personal characteristics. A venture
capitalist is counted in Top College, Top Business School, Top Grad School or Top School if she holds,
respectively, an undergraduate, business, graduate or any degree from a top university. There are
individuals which hold more than several different degrees from top schools. That is why, Top College,
Top Business School and Top School numbers do not add up to Top School. Ethnicity is uniquely
determined. Gender information is missing for 27 venture capitalists in the dataset.
Personal Characteristic
Top College
Top Business School
Top Grad School

Number of VCs
1,089
1,308
466

Top School

Fraction of VCs
31.0%
37.3%
13.3%

1,867

53.2%

Indian
East Asian
Middle Eastern
Jewish

83
113
15
640

2.4%
3.2%
0.4%
18.2%

Ethnic Minority

851

24.2%

Male
Female

3,264
219

93.0%
6.2%

Total Number of VCs

3,510

100.0%

34

Table 3
Individual Investment Success
This table reports marginal effects of probit regressions for the probability of success of an investment
made by a venture capitalist. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if
the investment is successful and zero otherwise. Independent variables are success and personal
(education, ethnicity, and gender) characteristics of a venture capitalist. Performance is the venture
capitalist’s success ratio up to the current deal. Top College, Top Business School, Top Grad School and
Top School are dummy variables which take the value of one if a venture capitalist holds, respectively, an
undergraduate, business, graduate or any degree from a top university and zero otherwise. Ethnic
Minority is a dummy variable that equals one if a venture capitalist is East Asian, Indian, Jewish, or
Middle Eastern. Portfolio company’s industry and year of investment fixed effects are included in all
specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are reported in brackets.
Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Performance

(1)

Top Grad School
Top Business School

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

0.012**

0.012**

0.012**

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

0.010

0.010*

0.010*

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.006]

0.020***

[0.005]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.005]

0.025***

Top School

0.025*** 0.025***

[0.005]
East Asian
Indian
Jewish
Middle Eastern

[0.005]
-0.001

-0.008

-0.006

[0.013]

[0.013]

[0.013]

-0.008

-0.009

-0.011

[0.015]

[0.015]

[0.015]

-0.005

-0.004

-0.004

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.006]

-0.009

-0.007

-0.009

[0.041]

[0.041]

[0.040]

Ethnic Minority

Observations

(8)

0.020*** 0.020***

[0.005]

Female

(7)

0.083*** 0.084*** 0.089*** 0.089*** 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.084*** 0.084***
[0.008]

Top College

(2)

[0.005]

-0.005

-0.005

-0.005

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.005]

-0.012

-0.012

-0.014

-0.014

-0.012

-0.012

-0.012

-0.012

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

26,327

26,327

26,327

26,327

26,327

26,327

26,327

26,327

35

Table 4
Syndication Partnering Decision
This table reports marginal effects of probit regressions for the probability of a venture capitalist to
partner with another venture capitalist based on a set of observable characteristics. The dependent
variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the syndication between two investors takes place (actual
pairs) and zero otherwise (counterfactual). Independent variables are pairwise personal characteristics
(education, ethnicity, career and gender) of a dyad of venture capitalists. Both Top College, Both Top
Business School, Both Top Grad School and Both Top School are dummy variables which take the value
of one if both venture capitalists in a pair hold, respectively, undergraduate, business, graduate or any
degrees from a top university and zero otherwise. Same School equals one if venture capitalists attended
the same academic institution and zero otherwise. Same College, Same Business School and Same Grad
School are defined similarly with a restriction on the type of degree obtained. Same Ethnic Minority
equals one if venture capitalists are both part of the same ethnic minority and zero otherwise. Same
Previous Employer is a dummy variable equal to one if two venture capitalists worked at the same
company before entering the venture capital industry and zero otherwise. Same Location is a dummy
equal to one if venture capitalists’ firms have offices in the same Combined Statistical Area. Portfolio
company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects are included in all specifications. Robust
standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are reported in brackets. Asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Top College: Both

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.013**
[0.005]
Top Business School: Both 0.020***
[0.005]
0.005
Top Grad School: Both
[0.011]
0.022***
Top School: Both
[0.004]
0.110***
Same College
[0.016]
0.040***
Same Business School
[0.008]
0.066***
Same Grad School
[0.025]
0.053***
Same School
[0.006]
0.193***
East Asian: Both
[0.047]
0.135*
Indian: Both
[0.069]
0.049***
Jewish: Both
[0.011]
0.059***
Same Ethnic Minority
[0.010]
0.040
0.040
0.039
0.039
0.041
0.041
Female: Both
[0.030]
[0.030]
[0.030]
[0.029]
[0.030]
[0.030]
Same Previous Employer 0.169*** 0.169*** 0.167*** 0.165*** 0.171*** 0.171***
[0.019]
[0.019]
[0.019]
[0.019]
[0.019]
[0.019]
0.125*** 0.125*** 0.125*** 0.124*** 0.127*** 0.127***
Same Location
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
Observations
66,888
66,888
66,888
66,888
66,888
66,888
36

(7)
0.004
[0.006]
0.013**
[0.005]
-0.008
[0.012]

(8)

0.012***
[0.004]
0.103***
[0.016]
0.028***
[0.009]
0.072***
[0.028]
0.045***
[0.007]
0.188***
[0.048]
0.131*
[0.070]
0.049***
[0.011]
0.061***
[0.010]
0.040
0.040
[0.030]
[0.030]
0.166*** 0.164***
[0.019]
[0.019]
0.124*** 0.123***
[0.005]
[0.005]
66,888
66,888

Table 5
Investment Success: Pairwise Characteristics
This table reports marginal effects of probit regressions for the probability of investment success by a pair
of venture capitalists. The dependent variable equals one if the investment is successful and zero
otherwise. Independent variables are pairwise personal characteristics (education, ethnicity, career, and
gender) of a dyad of venture capitalists. Variables with the classifier at least one (both) take the value of
one if at least one (both) individual(s) in a pair has (have) a specific attribute and zero otherwise. Same
Previous Employer is a dummy variable which equals one if venture capitalists in a dyad worked at the
same company. Same Location takes a value of one if the two venture capitalists’ firms are located in the
same CSA. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects are included in all
specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are reported in brackets.
Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Top School: At Least One
Top School: Both
Same College
Same Business School
Same Grad School

(1)
0.017
[0.011]
0.021**
[0.009]
-0.048***
[0.017]
0.001
[0.014]
0.000
[0.033]

(2)
0.016
[0.011]
0.021**
[0.009]
0.047***
[0.017]
0.001
[0.014]
0.001
[0.033]

(3)
0.016
[0.011]
0.023**
[0.009]

Same School
East Asian: At Least One
East Asian: Both
Indian: At Least One
Indian: Both
Jewish: At Least One
Jewish: Both

Female: Both
Same Previous Employer
Same Location
Observations

(5)
0.019*
[0.010]
0.022**
[0.009]
0.047***
[0.017]
0.001
[0.014]
0.001
[0.033]

-0.014
[0.010]
-0.010
[0.019]
-0.133***
[0.025]
-0.004
[0.025]
-0.045
[0.073]
0.001
[0.010]
-0.043**
[0.018]

Same Ethnic Minority
Female: At Least One

(4)
0.020*
[0.010]
0.022**
[0.009]
0.047***
[0.017]
0.002
[0.014]
0.001
[0.033]

-0.020
[0.015]
-0.039
[0.049]
-0.038**
[0.019]
0.021**
[0.010]
17,320

(6)
0.019*
[0.010]
0.024***
[0.009]

-0.014
[0.010]
-0.010
[0.019]
-0.133***
[0.025]
-0.001
[0.025]
-0.045
[0.073]
0.000
[0.010]
-0.043**
[0.017]

-0.052***
[0.017]
-0.020
[0.015]
-0.039
[0.049]
-0.039**
[0.019]
0.020**
[0.010]
17,320

-0.053***
[0.017]
-0.020
[0.015]
-0.038
[0.049]
-0.038**
[0.019]
0.020**
[0.010]
17,320
37

-0.038*
[0.019]
0.020**
[0.010]
17,473

-0.052***
[0.017]

-0.053***
[0.017]

-0.038**
[0.019]
0.020**
[0.010]
17,473

-0.038*
[0.019]
0.020**
[0.010]
17,473

Table 6
Ability and Affinity Scores: Investment Success
This table reports marginal effects of probit regressions for the probability of investment success by a pair
of venture capitalists. The ability score is the simple average of pairwise ability characteristics
(Top College (Business School, Grad School, School): Both) in Columns 1 and 2 and the weighted average
of pairwise ability characteristics in Columns 3 and 4 where the weights are coefficients from the
syndication partnering decision model reported in Table 4. The affinity score is defined similarly over the
set of pairwise affinity characteristics (Same College (Business School, Grad School, School), East Asian
(Indian, Jewish): Both, Same Ethnic Minority, Female: Both, and Same Previous Employer), with simple
averages in Columns 1 and 2 and weighted averages in Columns 3 and 4. Columns 1 and 3 are based on
specification 7 in Table 4, and Columns 2 and 4 are based on specification 8 in Table 4. Portfolio
company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects as well as a dummy variable indicating
whether the two venture capitalists’ firms are located in the same CSA are included in all specifications.
Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are reported in brackets. Asterisks
denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Simple average
Independent Variables
Ability Score
Affinity Score
Observations

Weighted average

(1)
0.050**
[0.020]
-0.243***
[0.074]

(2)
0.032***
[0.010]
-0.118***
[0.036]

(3)
0.010
[0.006]
-0.316***
[0.082]

(4)
0.029***
[0.010]
-0.127***
[0.038]

17,320

17,320

17,320

17,320

38

Table 7
Ability and Affinity Scores: Repeated Collaborations
This table reports the results of Poisson regressions for the number of co-investments a pair of venture
capitalists made together. Columns 1 and 3 present the results of the analysis over both actual (positive
number of co-investments) and counterfactual (no co-investments) pairs; Columns 2 and 4 focuses
exclusively on actual pairs. The ability score is the simple average of pairwise ability characteristics
(Top College (Business School, Grad School, School): Both) in Columns 1 and 2 and the weighted average
of pairwise ability characteristics in Columns 3 and 4 where the weights are coefficients from the
syndication partnering decision model reported in Table 4. The affinity score is defined similarly over the
set of pairwise affinity characteristics (Same College (Business School, Grad School, School), East Asian
(Indian, Jewish): Both, Same Ethnic Minority, Female: Both, and Same Previous Employer), with simple
averages in Columns 1 and 2 and weighted averages in Columns 3 and 4. Ability and affinity scores are
computed based on specification 7 from Table 4 (results based on specification 8 from Table 4 are both
qualitatively and quantitatively similar). Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed
effects as well as a dummy variable indicating whether the two venture capitalists’ firms are located in
the same CSA are included in all specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio
company level are reported in brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**),
or 10% (*) level.
Simple average
Weighted average
With Pseudo Pairs Actual Pairs Only With Pseudo Pairs Actual Pairs Only
Independent Variables
Ability Score
Affinity Score
Observations

(1)
0.03900
[0.036]
1.848***
[0.145]

(2)
-0.00400
[0.012]
0.143***
[0.052]

(3)
0.031***
[0.011]
2.444***
[0.149]

(4)
0.00000
[0.004]
0.195***
[0.061]

66,888

17,320

66,888

17,320

39

Figure 1
Ability and Affinity Scores: Repeated Collaborations
This figure presents the average values of ability and affinity scores for pairs of venture capitalists
grouped by the number of co-investments they make together. Counterfactual pairs of venture capitalists
partnered on no investments by construction; actual pairs of venture capitalists participated on at least
one joint deal. The ability score is the simple average of pairwise ability characteristics (Top College
(Business School, Grad School, School): Both). The affinity score is defined similarly over the set of
pairwise affinity characteristics (Same College (Business School, Grad School, School), East Asian (Indian,
Jewish): Both, Same Ethnic Minority, Female: Both, and Same Previous Employer). Ability and affinity
scores are computed based on specification 7 from Table 4 (results based on specification 8 from Table 4
are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar).

0.18

Ability Score

0.14

0.025

Affinity Score

0.12

0.02

0.1
0.015
0.08
0.06

0.01

0.04
0.005
0.02
0

0
0

1
2
Number of Deals Together

40

3+

Affinity Score

0.16

0.03
Ability Score

Table 8
Portfolio Company Characteristics
Results presented in this table show that the detrimental effect of affinity on investment success is robust
to accounting for the characteristics of a portfolio company–measured at the time of investment–that
strongly predict future investment outcome. Each panel reports robust standard errors clustered at the
portfolio company level in brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or
10% (*) level.
Panel A. This panel reports OLS estimates for the probability of success of an investment made by an
individual venture capitalist. The dependent variable equals one if the portfolio company eventually goes
public and zero otherwise. Independent variables are characteristics of a portfolio company at the time of
investment. Serial entrepreneur is a dummy equal to one if the founder of a portfolio company had
previously founded another venture-backed company. Portfolio Company Stage is a variable with integer
values from 1 to 5 corresponding to start-up/seed, early stage, later stage, expansion, and
buyout/acquisition, respectively. Financing Round indicates the round at which the investment was
made into the portfolio company. Moderate (High) Media Coverage is a dummy variable that equals one
if the number of news articles covering the investment is greater than zero and is below (above) the
median number of news articles for investments covered by at least one news article in that year.
Industry, year of investment, and venture capital firm fixed effects are included in all specifications.
Independent Variables
Serial Entrepreneur

(1)
0.038***
[0.013]

Portfolio Company Stage

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.029***
[0.004]

Financing Round

0.031***
[0.003]

Moderate Media Coverage

0.047***
[0.008]
0.062***
[0.010]
25,441
0.193

High Media Coverage
Observations
R-squared

18,408
0.208

25,880
0.195

24,961
0.207

(5)
0.035**
[0.013]
0.020***
[0.006]
0.020***
[0.004]
0.036***
[0.011]
0.045***
[0.013]
17,390
0.224

Panel B. This panel reports marginal effects of probit regressions for the probability of investment
success by a pair of venture capitalists. Affinity Score is the simple average of pairwise affinity
characteristics: Same College/Business School/Grad School, East Asian/Indian/Jewish: Both, Female:
Both, and Same Previous Employer. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects
are included in all specifications.
Independent Variables
Affinity Score
Top School: Both
Same Location

(1)
-0.237***
[0.072]
0.030***
[0.009]
0.020**
[0.010]

Portfolio company controls

None

Observations

17,320

(2)
(3)
-0.225***
-0.227***
[0.074]
[0.072]
0.031***
0.025***
[0.010]
[0.010]
0.020**
0.023**
[0.010]
[0.010]
Serial entreStage
preneur
16,368
17,175

41

(4)
-0.216***
[0.074]
0.024**
[0.010]
0.024**
[0.010]

(5)
-0.213***
[0.073]
0.027***
[0.010]
0.024**
[0.010]

(6)
-0.197***
[0.076]
0.022**
[0.010]
0.028***
[0.010]

Round

Media

All

16,674

16,595

15,470

Table 9
Cost of Affinity: Instrumental Variable Approach
This table reports results of two-stage least squares for the probability of investment success by a pair of
venture capitalists. Ability Score is defined as in Panel B of Table 8. Ability Score equals one if both
VCs in a pair hold degrees from top schools and zero otherwise. Affinity (Ability) Score is instrumented
for with the Cross-Firm Affinity (Ability) Score, which measures the extent to which employees of two
firms–excluding people involved in a deal under consideration–are similar to each other in terms of
affinity (ability) characteristics. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects are
included in all specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are
reported in brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Panel A. This panel reports structural form equation estimates for the probability of investment success
by a pair of venture capitalists.
Independent Variables
Affinity Score
Ability Score
Same Location
Portfolio company
controls
Observations
R-squared

(1)
-1.008**
[0.481]
0.077
[0.054]
0.027**
[0.013]
None
10,441
0.13

(2)
-0.845*
[0.468]
0.052
[0.056]
0.026**
[0.013]
Serial entrepreneur
10,035
0.144

(3)
-0.898*
[0.475]
0.061
[0.055]
0.029**
[0.013]

(4)
-1.024**
[0.467]
0.031
[0.055]
0.037***
[0.013]

(5)
-1.182**
[0.514]
0.072
[0.055]
0.031**
[0.014]

(6)
-0.976**
[0.485]
0.019
[0.058]
0.038***
[0.013]

Stage

Round

Media

All

10,400
0.145

10,214
0.149

9,996
0.134

9,512
0.162

Panel B. This panel reports first stage estimates for each endogenous variable in a specification with all
portfolio company controls (column 6 in Panel A). First stage estimates for columns 1—5 in Panel A are
similar and are not displayed for brevity.
Independent Variables
Cross-Firm Affinity Score
Cross-Firm Ability Score
Same Location
Serial Entrepreneur
Portfolio Company Stage
Financing Round
Moderate Media Coverage
High Media Coverage
Observations
F-statistic on excluded instruments
R-squared
42

Affinity
0.538***
[0.053]
-0.007***
[0.003]
0.004***
[0.001]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.000
[0.001]
0.000
[0.000]
-0.002*
[0.001]
-0.002
[0.002]
9,512
155.72
0.043

Ability
-0.385
[0.309]
0.393***
[0.024]
0.076***
[0.013]
0.014
[0.016]
0.005
[0.008]
0.000
[0.005]
-0.021
[0.016]
-0.012
[0.018]
9,562
194.20
0.066

Table 10
Cost of Affinity on Deals of Superior Investment Quality
This table reports estimates of OLS regressions for the probability of investment success by a pair of
venture capitalists. Affinity Score is the simple average of pairwise affinity characteristics: Same
College/Business School/Grad School, East Asian/Indian/Jewish: Both, Female: Both, and Same
Previous Employer. Investment Quality is the investment appeal of a portfolio company at the time of
financing. It is defined as the probability of an IPO predicted by the corresponding model in Panel A of
Table 8 (specifications are matched column-to-column). High (Low) Investment Quality is a dummy
variable that equals one if the Investment Quality of a deal is above (below) the median investment
quality of all deals in that year. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects are
included in all specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are
reported in brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Affinity Score x
High Investment Quality
Affinity Score x

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.255**

-0.229**

-0.257**

-0.224**

-0.327***

[0.101]

[0.100]

[0.103]

[0.104]

[0.104]

-0.128

-0.132

-0.088

-0.133

-0.028

[0.078]

[0.083]

[0.080]

[0.082]

[0.087]

0.021**

0.015*

0.013

0.018*

0.016

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.010]

0.145***

0.139***

0.150***

0.135***

0.174***

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.011]

[0.010]

[0.011]

0.011

0.011

0.013

0.011

0.015

[0.010]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.010]

[0.010]

Observations

16,368

17,175

16,674

16,595

15,470

R-squared

0.186

0.179

0.189

0.175

0.202

Low Investment Quality
Top School: Both
High Investment Quality
Same Location

43

Table 11
Heckman Two-Stage Procedure
This table presents the results of the Heckman two-stage model. The dependent variable in the selection
equation (1) equals one if a pair of individual venture capitalists syndicate on a deal and zero otherwise.
The dependent variable in the syndication success regressions (2—7) is a dummy equal to one if a portfolio
company goes public. Number of Syndications between VC Firms is an instrument in the selection
equation; it is equal to the number of co-investments between two venture capital firms within 6 months
prior to a given syndication between a pair of individual VCs. The Inverse Mills Ratio is generated from
the selection equation. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects are included
in all specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are reported in
brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Inverse Mills Ratio

(1)
Real Pair

Affinity Score

1.514***
[0.120]
Top School: Both
0.027**
[0.011]
Same Location
0.320***
[0.011]
Number of Syndications 0.698***
between VC Firms
[0.016]
Portfolio Company
None
Controls
Observations
66,888

(2)
IPO
-0.017
[0.013]
-0.233***
[0.059]
0.028***
[0.006]
0.015**
[0.007]

None
17,320

(3)
IPO
-0.012
[0.014]
-0.218***
[0.060]
0.029***
[0.006]
0.017**
[0.007]

Serial entrepreneur
16,368

(4)
IPO
-0.031**
[0.013]
-0.233***
[0.059]
0.023***
[0.006]
0.013*
[0.007]

(5)
IPO
-0.039***
[0.014]
-0.238***
[0.059]
0.022***
[0.006]
0.014**
[0.007]

(6)
IPO
-0.024*
[0.014]
-0.217***
[0.060]
0.026***
[0.006]
0.017**
[0.007]

(7)
IPO
-0.044***
[0.014]
-0.226***
[0.061]
0.020***
[0.006]
0.016**
[0.007]

Stage

Round

Media

All

17,175

16,674

16,595

15,470

Table 12
Selection into Deals of Inferior Investment Quality
This panel reports estimates of OLS regressions for the ex ante quality of investment. The dependent
variable (Investment Quality) is the investment appeal of a portfolio company at the time of financing. It
is defined as the probability of an IPO predicted by the corresponding model in Panel A of Table 8
(specifications are matched column-to-column). Affinity Score is the simple average of pairwise affinity
characteristics: Same College/Business School/Grad School, East Asian/Indian/Jewish: Both, Female:
Both, and Same Previous Employer. Portfolio company’s industry and year of co-investment fixed effects
are included in all specifications. Robust standard errors clustered at the portfolio company level are
reported in brackets. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.
Independent Variables
Affinity Score
Top School: Both
Same Location
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.048***
[0.015]
0.014***
[0.002]
0.017***
[0.002]

-0.067***
[0.014]
0.017***
[0.002]
0.013***
[0.002]

-0.075***
[0.015]
0.016***
[0.002]
0.013***
[0.002]

-0.072***
[0.014]
0.016***
[0.002]
0.012***
[0.002]

-0.068***
[0.018]
0.016***
[0.002]
0.015***
[0.002]

16,368
0.725

17,175
0.717

16,674
0.694

16,595
0.704

15,470
0.676

44

Appendix Table 1
Investment Performance of Top School Venture Capitalists
This table contrasts the investment performance of venture capitalists’ with a degree from a top academic
institution and those who did not attend a top university. We consider three different classifications of
top schools. Column 1 presents summary statistics for only the Ivy League schools–Brown University,
Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University, Princeton University,
University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University–classified as top schools. Column 2 adds other Top U.S.
schools–Amherst College, California Institute of Technology, Duke University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Northwestern University, Stanford University, University of California (Berkeley), University
of Chicago, and Williams College–in the classification. Top European schools–Cambridge University,
INSEAD, London Business School, London School of Economics, and Oxford University–are added to
the list in Column 3.
Top School Classification
Number of Venture Capitalists
Top School VCs
Non-Top School VCs
Number of Investments (avg / med)
of a Top School VC
of a Non-Top School VC
Success Ratio (avg / med)
of a Top School VC
of a Non-Top School VC

Ivy

Ivy + Top US

Ivy + Top US + Top Europe

1,253
2,257

1,867
1,643

1,940
1,570

8.4 / 6
7.1 / 5

8.5 / 6
6.4 / 5

8.4 / 6
6.4 / 5

16.9% / 12.5%
12.8% / 0.0%

16.0% / 11.1%
12.3% / 0.0%

15.7% / 11.1%
12.5% / 0.0%

45

Appendix Table 2
Venture Capital Investments over Time
This table illustrates the venture capital investment activity–in terms of the total number of deals and the number of successful
deals–over time and across different industries.

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
11,895
1,865
15.7%

All Industries
1975-1985
966
342
35.4%

1986-1995
3,025
941
31.1%

1996-2003
7,904
582
7.4%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
5,164
710
13.7%

Computers
1975-1985
410
129
31.5%

1986-1995
1,145
332
29.0%

1996-2003
3,609
249
6.9%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
1,722
288
16.7%

Communications
1975-1985
1986-1995
181
443
72
134
39.8%
30.2%

1996-2003
1,098
82
7.5%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

Business and Industrial
1975-2003
1975-1985
1986-1995
200
60
89
31
11
18
15.5%
18.3%
20.2%

1996-2003
51
2
3.9%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
568
101
17.8%

Consumers
1975-1985
39
17
43.6%

1996-2003
322
26
8.1%

1986-1995
207
58
28.0%

46

Energy
1975-1985
4
3
75.0%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
31
12
38.7%

1986-1995
12
7
58.3%

1996-2003
15
2
13.3%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

Biotech and Healthcare
1975-2003
1975-1985
1986-1995
2,237
187
814
528
82
312
23.6%
43.9%
38.3%

1996-2003
1,236
134
10.8%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
247
31
12.6%

Financial Services
1975-1985
1986-1995
7
45
1
15
14.3%
33.3%

1996-2003
195
15
7.7%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
1,300
76
5.8%

Business Services
1975-1985
1986-1995
16
92
4
19
25.0%
20.7%

1996-2003
1,192
53
4.4%

# of deals
# of IPOs
% of IPOs

1975-2003
426
88
20.7%

Other
1975-1985
62
23
37.1%

1986-1995
178
46
25.8%

1996-2003
186
19
10.2%

