NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTING FOR KEYNESIAN LABOR DEMAND
Mark Bils
Peter J. Klenow
Benjamin A. Malin
Working Paper 18149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18149

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

Prepared for the 2012 NBER Macroeconomics Annual. This research was conducted with restricted
access to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data. Randall Verbrugge provided us invaluable assistance
and guidance in using the BLS data. We thank Olamide Harrison, Gabriel Mihalache and Neryvia
Pillay for excellent research assistance, and Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan Parker, Ricardo Reis, Julio
Rotemberg and Michael Woodford for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the BLS or the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Testing for Keynesian Labor Demand
Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin
NBER Working Paper No. 18149
June 2012
JEL No. E12,E2,E3,E6
ABSTRACT
According to the textbook Keynesian model, short-run demand for labor is sensitive to the demand
for goods. In this view, sellers deviate from setting the marginal product of labor proportional to the
real wage, instead enduring or choosing lower price markups when demand for goods is high. We
test this prediction across U.S. industries in the two decades up through the Great Recession. To identify
movements in goods demand, we exploit how durability varies across 70 categories of consumption
and investment. We also take into account the flexibility of prices and capital-intensity of production
across goods. We find evidence in support of Keynesian Labor Demand.

Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu
Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Pete@Klenow.net

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18149

Benjamin A. Malin
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Ave
Minneapolis, MN 55401
benjamin.malin@mpls.frb.org

1. Introduction
A leading proximate explanation for plunging employment during the Great
Recession is plummeting demand for goods. According to this Keynesian Labor Demand
hypothesis, when producers face unexpectedly low demand for their goods they respond by
laying off workers rather than lowering their output prices.

The underlying source of

Keynesian Labor Demand could be nominal price stickiness and/or countercyclical desired
markups. See Keynes (1939) for his embrace of both justifications.1
We test for Keynesian Labor Demand across U.S. industries in recent decades (19902011). To do so, we exploit how durability varies across 70 consumption and investment
categories to predict relative goods demand movements over the business cycle. Relative
demand shocks allow us to test whether markups move in the direction predicted by
Keynesian Labor Demand.2 We also exploit information on which goods are luxuries vs.
necessities to predict relative demand, and take into account how price flexibility and capitalintensity of production vary across industries.
According to consumer theory, durability should be a powerful determinant of the
cyclical expenditures on a good. The more durable a good, the smaller is the average flow of
expenditures on the good relative to the accumulated stock. For a good that lasts N years,
increasing the stock by 1% requires an N% increase in expenditures on the good relative to
replacement expenditures.

Thus any common macro shock (such as to technology or

1

Keynesian Labor Demand has played a central role in business cycle modeling. See, for example, Rotemberg
and Woodford (1991), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007) and Hall (2011).

2

Under partially sticky prices, markups should actually move in the same direction as output in response to
productivity shocks. For this reason, one cannot simply look at the cyclicality of the average economy-wide
markup to test for Keynesian Labor Demand. One has to relate markups to demand and/or supply shocks. By
using durability to predict relative demand, we sidestep the need to identify aggregate demand or supply shocks.

2

monetary policy) should hit demand for durables more dramatically. Similarly, demand for
luxuries should be more cyclical than demand for necessities.
Under sticky prices, firms should accommodate shifts in relative demand by firing or
hiring workers rather than adjusting their prices. If capital is less flexible than labor in the
short run, firms in flexible-price industries should adjust their prices more and adjust their
production less than do sticky-price industries – controlling for the size of the demand shift
they face. If target markups are countercyclical, however, then price stickiness may not be
essential for a Keynesian Labor Demand response to goods demand shocks.
We test for Keynesian Labor Demand using a variety of data. We use U.S. National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and insurance industry estimates of durability for 70
goods covering around 60% of GDP. These include most consumer and investment goods
and services, but exclude government purchases and housing consumption. We estimate
whether a good is a luxury or a necessity using cross-sectional Engel curves from the U.S.
Consumer Expenditure Survey. We assess price flexibility using U.S. CPI and PPI micro
data on the frequency of price changes by good.
We use quarterly NIPA data on consumption and investment from 1990 to 2011 to
test whether durability and luxuriousness succeed in predicting the cyclicality of
expenditures. Durability is a strong predictor. Bringing in data from the U.S. Current
Employment Survey, we find that durability is also highly correlated with employment
growth across industries – including in the Great Recession. Finally, we incorporate the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics KLEMS data on production, prices and inputs across detailed
industries. This allows us to contrast movements in labor’s productivity with its real wage,

3

identifying whether producers move away from constant-markup labor demand in response
to goods demand shocks.
We find that industries producing goods that are more durable, while displaying much
more cyclical employment and output, exhibit countercyclical relative markups.

This

countercyclical increase in markups is sufficiently large that relative prices of durables do not
fall in recessions. (By contrast, sectoral TFP movements play little role in explaining the
lack of cyclicality in durables’ relative prices.) Our evidence rejects flexible-price labor
demand under a constant markup, but is consistent with Keynesian Labor Demand. This
cyclical pricing for durables could reflect intentional markup movements, rather than being
the byproduct of price stickiness. In fact, a model with countercyclical intended markups for
durables, but flexible pricing in general, would arguably explain the data better than a stickyprice model.
Despite its prominence in business cycle theorizing, there have been surprisingly few
tests for Keynesian Labor Demand. Most have been based on aggregate time series, such as
Galí and Rabanal (2004) and Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006). More recently, a number of
studies have exploited regional variation to test whether goods demand drives employment.
Examples include Feyrer and Sacerdote (2011), Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), and Mian
and Sufi (2012).

Mulligan (2011) looks at seasonal movements in labor supply and

employment. Our study complements these by looking at cross-industry evidence. Thus, our
approach is similar to Shea (1993) and Nekarda and Ramey (2011), who examine the impact
of an industry’s downstream demand (Shea) and its share of government purchases (Nekarda
and Ramey) on industry price and quantity. Chang et al. (2009) examine how employment

4

responds to industry-specific productivity shocks, and how that response depends on the use
of inventories and pricing frequency in the industry.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we lay out a DSGE model
to illustrate the key forces that motivate our demand predictors. Section 3 briefly describes
the datasets we use. Section 4 presents the main results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Model
In this section we use a multi-sector DSGE model to demonstrate how relative demand
shocks affect markups under Keynesian vs. Classical Labor Demand. Here the source of
Keynesian Labor Demand is sticky prices, rather than countercyclical intended markups. We
incorporate heterogeneity in the durability of goods, the capital intensity of firms’ production,
and the frequency of price changes. After sketching the key model features,3 we use a
simplified version of the model to illustrate analytically how movements in relative quantities
and prices across sectors differ depending on whether the model is Keynesian or Classical
(i.e., sticky or flexible prices). We then calibrate and simulate the full-blown model to get
some quantitative sense of these movements.

Firms
Durable (Yd ) and nondurable (Yn ) final goods are produced from intermediate goods,
which are produced by two types of firms: those with high- and low-capital-intensity
technologies. Competitive final goods producers use the following production function

3

A complete specification of the model is provided in Online Appendix A.

5


æ
-1 ÷ö-1
çç
Y j,t = çç
Y jf ,t  ÷÷÷÷ ,
çç
÷÷
è f =h,l
ø

å

where Y jf ,t are composite intermediate goods produced (by competitive firms) according to

æ 1
ö-1

1
÷
ç
Y jf ,t = ççç y jf ,t (l )  dl ÷÷÷÷ ,
÷ø
ççè 0

ò

where  > 1 . Individual intermediate goods producers are monopolistically competitive and
produce using a constant-returns-to-scale (CRS) production function
a

1-af

y jf ,t (l ) = Ajf ,t k jf ,t (l ) f n jf ,t (l )

,

where k jf ,t (l ) and n jf ,t (l ) are capital and labor services employed by firm l in sector jf at
time t, Ajf ,t is sector-specific TFP, j = {d, n} indexes the type of good produced, and
f = {h,l } denotes the technology used. Sectoral price indices, Pj ,t and Pjf ,t , expressed as

functions of individual prices p jf ,t (l ) , can be derived via standard cost minimization.
Capital and labor flow freely between firms in the same sector, which implies, under
CRS production, that nominal marginal costs and capital-labor ratios will be equated across
firms in the same sector. However, as will become clear when we discuss household supply
of factor inputs, imperfect capital mobility will allow marginal costs to vary across sectors.
Furthermore, different production technologies across sectors imply different slopes for
sectoral marginal cost curves. In particular, firms that produce with more capital-intensive
technologies (larger  f ) will require a greater increase in the flexible labor factor to effect a
given short-run increase in production (i.e., their marginal cost curves are steeper).

6

Finally, goods prices are sticky. We use the Calvo (1983) assumption whereby
monopolistically competitive firms change their prices with a constant probability of
(1 - qjf ) . We allow qjf to vary by sector, and will also consider perfect price flexibility
(qjf = 0, "jf ) .

Households
Households get utility from nondurable and durable consumption and disutility from
working. Let C n,t denote nondurable consumption, Cd ,t durable consumption expenditures,
Dtc the stock of the durable consumption good, and Nt labor supply. Households maximize

expected discounted utility

max Et

¥

å bs êëê u (Cn,t +s , Dtc+s ) - v(Nt +s )úûú ,
é

ù

s =0

and the stock of the durable consumption good evolves according to

Dtc

= (1 - d)Dtc-1

+ Cd,t

æ

ö2

'' ç C
÷
- S ççç cd,t - d ÷÷÷÷ Dtc-1.
2 ççè Dt -1
÷ø

where δ is the depreciation rate and S ¢¢ governs adjustment costs on durables expenditures.
Following Barsky et al. (2007), the functional forms for household preferences are

u (Cn,t , Dtc ) =

1- 1
h ü
ì
s
ï
ï
ïï é 1
h -1
h -1 ù h -1 ï
ï
1
ï
ï
ê
ú
ï ê y hC
h + 1 - y h Dc h ú
í
(
) t ú ïýï
n,t
ï
ê
ï
ï
êë
úû
ï
ï
ï
ï
ï
ï
î
þ

1
1s

7

, v(Nt ) = c

1+ 1
f

Nt

1
1+
f

,

where s is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, y determines the relative preference
for nondurables vs. durables, h is the elasticity of substitution between the two goods, f is
the Frisch labor supply elasticity, and c governs the level of disutility from labor supply.
Greater durability implies that any increase in consumption requires a more dramatic
increase in expenditure. To increase consumption of the durable good by 1% from a steady
state level requires an annual increase in expenditure of 1/δ%, whereas a 1% increase in
nondurables consumption requires only a 1% increase in expenditure. This motivates our use
of durability as a shifter of goods demand and, because a larger increase in expenditure will
call forth a larger increase in hours worked, labor demand as well.
The household also owns the economy's stock of physical capital ( K s ), sets the
utilization rate of capital ( u ), and rents capital services to firms in a competitive market. The
relationship between capital services, utilization, and the physical capital stock is

K jf ,t = u jf ,t K sjf ,t .
The accumulation equation for capital mirrors that for durables consumption:
'' æçç I jf ,t
S
s
s
K jf ,t +1 = (1 - d)K jf ,t + I jf ,t - ççç s
2 çç K jf ,t
è

2
÷÷ö
- d ÷÷÷ K sjf ,t ,
÷÷
÷ø

where I jf ,t denotes investment that adds to the sector-jf capital stock. Note that I jf ,t is
distinct from investment expenditures, which are given by

Ijf ,t = 1i I jf ,t + a(u jf ,t )K sjf ,t .
t

(

)

Investment expenditures include maintenance costs arising from capital utilization,
a(u jf ,t )K sjf ,t . The cost function a(·) is increasing, convex, and zero in steady state. In

8

addition, investment is affected by investment-specific productivity ( ti ); greater productivity
means less expenditure is required to achieve a given increase in the capital stock.
Importantly, we have assumed each sector has a separate capital stock, which means
that capital is (partially) fixed in the short-run. Capital services can adjust immediately due to
time-varying utilization, but utilization costs make utilization less than perfectly flexible.
Capital stocks adjust fully over time, but the speed depends on investment adjustment costs.
Households also supply labor to firms in each sector, and this process is intermediated
by monopolistically competitive unions who have the power to set wages (Erceg et al., 2000).
The unions face Calvo frictions, altering wages with a constant probability of 1 - qw .
Because wage stickiness does not vary by sector and labor supply across sectors is assumed to
be perfectly elastic ( N t = å j , f N jf ,t ), (nominal) wages Wt will be equalized across sectors.

Analytical Discussion
Before presenting numerical simulations, we use a stripped down version of our model
to analytically illustrate how cyclical movements in relative sector quantities, prices and
markups behave under sticky vs. flexible prices. We assume the economy starts in steady
state and evaluate the immediate response to an expansionary aggregate shock at time t. The
stripped down model features a constant aggregate capital stock, with the distribution of
capital services across sectors fixed at time t but perfectly mobile by t+1 (fixed capital
utilization and no investment adjustment costs). We also assume durables goods are very
long-lived (δ sufficiently small that the shadow value of durables is nearly invariant to shortlived shocks, as in Barsky et al., 2007).

9

With sufficiently long-lived durables, household optimization requires
1  ˆc ˆ  ˆ
D  Cn,t  Pn,t  Pˆd ,t ,

 t

( 1)

where hatted variables are log deviations from steady-state values. Furthermore, the law of
motion for durables implies Dˆ tc   Cˆ d ,t ; all produced goods are consumed Cˆ j ,t  Yˆj ,t ; the

production functions are Yˆj ,t  Aˆt  (1   j ) Nˆ j ,t ; marginal costs are Mˆ j ,t  Wˆt  Aˆt   j Nˆ j ,t ;

and markups are given by ˆ j ,t  Pˆj ,t  Mˆ j ,t . Combining these expressions, we have

 1   d   ˆ

1n  ˆ
1  ˆ
A.
 d 
 N d ,t   n 
 N n,t  ( ˆ d ,t  ˆ n,t ) 

 
 t




( 2)

We first consider a flexible-price economy. Markups are constant at  j      1 .
If sectors have the same capital intensities, equation (2) shows that labor will expand more in
the durables sector. Thus, relative output, marginal costs, and prices also increase. Note that
these relative movements do not depend on the underlying shock causing the expansion, but
the movements are even larger if the source is a positive aggregate TFP shock.
The results differ under sticky prices. Take the extreme of fixed prices, so that relative
prices do not move. Equation (1) implies an increase in relative durables output, and thus
labor and marginal costs. Therefore, relative markups are countercyclical. If prices are not
perfectly rigid but are equally sticky in the two sectors, one can show that relative output,
labor and prices are procyclical, while relative markups are countercyclical.4 So, the primary

4

If firms have the same price-change frequency and (expected) marginal costs are equalized across firms from
t+1 onwards (which is true under CRS production and perfectly mobile factor inputs), then
Pˆ  Pˆ    Mˆ  Mˆ  , with 0 < κ < 1. Combining this expression with equation (1) yields an expression,
d ,t

n ,t

d ,t

n ,t

similar to equation (2), which shows relative durables labor is procyclical. Relative marginal costs are thus
procyclical, while relative markups are countercyclical.

10

(qualitative) difference between flexible and sticky prices is the behavior of relative markups.
We have derived these predictions for relative movements in durables holding other
characteristics – such as price flexibility, capital intensity, and TFP – fixed across sectors.
This is important. For example, if durables prices were perfectly flexible and nondurables
perfectly rigid, the relative durables markup would be procyclical and, under some
parameters, relative labor could be countercyclical. Likewise, if the aggregate expansion was
caused by a shock to durables TFP (Ad,t > An,t), one can show that, under sticky prices, the
relative durables markup would again be procyclical (e.g., assuming η=1 and αj = α). In our
subsequent empirical analysis, therefore, we will control for variables that might be correlated
with durability.
So far, we have analyzed the response of durables relative to nondurables, but the
model also predicts relative movements across goods on other dimensions, holding durability
constant. Optimal demand by final (durable or nondurable) goods producers implies
Yˆh ,t  Yˆl ,t    Pˆl ,t  Pˆh ,t  ,

( 3)

where h and l denote high- and low-capital-intensity firms. Assuming equally-sticky prices in
the two subsectors, one can derive the following expression for relative markups
  h   1   1     1  h l 
ˆ h ,t  ˆ l ,t  1   1     1  l 
 1 Nˆ l ,t ,
   1   1     1  


l





h

l



so that higher capital intensity production implies a countercyclical markup. The sign of the
relative movements in other variables depends on parameter values, although the more
capital-intensive good typically has higher marginal costs and prices, but lower output.

11

We can also use equation (3) to analyze how differences in price stickiness affect
relative movements, now letting h and l denote firms with high and low price stickiness. We
get the following relationship between relative labor and relative markups:
Nˆ l ,t  Nˆ h ,t 


 ˆ h ,t  ˆ l ,t  .
1     1  

That is, relative labor (and thus output and marginal costs) will move in the opposite direction
of relative markups (and prices).

Whether the relative markups are procyclical or

countercyclical, however, depends on the nature of the underlying shock. Monetary (TFP)
shocks which put upward (downward) pressure on prices will lead to countercyclical
(procyclical) markups for the sector with stickier prices.

Quantitative Results
We now calibrate and simulate the full-blown model. This allows us to move away
from stark assumptions, such as the complete short-run fixity of capital, and consider realistic
features like capital utilization and investment adjustment costs. We consider an empirically
relevant amount of durability, capital intensity, and price stickiness in order to get a
quantitative sense of the size of movements of key variables across sectors.
Table 1 summarizes our model calibration. The parameters governing household
preferences (σ, η, ϕ) and desired markups are set to standard values, and y is set to produce a
steady-state nondurable-to-durable consumption ratio of 2.96. The annual depreciation rate of
5% matches the (weighted) average life-span of durables in our data (i.e., 20 years). We set
the household’s annual discount rate (3.34 percent) to match an investment-to-output ratio of
0.16, given the depreciation rate and an empirical aggregate capital share of 0.322. When we

12

consider high- and low-capital intensity sectors, we use capital shares of ah = 0.475 and
al = 0.169 , which are the weighted average capital shares for consumption categories above

and below the median capital share, respectively. Consistent with the micro data underlying
the U.S. CPI, the average price changes every four months, while high- and low-frequency
firms set prices roughly every 2.5 and 12 months. Wages are assumed to change once a year.
The curvature of the utilization adjustment cost function is pinned down by the
relationship between relative sector utilization rates and relative labor-to-capital ratios:

uˆj,t - uˆi,t =

1 é (Nˆ - Kˆ s ) - (Nˆ - Kˆ s )ù .
ê
j,t
i,t
j,t
i,t úûú
1 + a '' ëê

Using Gorodnichenko and Shapiro (2011) data on 20 2-digit manufacturing sectors over the
past 30 years, we regress utilization rates on labor-capital ratios (and time effects) to estimate
an elasticity of 0.33, corresponding to a '' = 2.0. Online Appendix C has details. For durables
expenditure adjustment costs we set S '' = 0.455 d to match Cooper and Haltiwanger’s
(2006) estimate of the elasticity of the investment rate with respect to Tobin’s Q.
Finally, we need to calibrate the exogenous shock processes and the Taylor Rule that
governs monetary policy. With one exception, these parameters are monthly transformations
of the quarterly estimates of Smets-Wouters (2007).5 We choose a larger volatility for the
neutral technology shock to match the cyclicality of the aggregate labor share (i.e., inverse
markup), but since our primary focus is on conditional impulse response functions, alternative
calibrations of the volatility do not change the insights we draw from the model.
5

We consider four shocks: monetary policy, government spending, TFP, and investment-specific technology.
For the persistence parameters ρ, we scaled down SW’s “Great Moderation” estimates of 1- ρ by 1/3, and the
standard deviations are 1/3 of SW’s estimates. Note that the values reported in Table 1 also reflect differences in
notation between our model and the SW model.

13

Figures 1 to 4 show impulse responses to an expansionary monetary policy shock.6
We plot relative movements in output, labor, prices, and markups, where we measure
markups using the inverse of the labor share. (Note that, under Cobb-Douglas production,
fluctuations in markups are equivalent to fluctuations in the labor share. However, our test
does not hinge on Cobb-Douglas production, and we will explicitly consider departures from
it in our empirical analysis.) For scaling purposes, we also show the response of aggregate
output (thin line). Figure 1 shows the relative durable-to-nondurable responses under sticky
prices. For this exercise, the average capital intensity and price-change frequency in the two
sectors are the same.7 Relative output (thick solid line) and labor (dashed line) are strongly
procyclical, while the relative price response (dashed-dotted line) is also positive but muted
by sticky prices. Relative markups (dotted line) are countercyclical, reflecting two forces:
first and most important, price markups are more countercyclical for durables firms than for
nondurables firms; second, within each sector the more labor-intensive subsector will gain
market share because it has more flexibility to ramp up production. This composition effect
will cause the labor share of both sectors to increase (decreasing the measured markup), but
will be stronger for durables as their expenditures increase more.
The immediate relative markup response is about 25 percent that of relative output,
while the relative labor response is 25 percent greater than the output response. With wages
equalized across sectors, ˆ rel  Pˆ rel  Yˆ rel  Nˆ rel . These magnitudes are, of course, dependent

on our calibration. If the cost of varying capital utilization was zero (infinite), the relative

6

Impulse responses to other shocks are available in Online Appendix A. As shown analytically, the (qualitative)
results do not depend on the identity of the underlying shock, as long as private spending expands. However, a
government spending shock that increases production but reduces private spending (i.e., fiscal multiplier < 1)
will produce relative durables movements with opposite signs.

7

Each sector has low- and high-capital-intensity subsectors that have equal price-change frequencies.

14

labor response would be the same as (50 percent greater than) the relative output response.
Figure 2 repeats the same exercise but with flexible prices in both sectors. (Note that
wages are still sticky.) The monetary shock has smaller real effects under flexible prices; the
aggregate output response is about 70 percent as big as the response under sticky prices. The
relative price of durables now increases more, muting the shift in goods and labor demand
towards durables. The relative markup response is nearly zero, with the small discrepancy
solely reflecting the aforementioned composition effect.
Figure 3 demonstrates the effect of price flexibility in another way. We once again
allow for sticky prices, as in Figure 1, but consider low- and high-price flexibility subsectors
( 1 - ql = 0.08 , 1 - qh = 0.42 ) and focus on movements within the durables sector. The
subsector with less price flexibility will exhibit a more sluggish price response, decreasing its
relative price and increasing its relative output, labor input, and marginal costs. Thus, firms
whose prices respond more slowly (on average) to the monetary shock see their relative
markups decline.

The magnitude of the relative markup movement is almost half the

magnitude of the relative output response.
Finally, Figure 4 compares high- and low-capital-intensity subsectors ( ah = 0.475 ,
al = 0.169 ) within the durables sector, while keeping prices equally sticky. In response to an

expansionary shock, firms with more capital-intensive technologies face steeper marginal cost
curves.

Although their relative markup decreases (as shown analytically), their higher

marginal costs lead to a higher relative price and lower relative output.

Note that the

magnitude of the markup response is greater than the output response because the initial
relative labor response is positive under our calibration, although this result is quite sensitive

15

to the capital-intensity gap ( ah - al ) and fixity of the capital stock. At any rate, the relative
labor response is more muted than under flexible prices, where markups are constant and the
higher marginal costs of high-capital-intensity firms are completely passed through into
relative prices, resulting in a larger decrease in relative output and a decrease in relative hours.
To recap, the Keynesian Labor Demand hypothesis is that firms respond to
unexpectedly low demand for their goods by laying off workers rather than lowering their
output prices. Equivalently, if marginal cost curves are upward sloping, firms increase their
markups. In this section we have considered one possible source of this behavior – nominal
price stickiness – and have shown that the relative markups of more durable and more capitalintensive goods are (essentially) constant under flexible prices but countercyclical under
sticky prices.8 In our empirical analysis, we will exploit variation across different types of
goods to test this prediction of Keynesian Labor Demand.
The model is also helpful for clarifying why we do not simply examine the cyclicality
of the aggregate markup in the data. The reason is that, even under sticky prices, the
aggregate markup can be uncorrelated with output. This is what happens, for example, in the
Smets-Wouters (2007) model estimated on U.S. data. The reason is that the aggregate
markup responds positively to some expansionary shocks but negatively to others. We
demonstrate this in Figures 5 and 6, which show impulse responses to all four aggregate
shocks in our DSGE model. We scale the shocks to have the same initial effect on aggregate
output (Figure 5), while Figure 6 shows the different aggregate markup responses to the
various shocks. Of course, one could address this by conditioning on particular aggregate

8

As emphasized earlier, nominal stickiness is not the only source of countercyclical markups – see Rotemberg
and Woodford (1991, 1999) for models in which flexible-price firms choose countercyclical markups.

16

shocks a la Gali (1999). But we pursue a different, complementary approach of examining
how relative markups respond to relative demand shocks across industries.

3. Evidence on Durability and the Cyclicality of Expenditures
We now construct demand predictors across industries. We start with the BLS’s
classification of goods in the CPI into 70 Expenditure Classes (ECs). (See Appendix 6 in
http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch17.pdf.) We combine four pairs of ECs and drop
five others due to missing NIPA data or overlap with NIPA investment categories, leaving us
with 61 consumer goods.9 We then add 9 categories of investment from NIPA, leaving us
with a total of 70 expenditure categories. Online Appendix Table 1 provides the full list.
For each of these 70 categories, we create two demand predictors. The first is based
on the good’s durability, and the second is based on the Engel Curve slope for the good (i.e.,
the extent to which the good is a luxury or necessity). We also construct two variables
specific to each category that should affect how prices and costs respond to demand: the
frequency of price change and the importance of capital versus labor in producing the good.

Durability
Of our 70 goods, 28 are classified by NIPA as durable goods (19 of the 61 consumer
goods are durables, and all 9 investment goods).

We use two sources to quantify the

durability of the durables. A primary source is life expectancy tables from a major propertycasualty insurance company, which we use for 17 goods. For autos, tires and the 9 investment
9

We drop three categories with no NIPA match (personal care products, miscellaneous personal goods and
housekeeping supplies). We drop rent and owner’s equivalent rent because investment in residential
construction is already one of our investment categories.

17

categories

we

use

estimates

from

the

U.S.

Bureau

of

Economic

Analysis

(http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=10&step=1).
Among the 28 durable goods, the extent of durability varies widely. It is over 30 years
for residential structures and three types of commercial buildings. For business equipment it
ranges from 4 to 11 years (with information equipment and software at the less durable end,
presumably due to obsolescence). Durability also varies among the 19 consumer durables.
At the low end are clothing categories (less than 5 years) and at the upper end are appliances
and electronics (closer to 10 years). We classify the remaining 42 consumption categories as
nondurables (i.e., lasting less than a year). These include food and services.

Engel Curves
Whether a good is a luxury or necessity should also help predict cyclicality of demand.
To estimate Engel curves, we turn to the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) Interview
Surveys. We pool CE cross-sections from 1982 to 2010 to estimate Engel elasticities for our
61 consumer goods and for housing services.10 The CE Interview Survey lumps together all
food for home consumption, so for these categories we estimate a common elasticity.
Households are interviewed up to four consecutive quarters on their detailed
expenditures. We estimate Engel elasticities by regressing spending on each category from
the household’s second through fourth interviews on the sum of its spending during those
same three quarters. We instrument for the log of a household’s total expenditures in its final
three interviews based on its (logged) total and nondurable expenditures from the first

10

Online Appendix B on our websites provides more detail on our CE sample. Housing services are measured
by rent for renters. For home owners it is measured by household’s estimate of the home’s rental value.

18

quarterly interview, as well as its (logged) before-tax annual income reported in both the first
and final interviews. We instrument to limit attenuation bias from measurement error in
household total expenditures. We do not log expenditures for individual categories, the
dependent variables in the second stage, as these are zero in some cases. Instead we divide
the household’s spending on a category by mean spending on that category across households.
So our elasticities are relative to mean household spending on that category.11
For the 9 NIPA investment categories, we estimate Engel curves for consumer goods
that make use of that investment. For investment in residential structures we use our estimate
for housing services; for investment in power and communication structures we use a
weighted average of our estimates for household utilities. For the remaining investment
categories we assign an elasticity that is a weighted average of the Engel elasticities for all of
our NIPA goods. To construct the weights we employ the BEA’s detailed commodity-bycommodity input-output matrix for 2002 (www.bea.gov/industry/io_benchmark.htm), with
weights reflecting the importance of the goods as final users of that investment category.
Online Appendix Table 1 provides our point estimates for Engel Curve slopes. The
slopes average about one, as expected. At the luxurious end are Household operations (over
2; think household help), lodging away from home (1.8), and recreation services (1.8).
Necessities include tobacco (0.1) and food for home consumption (0.4).

11

The regressions control for year and seasonal dummies, as well as household demographics (age, household
size, urban status, marital status, and number of earners).

19

Frequency of Price Changes
The stickier the prices, the more Keynesian the Labor Demand if desired markups are
constant. Thus we would like to incorporate information about the flexibility of prices in
testing for Keynesian Labor Demand.
An advantage of using the BLS Expenditure Classes for the CPI is that estimates of
price flexibility are readily available for these categories. From the micro data underlying the
CPI, we obtain price change frequencies from Klenow and Malin (2011). These are based on
monthly prices from 1988 through 2009. We use their estimates for regular prices, i.e.,
excluding sale-related price changes, as suggested by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
For the four equipment investment categories we use frequencies calculated by
Nakamura and Steinsson on monthly PPI data from 1998-2005.12

For structures we

distinguish between those built to order and those built speculatively. From 1988 to 2010, on
average 61 percent of new homes were sold prior to completing the house (built to order),
while 39 percent sold after the house was built (spec homes built to stock). We treat built to
order homes as selling at a negotiated price, assigning it a pricing frequency of one. For
houses built to stock we assume they are priced only when put on the market, setting
frequency to one divided by the median time on the market, which averaged 5 months for
1988 to 2010. This yields an overall frequency for residential investment of 0.73 per month.
We assume business structures are all produced to order, or at least priced subject to
negotiation. So we assign a frequency of one to the business structure categories.

12

We map 79 of their producer prices series to one of these 4 investment categories. We estimate a category’s
frequency from the weighted average of the frequencies of its associated producer prices.

20

Table A1 gives the monthly frequency of price change for our goods. As emphasized
by Bils and Klenow (2004) and others, price flexibility varies widely. It is lowest for services
(e.g. health professionals and restaurant meals), where prices change less than once a year. It
is highest for business structures (where we assume each price is newly negotiated) and for
commodities such as gasoline and fresh produce (prices change every few months).

Capital Shares
Our capital shares are taken from the U.S. KLEMS data on multifactor inputs and
productivity for 18 manufacturing and 44 non-manufacturing sectors. This data is described
in Section 4 below. The capital share for a NIPA category is a weighted average of the capital
shares of value added in each of the KLEMS industries matched to that good. We map NIPA
categories to KLEMS based on the shares of employment assigned to corresponding KLEMS
industries. This mapping is also described in detail in the next section.

Expenditure Shares and Employment Shares
To gauge whether durability (and Engel elasticities) predict cyclicality of
expenditures, we match our 70 goods to NIPA expenditure categories.13

Nominal

expenditures on our 70 goods average 57% of nominal GDP from 1990:1 through 2011:2.
The major components of GDP excluded from our set are rent and owner’s implicit rent,
government expenditures, inventory investment, and net exports. Among our 70 categories,
40% of spending is on durables, and 60% on nondurables. We will use expenditure shares to

13

For consumption categories see http://bea.gov/iTable/index_UD.cfm and for investment categories see both
http://bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=9&step=1 and http://bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=21&step=1 .

21

weight goods in the results that follow. The largest categories are hospital services (9.3%),
residential structures (7.2%), professional services (7.2%), and food away from home (5.6%).
Based on data on employment by detailed industry from the BLS Current Employment
Survey (CES), we also estimate the share of employment by industries producing each good.14
Of our 70 categories, 32% of employment is in durables-producing industries, and 68% is in
nondurables-producing industries. The largest employers are for food away from home
(12.0%), hospital services (10.3%), and miscellaneous personal services (7.9%).
All of the results we report are for de-seasonalized series.

Relevance of the Durability Instrument
As illustrated in Section 2, durability should powerfully predict the cyclicality of
expenditures and employment. In the next section we will test for Keynesian Labor Demand
using production data across industries.

The production data are at a higher level of

aggregation due to data limitations. So it is useful at this point to gauge whether durability is
a good predictor of fluctuations in spending at our detailed level of 70 goods.
We first estimate the cyclicality of expenditures by good as follows. For each good,
we regress quarterly HP-filtered log real expenditures on quarterly HP-filtered log real GDP
from 1990:1 to 2011:2. The weighted mean coefficient is 1.62 and the weighted mean
standard error is 0.24. (Our typical category is more cyclical than GDP because the largest
excluded categories – rent and government expenditures – are less cyclical than GDP.) The
coefficients tend to be much bigger for durable goods (3.25) than for nondurable goods (0.54).

14

Our matching of NIPA goods to CES employment industries is described in Section 4.

22

Figure 7 plots these cyclicality coefficients against log durability of the good. The size of
each ball represents its expenditure share. If one runs WLS on these 70 observations, the
adjusted R2 is 0.54. The R2 actually rises to 0.77 if one excludes the outlier of business
transportation equipment (whose cyclicality coefficient is 10). We obtain similar results if we
look at growth rates or annual data, though the standard errors are larger with annual data.
Figure 8 shows that durability predicts the cyclicality of employment even better. The
R2 from WLS here is a striking 0.85. The weighted mean coefficient for durables is 1.79 vs.
only 0.19 for nondurables. In the Figure, the large ball with a cyclical response near 3 is
residential construction. But this sector is far from driving the results. Without residential
construction the mean cyclicality coefficient for durables is still 1.52 and the R2 is 0.63.15
Figure 9 looks at the Great Recession in particular. Using NBER Business Cycle
dates, we calculate the peak-to-trough decline (log first difference in employment) for each
good from December 2007 to June 2009. The R2 from running WLS on log durability is
0.74. Residential construction is influential, but not dominant. The R2 is still 0.41 without it.
The outlier on the other side is manufacturing structures. Employment for industrial buildings
soared 38% during the Great Recession. The influence of this observation is limited by its
small weight (0.5% of employment); the R2 edges up to 0.76 when we exclude it.
In Figure 10 we relate the cyclicality of prices to durability. A WLS regression does
show a positive coefficient but with an imprecise coefficient (0.11 with a standard error of
0.07). If we drop the energy outliers, the relationship becomes more positive and statistically
significant (coefficient 0.18, s.e. 0.02). But economically the impact remains small – an order

15

Our findings are robust to defining the cycle in terms of total nonfarm employment rather than GDP. Defined
this way, the weighted mean cyclicality coefficient is 1.85 for durables vs. 0.34 for nondurables.

23

of magnitude smaller than the cyclical impact of durability on expenditures and employment.
Finally, we note that the failure of durable goods to show (much) greater cyclicality in their
prices does not reflect countercyclical prices for durable investment equipment (e.g.,
Greenwood, et al., 2000 or Fisher, 2006). These 4 categories are not especially durable and, if
we drop them, the price of durables becomes only slightly more procyclical.

4. Industry Results on the Cyclicality of Markups
The results above show that durability is an important predictor of cyclical movements
in employment and expenditures across goods. We now relate the information on our 70
NIPA goods for durability, Engel curves, and pricing frequencies to industry data to see how
industries differ cyclically depending on characteristics of the goods produced.

Measuring Cyclical Behavior by Industry
The U.S. KLEMS data (http://www.bls.gov/mfp/) provide annual values, both nominal
and real, for gross output and inputs of intermediates, labor, and capital from 1987 to 2009 for
18 manufacturing and 44 non-manufacturing sectors. These data allow us to examine the
cyclical behavior of output, as opposed to expenditures, and to construct a measure of
movements in price markups as discussed below.

With the industry data we can also

condition on industry movements in productivity, thereby seeing whether the lack of
procyclical prices for durables goods is driven by favorable productivity shocks skewed
toward these goods. The data also allow us to examine the impact of capital’s share on
fluctuations.

Under flexible pricing, high-capital-share industries should display more

procyclical prices but less cyclical quantities in response to relative demand shifts. With
sticky prices, this role of capital’s share will be muted.
24

We supplement the KLEMS data with series on employment, weekly hours, and
wages from the BLS Current Employment Survey (CES).

The CES reports hours and

earnings for production-related employees in goods-producing industries and for
nonsupervisory employees in private service-providing industries. For our industries 81.8
percent of employees are production and non-supervisory. We follow the convention of
referring to these employees collectively as “production workers.” Since March 2006 the
BLS has provided earnings series for all employees. But for salaried workers it is especially
difficult to justify the assumption that contemporaneous payments reflect their shadow wage.
We map the characteristics of the 70 NIPA goods to the KLEMS industries as follows.
For 1990 forward, the CES provides data on employment for 210 distinct industries that can
be mapped to our 70 NIPA goods.16 Because each CES industry has, through NAICS, an
associated KLEMS industry, we can associate a relative importance of each NIPA category to
an industry based on the KLEMS industry employment assigned to that category as a share of
employment assigned across all 70 NIPA categories. For instance, employment for KLEMS
industry NAICS 335 (electrical equipment and appliances) is assigned for 2009 as 38% to
consumer appliances and 62% to electrical equipment investment.

The characteristics

assigned to NAICS 335 for 2009, in turn, are a weighted average of those for these two NIPA
categories, with relative weights 0.38 and 0.62. We achieve a mapping for 40 KLEMS
industries.

Online Appendix Table 2 lists these industries along with their mapped

characteristics. 13 are manufacturing; 27 are in construction, trade, or services.17
16

For industries that map to more than one NIPA good category, we allocate CES employment in proportion to
relative expenditures in the categories. For motor vehicles, computers, and computer software, we can make this
allocation at a finer level of aggregation using NIPA data.
17

On average, we associate 44.4 percent of employment in a KLEMS industry with NIPA categories. For
robustness, we also estimated for industries with at least 25 percent of employment covered. The only notable
impact is that prices become more procyclical for industries producing luxuries.

25

We focus attention on how cyclicality differs across the KLEMS industries with
respect to output, price, and the price markup. Output and price are measured by industry
value added and its deflator. These are constructed using the Divisia method from values and
prices for gross output and intermediate inputs, as described by Basu and Fernald (1997).
The markup of price over marginal cost can be expressed as a worker’s marginal
product relative to his real product wage. The Appendix illustrates that if (a) production is
Cobb-Douglas, and (b) the marginal price of labor is captured by average hourly earnings,
then fluctuations in the markup are captured by movements in the inverse of labor’s share.18
This is robust to adjustment costs for labor, provided there are no adjustment costs at the
intensive, workweek margin. The markup is measured in terms of production labor’s share of
industry output. For salaried workers, the data do not provide a reliable measure of a
worker’s marginal price at the intensive, workweek margin; and it is not defensible to assume
no adjustment costs for salaried workers at the extensive, employment margin.
The Appendix generalizes this measure of real marginal cost for elasticities of
substitution between capital and labor other than one. Below we show that our results are
robust with respect to considerable variation in that elasticity.
Of more quantitative importance is how the marginal price of labor is measured. In
the Appendix we discuss two alternatives to average hourly earnings. The first incorporates
an estimate of the marginal impact of an increase in hours on overtime pay. This suggests a
marginal wage rate that increases relative to average hourly earnings if the workweek
increases. We refer to this as the marginal wage. Many of the KLEMS industries do not
report data on overtime hours. For these industries we ignore any overtime premium, setting

18

This has been illustrated often, for instance by Bils (1987), Sbordone (1996), Rotemberg and Woodford
(1999), and Galí, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2007).

26

the marginal wage equal to average hourly earnings. We also consider dropping average
hourly earnings entirely as a measure of labor’s price. In this variant we calculate relative
wage rates across industries based on firms internalizing workers’ marginal disutility of an
hour’s work. We refer to this price of labor as the shadow wage. Our calculated shadow
wage assumes a Frisch elasticity of labor supply at the intensive margin of 0.5 (see Hall 2009
and Chetty 2012). It assumes, further, that the marginal utility of consumption does not vary
cyclically for workers in one industry relative to another. These assumptions are consistent
with the model’s perfectly integrated labor market, as adjusting the shadow wage for hours
worked can be viewed as the marginal compensating differential with respect to hours.
We ask if markups are more countercyclical for durables. Under the null hypothesis
of classical labor demand the markup is constant; so clearly the answer is no. That is
E (  j ,t  t )  j | Yt   0 ,
where  j ,t  t is the markup for good j, relative to the average for all goods,  j is good j’s
durability, and Yt is aggregate output. We reject this hypothesis below, as markups are more
countercyclical for durables. Given that rejection, we want to refine the alternative – that
cyclicality of markups depends on durability – to condition out the effect of variables that
might be correlated with durability and, under sticky prices, might affect the markup. The
model presented in Section 2 highlighted three such variables: sector-specific technology
shocks ( Aj ,t  At ), sector frequency of price change (  j ), and sector capital share (  j ). Thus
our alternative hypothesis of countercyclical markups for durables can be expressed as

E   (  j , t  t )  E [(  j , t  t ) | ( Aj , t  Aj ),  j ,  j ]    j | Yt   0 .

27

Results
Table 2 displays how cyclicality differs by durability of an industry’s good. Separate
results are given for cyclicality in real value added, price (the deflator for value added), and
the price markup. For instance, the first element in row one reflects a regression of real value
added on a full set of year dummies (suppressed) as well as an interaction of industry-specific
durability with the aggregate cycle. We measure durability by Ln(1 + lifespan in years). The
aggregate business cycle is measured by HP-filtered log real annual GDP. All dependent
variables are logged and HP filtered as well (which also removes industry fixed effects).19
Consistent with results from the previous section, durables show greater cyclicality in
quantities but not prices. Consider a good with lifespan of 12 years (appliances) versus a
nondurable. The estimates imply that a one percent increase in aggregate GDP is associated
with a 1.7 percentage point greater increase in value added for an industry producing goods as
durable as appliances relative to industries producing nondurables. Price is actually predicted
to fall by 0.3 percentage points for the industry producing such a durable relative to those
producing nondurables, though this relative price effect is not statistically significant.
The price markup is relatively countercyclical for more durable goods. The size of
this effect is similar whether we measure the price of labor by average hourly earnings or by
the marginal wage, in each case suggesting that a percentage point relative expansion in
output for durables in a boom is associated with a relative decrease in the markup of about
one-third of a percentage point. This is actually larger than the response generated by the

19

Data are annual for 1990 to 2009 for each of the 40 industries, except Publishing, for which data on hours and
wages are available beginning in 2003. The parameter for annual HP-filtering is 6.25 (Ravn and Uhlig, 2002).

28

sticky-price model we sketched above (see Figure 1).20 If we measure labor’s price by the
shadow wage, then the decrease in markups for durable goods in booms is considerably
larger.

For instance, comparing a good with the durability of appliances (12 years) to

nondurables, a one percent increase in GDP, which is associated with a 1.7 percentage point
greater increase in output for the durable, is associated with a 1.1 percentage point relative
decrease in its markup.
One possible explanation for the lack of a relative price increase for durables during
expansions is that durable sectors experience more procyclical productivity shocks. Based on
the KLEMS data, such an effect does not appear important. Regressing TFP on year dummies
and the interaction of Ln(1 + lifespan) with the cycle yields an insignificant coefficient of
only 0.10. This is only one-seventh the size of the effect of durability on relative output. Of
course, TFP is not necessarily an unbiased measure of productivity shocks. Our model
simulations allowed capital utilization to respond with an elasticity of one third to movements
in the labor-capital ratio. (This adjustment was motivated by examining series on capital
services constructed by Gorodnichenko and Shapiro, 2011.) If we empirically adjust TFP
based on that elasticity response, we find that adjusted-TFP is slightly less procyclical for
durables – its regression on Ln(1 + lifespan) interacted with the cycle yields a coefficient of
−0.08 (standard error 0.27). In the second panel of Table 2, we include adjusted-TFP as a
regressor, in addition to the good’s lifespan, for explaining the relative cyclicality of output,

20

The markup is acyclical overall for these industries if the wage is measured by average hourly earnings or the
marginal wage. Pooling the industries, a one percent increase in GDP increases the markup by 0.04 percent
using average hourly earnings and decreases it by 0.002 percent using the marginal wage. Using the shadow
wage the markup is strongly countercyclical, decreasing by 0.41 percent (std. error 0.18 percent). But the
assumptions motivating the shadow wage as a measure across industries (no relative consumption movements)
do not extend to aggregates. Moreover, there remains the issue of whether demand or supply shocks drive the
overall business cycle.

29

prices, and markups. The estimated cyclical impact of durability on an industry’s output,
price, and markup is not affected.
From the bottom panel of Table 2, we see the following effects for industry
movements in adjusted-TFP. A one percent relative increase in industry productivity is
associated with a decline in the industry’s relative price of 0.7 percent. Output increases a
little less than one-for-one with productivity, by 0.8 percent.

This implies a small

corresponding decrease in inputs. But, an estimate of the impact of adjusted-TFP on labor
hours for production workers, conditioning on durability, is close to zero, with coefficient
0.03 (standard error 0.03). An increase in adjusted-TFP is associated with a rise in the
markup of 0.1 percent. This is true whether the wage measure is average hourly earnings, the
marginal wage, or the shadow wage. Although this effect is in the direction predicted by
sticky-price models, the magnitude is quite small and statistically insignificant.
Our measure of cyclicality in markups in Table 2 assumes an elasticity of substitution
of 1 between capital and labor. In Table 3 we present alternative results, assuming elasticities
of 0.5 then 2.0. The markup becomes more countercyclical for durables if the elasticity is
reduced to 0.5, and less countercyclical if increased to 2. This is not surprising given the
labor to capital ratio is more procyclical for durables. But the impact of assuming non-CobbDouglas production is quite modest.
The impact of durability on cyclicality in output, pricing, and markups is potentially
masked by the fact that durables display more frequent price changes. For our 40 KLEMS
industries, the correlation between durability and frequency of price change is 0.67. In the top
panel of Table 4 we control for the sector’s monthly frequency of price changes multiplied by
real GDP. We also include an interaction of this variable (demeaned) with the durability

30

variable (demeaned), allowing cyclical pricing of durables to differ for goods with frequent
versus infrequent price changes. Industries that produce goods with more frequent price
changes display more procyclical prices, but also less cyclical output. Price markups are
relatively procyclical for industries producing goods with frequent price changes.
From Section 3, energy prices are striking outliers, displaying far more procyclical
prices. For this reason, in the bottom panel of Table 4 we examine robustness to removing the
two energy KLEMS industries, oil and gas extraction and petroleum and coal refining. The
finding in the top panel – that frequent price changing predicts more cyclical prices – is not at
all robust. Excluding the energy sectors, prices are not more cyclical for industries producing
goods with frequent price changes, nor do they display more cyclical price markups.
Durability continues to be associated with much more procyclical output and with
relatively countercyclical markups. When all industries are considered, the estimated impact
on markups becomes considerably larger holding frequency of price change constant (by a
factor of 50 to 100 percent depending on the choice of wage measure.) Excluding energy, the
negative impact on markups is again of the magnitude reported in Table 2, though estimated
somewhat less precisely.
The regressions in Table 4 include interactions of durability and pricing frequency.
These address whether countercyclical markups are more pronounced for durables with less
frequent price changes, as predicted by the sticky-price model. The answer is affected by the
energy industries. Including the energy industries, markups for durables are, if anything,
more countercyclical for goods with frequent price changes.
dropping the energy industries, this result is gone.
apparent for durables with less frequent price changes.

31

But in the bottom panel,

Countercyclical markups are more

In Table 5 we extend the regressions to include interactions of economy-wide GDP
with the Engel curve for goods produced in the industry and for the industry’s (average)
capital share in value added. Sticky-price models suggest more cyclical expenditures, but also
more countercyclical markups, for industries producing luxuries. A higher capital share
predicts that marginal cost will be more procyclical for an industry. Therefore, with sticky
prices, it should be associated with a decline in the markup. The results for cyclicality by
durability and frequency of price change are largely unchanged: in particular, markups remain
countercyclical for durables. The estimated impact of an industry’s Engel curve elasticity and
capital share are not overly affected by excluding the energy industries, so we focus
discussion on the top panel with them included.
As expected, output is more cyclical for industries producing luxuries. For instance,
for an industry producing goods with an Engel curve elasticity of 1.6 (as estimated for
jewelry) rather than one, a one percent increase in U.S. GDP would be associated with a 0.5
percentage point greater increase in output. But, in contrast to durables, prices for luxuries do
rise in booms; and markups for luxuries are at least as cyclical as for necessities.
A higher capital share is associated with much less cyclical output, but not more
cyclical prices. Compare an industry with capital share of 0.7 (e.g., utilities) versus one with
share of 0.2 (furniture manufacturing). The impact of that higher capital share for a one
percent increase in GDP is that relative output decreases by 0.6 percentage points (though the
standard error here is 0.4 points), with no relative price effect. This does not particularly fit a
flexible price or sticky-price story, as neither explains why output should depend on the
capital share except through cyclicality of marginal cost and price. Markups are, arguably,
more countercyclical for industries with high capital share, as predicted by sticky-price

32

models. But this impact on markups is not at all precisely estimated nor is it robust to
employing the shadow wage as the price of labor.
To recap, our results conflict with the joint assumption of flexible pricing and constant
markups. In particular, we find countercyclical markups for durable goods in booms relative
to other goods.

But the results do not entirely fit sticky price theories:

adjusted-TFP

movements are largely passed through to prices; markups do not fall in expansions for
industries producing luxuries; and more frequent price changes only predict a more cyclical
industry price if energy goods are included.

5. Conclusion
Employment’s response to fluctuations in goods demand is exacerbated by
countercyclical markups in Keynesian models. We test this prediction across U.S. industries.
We identify movements in goods demand chiefly by exploiting differences in durability
across 70 categories of consumer and investment goods; we show that durability is a powerful
predictor of cyclicality in expenditures and employment across sectors. We also map Engel
curves to our goods, allowing us to treat an industry producing a luxury as facing more
cyclical goods demand. We stratify industries by the importance of capital in the production
process and by the frequency of price changes for its goods: High capital share implies more
cyclical marginal cost; and we anticipate that price will respond more with marginal cost if
price changes are frequent.
We find evidence in support of Keynesian Labor Demand over flexible prices with
constant markups. First and foremost, we estimate that price markups decline considerably
for durables relative to nondurables in expansions.

33

This result is robust to measuring

cyclicality of marginal cost under alternative measures of labor’s price and under a broad
range of assumed short-run substitutability of capital and labor.
Not all of our evidence aligns with New-Keynesian, sticky-price models of labor
demand. Procyclical marginal cost driven by producing a luxury does not generate a markup
decline. And a higher frequency of price change does not result in more cyclical prices,
beyond the extremely procyclical pricing of energy goods.
The observed cyclical wedges between labor’s marginal product and price might be
better explained by intended pricing by firms, principally countercyclical markups for
durables, rather than unintended markup movements that are the byproduct of price stickiness.
This interpretation would resolve the ostensible inconsistency between our findings and those
of Shea (1993) and Nekarda and Ramey (2011), who find considerable price responses to
their respective industry demand instruments. Targeted markups need not respond uniformly
to shifts in goods demand regardless of the source of that shift. It is important to decipher
whether departures from flexible pricing with constant markups reflect nominal price
stickiness or firms targeting markups that are cyclical. Targeted markups also create a
cyclical wedge that can exacerbate employment fluctuations. But, they do not support the
same policy prescriptions often justified by assuming sticky prices, i.e, active monetary policy
and fiscal policy that emphasizes spending, but not the marginal returns to working and
consuming.

34

Appendix: Measuring the Cyclical Markup Wedge
Marginal cost can be measured by the price of any input relative to its marginal
physical product. We consider hours of production labor as the input for measuring marginal
cost. In doing so, we assume no adjustment costs in varying production workers’ weekly
hours. But we put no restrictions on employment adjustment costs.
Let value added reflect production and non-production inputs according to
y  f (k pr , n pr ) g (knp , nnp ) .
The variables k , n denote services of capital and labor. Variables with subscript pr refer to
factors classified as engaged in physical production. Variables with subscript np refer to
factors not engaged in production.
We assume f (k pr , n pr ) is CES,


 1
 1 ( 1)


f (k , n)  a  (1   )(n n)    (k k )  
.



We have dropped the subscripts to denote production.  and k are utilization rates for
n
production labor and capital (i.e, n is effort per hour).  equals the multiple of returns to
scale and production inputs’ share in value added. σ is the elasticity of input substitution.
The required increase in labor for a marginal increase in output is
 1


 k k   
n
1
n

(1   )   
 .
y  (1   ) y 
 n n  



Multiplying

n
by the cost of an extra hour of labor, w , gives nominal marginal cost, mc .
y

Dividing price by mc yields the (gross) markup. Taking logs and ignoring constants,

35

 1






k
py
 p 


k
 ln (1   )   
ln 
 .
  ln

wn
 mc 
 n n  




Under Cobb-Douglas (   1 ) and a marginal price of labor, w , given by average hourly
earnings, movements in the markup equal inverse movements in production labor’s share of
output. This is one estimate of the markup we consider.
We examine the robustness of our results to allowing less, or more, substitutability of
production labor and capital in the short run. For Cobb-Douglas, there is no need to adjust for
rates of utilization n and k . For   1 , we assume capital utilization varies with an
elasticity of one third with respect to the ratio of production labor to capital. (We treat n as
constant.) This elasticity is estimated using series on capital utilization from Gorodnichencko
and Shapiro (2011), as outlined in online Appendix C.
In addition to measuring the price of labor by the average hourly wage, we consider
two other measures. One is based on an estimate of the marginal increase in straight and
overtime payments for a marginal increase in the workweek. We refer to this as the marginal
wage.

The other is based on measuring the wage that would be dictated by worker

indifference curves. We refer to this as the shadow wage.
Our estimate of the marginal wage follows work by Bils (1987) and Nekarda and
Ramey (2010). The starting point is allowing that labor may be quasi-fixed, with costs of
adjusting employment. Such costs suggest that average hourly earnings may understate the
cyclicality of the cost of labor. For example, in an expansion, the marginal adjustment cost
would reflect finding and training an additional employee, whereas in a recession, this might
reflect laying off one less employee.

By considering the workweek as the margin of

adjustment, we can avoid measuring marginal costs of adjusting employment. But average

36

hourly earnings may also poorly capture variations in the price of labor at the hours margin.
For example, a marginal increase in hours will more likely require premium payments (e.g.,
overtime) during a period when hours are high. Such overtime payments have little impact on
average hourly earnings, as that measure divides those payments by all hours worked.
Let h denote a firm’s average hours per worker and v denote its average overtime
hours. Then the marginal wage for the firm, equaling the increase in wage bill per worker for
an increase in h, is given by
v 

wm  wst 1  0.5  .
h 

wst is the straight-time wage rate. We assume a fifty percent overtime premium, as dictated
by legislation. Average hourly earnings are given by replacing the term

v
v
here with ; so
h
h

average hourly earnings would only capture the marginal wage in the peculiar case that
overtime hours are a constant share of hours regardless of the workweek.
We posit the following functional form for estimating

v
:
h

v
 a  b  h  40  .
h
This is a special case of those estimated by Bils (1987) and Nekarda and Ramey (2010),
which allow for higher-order terms in the workweek. But we did not find those terms matter
for our estimates for 1990 to 2009. We estimate this equation for the KLEMS industries to
which we could map overtime hours from the BLS CES data. This is 13 of the 40 industries.
The estimates are a  0.596 (with standard error 0.041) and b  0.057 (with standard error
0.017). These estimates imply a marginal wage that increases by about 2.2% if the workweek
increases from 40 to 41, which implies an elasticity of a little less than 0.9 with respect to the

37

workweek. For the 27 industries without series on overtime hours, we assume overtime
premia are irrelevant, setting the marginal wage to average hourly earnings.
The third wage measure we consider, the shadow wage, drops any pretext that measured
wages capture the effective price of labor. The implicit contracting literature provides one
strong rationale for separating the price of labor to firms from observed variations in wage
rate. Consider an alternative wage measure that allows that employers internalize workers’
indifference curves; so the effective wage is given by workers marginal rates of substitution:

uh (c, h) uc (c, h) . (Individual subscripts are implicit.) In turn, equating the marginal utility of
consumption to the shadow value of wealth (  ), we have

w u h (c, h )

.
pc

where pc is the price for consumer goods, and h is hours worked.
To measure aggregate cyclicality of w / pc requires knowing the cyclicality of  . But
our interest is only to measure relative cyclicality across industries. If we assume that cyclical
movements in  are comparable across industries, then relative wage movements simplifies
to calibrating movements in the compensating differentials to those workers who experience a
greater increase in hours worked than on average. If we further assume that preferences are
separable, with uh  h1/ , then relative wage movements are

 w 1
h
ln    ln   ,
 w 
h 
where variables with bars denote aggregates and  is the Frisch elasticity. We use a Frisch
elasticity of one half--so relative movements in wages across sectors simply equal two times
the relative movements in hours (workweeks).

38

Table 1
Model Parameters

Discount Factor (  )
Intertemporal Elasticity ( s )
Nondur-Dur Elasticitiy ( h )
Frisch Labor-Supply Elasticity ( f )
Elasticity across Varieties ( e )
Relative Nondur Pref ( y )
Depreciation Rate ( d )
Aggregate Capital Share ( a )
Low-Intensity Capital Share ( al )
High-Intensity Capital Share ( ah )

0.9661/12
1
1
1
6
0.639

Utilization Cost Curvature ( a '' )
Durables Adj Cost Curvature ( S '' )
Steady-state G/Y
Taylor interest-rate smoothing (br )
Taylor-rule inflation (bp )
Taylor-rule output gap (by )

1-0.951/12 AR(1) of monetary shock ( rr )
0.322
AR(1) of TFP shock ( ra )
0.169
AR(1) of Govt spending shock ( rg )

2.00
0.46/δ
0.19
0.95
1.8
0.12
0.76
0.98
0.99

Avg Price-Change Freq ( 1 - q )
Low Flexibility ( 1 - ql )
High Flexibility ( 1 - qh )

0.475
0.24
0.08
0.42

AR(1) of Investment shock ( ri )
SD of monetary innovation ( sr )
SD of TFP innovation ( sa )
SD of Govt spend innovation ( sg )

0.88
0.04
0.72
0.72

Avg Wage-Change Freq ( 1 - qw )

0.08

SD of Investment innovation ( si )

0.06

Notes: Model is monthly. The disutility of labor c is set so that steady-state aggregate labor supply is 1, and
the relative steady-state TFP levels are set to produce equal-sized subsectors within the durables and nondurables
sectors.

39

Table 2 Durability and Cyclicality
Price Markup Using:
Quantity

Price
Average
Wage

Marginal
Wage

Shadow
Wage

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.67
(0.27)

−0.13
(0.25)

−0.20
(0.08)

−0.24
(0.08)

−0.42
(0.09)

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.73
(0.09)

−0.19
(0.09)

−0.20
(0.09)

−0.23
(0.09)

−0.41
(0.10)

Adjusted-TFP

0.81
(0.05)

−0.73
(0.10)

0.07
(0.10)

0.07
(0.10)

0.10
(0.10)

Table 3 Durability and Cyclicality without Cobb-Douglas
Short-run Cap./Labor Subst = 0.5

Short-run Cap./Labor Subst = 2

Price Markup Using:

Price Markup Using:

Average
Wage

Marginal
Wage

Shadow
Wage

Average
Wage

Marginal
Wage

Shadow
Wage

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

−0.25
(0.08)

−0.28
(0.09)

−0.47
(0.10)

−0.18
(0.08)

−0.21
(0.08)

−0.39
(0.09)

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

−0.25
(0.09)

−0.28
(0.11)

−0.46
(0.11)

−0.18
(0.09)

−0.21
(0.09)

−0.39
(0.10)

Adjusted-TFP

0.07
(0.10)

0.07
(0.10)

0.09
(0.10)

0.07
(0.10)

0.07
(0.10)

0.09
(0.10)

Notes to Tables 2 and 3: Sample = 787 in all panels. This reflects 20 annual observations, 1990-2009, for each of 40
industries with the exception of Publishing (NAICS 511,516), for which data on hours and wages are only available for 20032009. Quantity refers to real value added, price to the value added deflator. Price markup is the inverse marginal labor share,
which is the effective price of labor times labor hours for production and nonsupervisory employees as a share of nominal
value added. Regressions include full set of year dummies. Newey-West corrected standard errors in parentheses.

40

Table 4
Cyclicality Interacting with Price-Change Frequency
Price Markup Using:
Quantity

Price
Average
Wage

Marginal
Wage

Shadow
Wage

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.86
(0.20)

−0.40
(0.18)

−0.40
(0.15)

−0.49
(0.16)

−0.63
(0.21)

Price Change Freq*GDP

−1.22
(0.53)

3.56
(1.45)

2.98
(1.23)

3.00
(1.18)

2.88
(1.29)

Freq*Durability*GDP

0.13
(0.34)

−0.83
(0.48)

−0.62
(0.41)

−0.48
(0.41)

−0.53
(0.49)

Adjusted TFP

0.80
(0.06)

−0.71
(0.09)

0.10
(0.09)

0.09
(0.09)

0.11
(0.09)

Drop two energy industries

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.88
(0.19)

−0.17
(0.16)

−0.18
(0.13)

−0.28
(0.14)

−0.41
(0.21)

Price Change Freq*GDP

−1.50
(0.79)

−0.15
(0.67)

−0.47
(0.67)

−0.33
(0.66)

−0.69
(0.72)

Freq*Durability*GDP

0.18
(0.41)

0.28
(0.32)

0.41
(0.26)

0.52
(0.27)

0.53
(0.38)

Adjusted TFP

0.77
(0.06)

−0.61
(0.07)

0.17
(0.08)

0.17
(0.08)

0.19
(0.08)

Notes: Sample = 787 in top panel, 747 in lower. Regressions include full set of year dummies. Frequency
and durability demeaned in variable Freq*Durability*GDP. Newey-West corrected standard errors in
parentheses.

41

Table 5
Cyclicality with Engel Curves and Capital Shares
Price Markup Using:
Marginal
Shadow
Wage
Wage

Quantity

Price

Average
Wage

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.92
(0.18)

−0.31
(0.18)

−0.39
(0.16)

−0.47
(0.16)

−0.55
(0.22)

Price Change Freq*GDP

0.22
(0.65)

4.21
(1.38)

3.61
(1.29)

3.67
(1.24)

3.14
(1.41)

Freq*Durability*GDP

−0.51
(0.37)

−1.14
(0.46)

−0.90
(0.46)

−0.77
(0.46)

−0.67
(0.56)

Engel Curve*GDP

0.83
(0.35)

0.63
(0.35)

0.30
(0.38)

0.31
(0.40)

0.48
(0.53)

Capital Share*GDP

−1.13
(0.66)

−0.01
(0.46)

−0.63
(0.52)

−0.65
(0.53)

0.43
(0.65)

Adjusted TFP

0.80
(0.06)

−0.71
(0.09)

0.10
(0.09)

0.10
(0.09)

0.12
(0.09)

Drop two energy industries

Ln (1 + lifespan)*GDP

0.94
(0.18)

−0.13
(0.16)

−0.21
(0.14)

−0.31
(0.16)

−0.37
(0.22)

Price Change Freq*GDP

0.20
(0.89)

0.40
(0.77)

−0.12
(0.79)

0.08
(0.80)

−0.60
(1.00)

Freq*Dur*GDP

−0.54
(0.45)

0.05
(0.33)

0.26
(0.30)

0.35
(0.32)

0.50
(0.48)

Engel Curve*GDP

0.83
(0.35)

0.35
(0.32)

−0.002
(0.31)

0.03
(0.34)

0.19
(0.49)

Capital Share*GDP

−1.10
(0.66)

−0.13
(0.42)

−0.71
(0.42)

−0.73
(0.45)

0.36
(0.64)

Adjusted TFP

0.78
(0.06)

−0.61
(0.07)

0.17
(0.08)

0.17
(0.08)

0.1935
(0.07)

Notes: Sample = 787 in top panel, 747 in lower. Full set of year dummies included. Frequency and
durability demeaned in Freq*Durability*GDP. Newey-West corrected standard errors in parentheses.

42

Figure 1
Relative Durables/Nondurables Response, Sticky Prices

Figure 2
Relative Durables/Nondurables Response, Flexible Prices

Notes for Figures 1 & 2: Impulse response to monetary policy shock. Y is output, N
labor, P prices and μ markups.

43

Figure 3
Relative Low/High Price Flexibility Response

Figure 4
Relative High/Low Capital Intensity Response, Sticky Prices

Notes for Figures 3 & 4: Impulse response to monetary policy shock. Y is output, N
labor, P prices and μ markups.
44

Figure 5
Response of Aggregate Output to Various Shocks

Figure 6
Response of Aggregate Markup to Various Shocks

Notes for Figures 5 & 6: MP stands for monetary policy, G for government spending,
I for investment-specific technology, and TFP for neutral technology. The shocks
have been scaled to produce the same movement in aggregate output on impact.

45

Figure 7 Cyclicality of Expenditures vs. Durability

Figure 8 Cyclicality of Employment vs. Durability

Notes for Figures 7 and 8: Each ball is one good out of 70 in Figure 7, out of 68 in Figure 8.
The ball size gives the average expenditure share over 1990-2011. Each good’s cyclicality
reflects regressing quarterly HP-filtered log real expenditures (or log industrial employment)
on quarterly HP-filtered log real GDP. Durability is defined as 1 + Expected Life in Years.

46

Figure 9 Employment Declines in the Great Recession vs. Durability

Figure 10 Cyclicality of Prices vs. Durability

Notes: Each ball is one of 68 (70) industries (goods), the size of the ball giving the average
employment (expenditure) share over 1990-2011. The Great Recession is defined using the
NBER peak-to-trough dates. The vertical axis in Figure 9 plots the log first difference of
industry employment in June 2009 vs. December 2007. In Figure 10 cyclicality is obtained
from regressing a good’s quarterly HP-filtered log price index (relative to that for GDP) on
quarterly HP-filtered log real GDP. Durability is defined as 1 + Expected Life in Years.

47

References
Barsky, Robert B., Christopher L. House, and Miles S. Kimball (2007), “Sticky-Price Models
and Durable Goods,” American Economic Review 97 (June), 984-998.
Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald (1997), “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates
and Implications,” Journal of Political Economy 105 (April), 249-283.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball (2006), “Are Technology
Improvements Contractionary?” American Economic Review 96 (December), 14181448.
Bils, Mark (1987), “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price,” American
Economic Review 77 (December): 838-855.
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy 112 (October): 947-985.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 12 (September): 383-398.
Chang, Yongsung, Andreas Hornstein, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte (2009), “On the Employment
Effects of Productivity Shocks: The Role of Inventories, Demand Elasticity, and Sticky
Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (April): 328-343.
Chetty, Raj (2012), “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica 80(3): 969-1018.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
113 (February): 1-45.
Cooper, Russell W. and John C. Haltiwanger (2006), “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
Costs,” Review of Economic Studies 73 (July), 611-633.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000), “Optimal Monetary
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics 46
(October), 281-313.
Eusepi, Stefano, Bart Hobijn, and Andrea Tambalotti (2011), “CONDI: A Cost-of-NominalDisturbances Index,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (July): 53-91.
Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote (2011), “Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Real Time
Estimates of the Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” NBER
Working Paper 16759, February.

48

Fisher, Jonas (2006), “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy 114 (June) 413-451.
Galí, Jordi (1999), “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology

Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89 (March), 249271.
Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler and J. David Lopez-Salido (2007), “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare

Costs of Business Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (November), 4459.
Galí, Jordi and Pau Rabanal (2004), “Technology Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations: How

Well Does the RBC Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data” NBER Working Paper 10636.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Matthew Shapiro (2011), “Using the Survey of Plant Capacity to
Measure Capital Utilization,” Working paper, UC-Berkeley and University of Michigan.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (2010), “The Role of InvestmentSpecific Change in the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review 44 (January): 91115.
Hall, Robert E. (2009), “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and
the Marginal Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy 117(2): 281-323.
Hall, Robert E. (2011), “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review 101 (April): 431–
469.
Klenow, Peter J. and Benjamin A. Malin (2011), “Microeconomic Evidence on PriceSetting,” Handbook of Monetary Economics, volume 3A, B. Friedman and M.
Woodford, editors, Elsevier: 231-284.
Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi (2012), “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate
Demand Channel,” NBER Working Paper 17830, February.
Mulligan, Casey B. (2010), “Does Labor Supply Matter During a Recession? Evidence from
the Seasonal Cycle,” NBER Working Paper 16357, September.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson (2008), “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (November): 1415-1464.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2011), “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evience
from U.S. Regions,” NBER Working Paper 17391, September.
Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey (2010), “The Cyclical Behavior of the PriceCost Markup,” unpublished paper, UCSD and Federal Reserve Board, June.

49

Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey (2011), “Industry Evidence on the Effects of
Government Spending,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (January), 3659.
Ravn, Morten O. and Harald Uhlig (2002), “On adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the
Frequency of Observations,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2), 371-375.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1991), “Markups and the Business Cycle,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 63-129.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1999), “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
Costs,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1A, John B. Taylor and Michael
Woodford, editors, Elsevier: 1051-1135.
Sbordone, Argia M. (1996), “Cyclical Productivity in a Model of Labor Hoarding,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 38 (October), 331-361.
Shea, John (1993), “Do Supply Curves Slope Up?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108
(1), 1-32.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach”, American Economic Review 97 (June): 586-606.

50

