                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REAL ASSETS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

                                          Murillo Campello
                                          Erasmo Giambona

                                         Working Paper 18147
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18147


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




Send correspondence to: Murillo Campello, Johnson Graduate School of Management, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201. E-mail: mnc35@cornell.edu. Phone: 607-255-1282. We are thankful for comments
from Malcolm Baker, Antonio Galvao, Wenlian Gao, Alessandro Gavazza, John Graham, Ulrich Hege,
Paul Malatesta (the editor), Ralf Meisenzahl, Antonio Mello, Lilian Ng, Hernan Ortiz-Molina, José
Luis Peydró-Alcalde, Gordon Phillips, Petya Platikanov, Amit Seru, David Thesmar, Philip Valta,
Qinghai Wang, Xueping Wu, and Josef Zechner. We are especially thankful to an anonymous referee
for many insightful comments. We also thank seminar participants at the Brazilian Finance Society
Meetings (2010), Catholic University of Milan, Cornell University, European Business School, FIRS
Conference (2011), FMA European Conference (2011), HEC, International Conference on Panel Data
(2010), Maastricht University, University of Amsterdam, University of New South Wales, and University
of Wisconsin at Madison. An earlier version of this paper was circulated with the title "Capital Structure
and the Redeployability of Tangible Assets." Ping Liu provided excellent research assistance. We
are responsible for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Murillo Campello and Erasmo Giambona. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Real Assets and Capital Structure
Murillo Campello and Erasmo Giambona
NBER Working Paper No. 18147
June 2012
JEL No. G32

                                              ABSTRACT

We characterize the relation between asset structure and capital structure by exploiting variation in
the salability of corporate assets. Theory suggests that asset tangibility increases borrowing capacity
because it allows creditors to more easily repossess a firm's assets. Tangible assets, however, are often
illiquid. We show that the redeployability of tangible assets is a main determinant of corporate leverage
--- beyond standard proxies for tangibility. To establish this link, we distinguish across different asset
categories in firms' balance sheets (e.g., machinery, land and buildings) and use an instrumental approach
that incorporates measures of supply and demand for those individual assets. We also use a natural
experiment driving differential increases in the supply of real estate assets in some regions of the country:
The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990. Consistent with a credit supply-side view
of capital structure, we find that asset redeployability is a particularly important driver of leverage
for firms that are likely to face credit frictions (e.g., small, unrated firms). Our tests also show that
asset redeployability facilitates borrowing the most during periods of tight credit in the economy. Our
work contributes new evidence to capital structure models that are based on contract incompleteness
and limited enforceability. It does so characterizing a well-defined channel through which credit frictions
affect firm financial decisions.


Murillo Campello
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Avenue
369 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 148531-6201
and NBER
campello@cornell.edu

Erasmo Giambona
University of Amsterdam Business School
Roetersstraat 11
1018 WB Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e.giambona@uva.nl
1     Introduction
Theory suggests that contract incompleteness and limited enforceability reduce a firm’s ac-
cess to external finance (Hart and Moore (1994) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)). In the
presence of such frictions, assets that are tangible are more desirable from the perspective of
creditors because they are easier to repossess in bankruptcy states (“verifiable by the courts”).
Tangible assets, however, often lose value when sold under distress (see evidence in Acharya
et al. (2007)). These losses imply that only those tangible assets that can be easily redeployed
should sustain high debt capacity. Diﬀerently put, tangible assets should facilitate corporate
borrowing only to the extent that they are liquid. While this distinction is intuitively clear, it
is rarely articulated in capital structure tests.
    This paper characterizes the relation between asset tangibility and capital structure by
exploiting variation in the supply and demand for corporate assets. Assets that are less firm-
specific should allow for higher debt capacity because they are easier to resell; for example, to
other firms in the same industry (Shleifer and Vishny (1992)). Assets whose usage responds to
supply and demand shifts in their secondary markets are also more likely to be redeployable
(see Gavazza (2011)). Using these insights, we decompose the measure of asset tangibility
commonly used in capital structure tests (“plant, property and equipment,” or PP&E) into
its main components. We then assess variation in redeployability across each of those diﬀerent
components by way of an instrumental approach that uses variation in asset salability in sec-
ondary markets. Our study reports new findings on the relation between asset tangibility and
capital structure, identifying when and how tangibility aﬀects leverage. Consistent with the
view that tangibility facilitates access to credit, we show that the redeployability of tangible
assets is an important driver of leverage for firms that are more likely to face credit frictions,
especially during periods of tight credit in the economy.
    Our analysis proceeds in several steps. Our first, basic step is to replicate standard capital
structure tests using our data to study the relation between the common proxy for asset tan-
gibility (the ratio of PP&E to total assets) and firm leverage. We then examine the economic
relevance of diﬀerent components of tangibility. This examination is new to the literature
and entails breaking down tangible assets into their identifiable parts, which include land and
buildings, machinery and equipment, and other miscellaneous assets. Notably, we evaluate the
importance of these diﬀerent categories using variation coming from the redeployability of the
underlying assets. We do so via an instrumental variables approach that identifies the compo-
nent (or “margin”) of tangibility that responds to shifts in liquidity and salability proxies.




                                                    1
    Our base tests employ a number of instruments. The first set of instruments speaks to
the liquidity of land and buildings owned by firms. This set contains proxies for the supply
and demand conditions in the real estate markets where firms operate, including proxies for
local real estate operators, the local disposal of real estate assets by the Federal Government
(the largest real estate “supplier” in the U.S.), as well as the pricing and volatility of local
rental rates. A second set of instruments relates to liquidity in the market for machinery and
equipment. These include proxies for the volume of transactions of second-hand machinery
and equipment in the industries our sample firms operate (e.g., Schlingemann et al. (2002) and
Campello (2006)). The list of instruments also includes information on industrial workforce,
which aﬀects capital/labor ratios and the demand for fixed assets (MacKay and Phillips (2005)
and Garmaise (2008)). Sources of data for our instruments range from standard COMPUS-
TAT, to the SNL real estate database, to authors’ filings of information request under the
Freedom of Information Act.
    We supplement our tests with evidence from a natural experiment: The Defense Base
Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (DBCRA). The DBCRA mandated the closure and
disposition of a large number of military bases and supporting facilities across the U.S. This
created a supply shock of more than 100,000 acres of land and thousands of buildings suit-
able for redevelopment into oﬃce parks and industrial zones. This event is unique in that it
generated an influx of corporate-type assets that was not caused by changes in local economic
circumstances, but by a nationwide sale of properties that became redundant with the end of
the Cold War.1 The shock aﬀected local commercial real estate markets in nonhomogeneous
ways. We take a careful look at this innovation to study how firms adjusted their holdings of
land and buildings and whether these adjustments had an eﬀect on their debt capacity. We do
so via a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences matching estimation approach designed to ensure that firms
under examination (“treated” and “controls”) are similar except for the extent to which their
local real estate markets were aﬀected by the disposition of military bases under the DBCRA.
    Our evidence shows that tangible assets drive capital structure only to the extent that they
are redeployable. Put diﬀerently, only the component of asset tangibility that responds to sala-
bility (“marketable tangibility”) exerts explanatory power over corporate leverage. In addition,
across the various categories of tangible assets, we find that land and buildings – arguably,
the least firm-specific fixed assets – have the most explanatory power over leverage ratios. At
the same time, assets that are more directly linked to firm-specific production processes, such
    1
      As we detail below, decisions about base closings and dispositions under the DBCRA were governed by a
strict “national security first” doctrine. Sales of real estate facilities under the Act were fairly orthogonal to
local economic conditions.



                                                        2
as machines and equipment, have only a small explanatory power over leverage. The results
we report are new to the literature and are consistent with the argument that frictions such
as contract incompleteness and limited enforceability (frictions that are alleviated via access
to liquid collateral) have first-order eﬀects on corporate leverage.
   To further characterize our inferences about corporate assets and leverage, we contrast
firms that are more likely to face credit frictions (small, unrated, and low dividend payout
firms) with firms that are less likely to face such frictions (large, rated, and high payout firms).
We find that the redeployability—leverage relationship is pronounced across the set of credit
constrained firms – firms for which collateral recourse is particularly important in the bor-
rowing process. For unconstrained firms, in contrast, redeployability is an irrelevant driver of
leverage. To be concrete, our small-firm estimates imply that a one-interquartile range change
in asset redeployability is associated with a 39% increase in market leverage. This is equivalent
to a shift in leverage from its mean of 22% to about 31%. For large firms, however, asset re-
deployability has no eﬀect on capital structure. These cross-sectional contrasts are consistent
with the logic of the financing friction argument: variation in asset redeployability only aﬀects
the borrowing capacity of those firms that are likely to be financially constrained.
   Macroeconomics research suggests that the extent to which credit frictions bind and af-
fect firm behavior is often a function of the state of the economy (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler
(1995)). This observation points to time-series variation that can be used to further identify
the redeployability—leverage channel that we propose. Following Kashyap and Stein (2000), we
employ a two-step estimator that builds on this intuition and find that the role of redeployabil-
ity in alleviating financing frictions is heightened during periods of tight credit. We estimate,
for example, that a 100-basis point increase in the Fed funds rate (a proxy for credit tighten-
ing) leads to a 42% increase in the sensitivity of leverage to asset redeployability. Consistent
with the supply-side view of capital structure, our macro tests suggest that asset redeployability
increases debt capacity by ameliorating credit frictions.
   It is important that we put our findings in context with the recent literature. Faulkender and
Petersen (2006) find that firms with credit ratings (a broad proxy for access to the public debt
markets) have higher leverage. Our paper complements Faulkender and Petersen’s results in
that we explore diﬀerent sources of data variation in providing evidence of a supply-side view of
capital structure. Notably, we find that the economic eﬀect of redeployability on leverage might
be as large as that of credit ratings, suggesting that supply-side determinants of capital struc-
ture might be even stronger than previously thought. The substantive contribution of our study
is that we identify and explore a well-characterized channel through which features of financial
contracting – liquidity of collateral recourse – aﬀect credit supply and corporate leverage.

                                                 3
       We also experiment with Lemmon et al.’s (2008) leverage model to check whether our
inferences about asset tangibility pass those authors’ “fixed-eﬀects stress tests.” Lemmon et
al. show that traditional determinants of leverage become largely irrelevant once the econo-
metrician accounts for time-invariant firm eﬀects. Like those authors, we find that regression
coeﬃcients of traditional leverage drivers become mostly insignificant after accounting for firm
eﬀects.2 However, our findings point to a diﬀerent pattern with respect to our tangibility
proxies. Relative to the baseline OLS model of Lemmon et al., the eﬀect of land and buildings
on leverage increases by a factor of almost 3 in firm-fixed eﬀects instrumental variables esti-
mations. Our findings suggest that while within-firm variation in the traditional determinants
of leverage has generally limited ability in explaining variation in leverage, land and buildings
seem to play a key role in explaining variation in leverage not only in the cross-section but also
within firm in the time series. Our inferences also survive the inclusion of “initial leverage”
in the regression specification (also following Lemmon et al.). These experiments highlight
the robustness of the redeployability—leverage channel we propose. We conjecture that the
estimation performance of other traditional leverage determinants might also improve upon
better empirical characterization.
       Our paper adds to current research on capital structure by considering credit supply-side
frictions as determinants of leverage. A few other papers have explored related ideas. Benm-
elech (2009) uses variation in the width of track gauges of 19th century railroads to measure
asset salability. Empirically, he finds that railroad companies that used more liquid track
gauges were able to raise debt with longer maturities, but not necessarily have higher leverage.
Using data from the airline industry, Benmelech and Bergman (2009) find that debt tranches
secured by more liquid collateral pay lower interest rates and sustain higher loan-to-value ra-
tios.3 Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2010) find that asset liquidity lowers the implied cost of capital.
The authors, however, do not examine the relation between liquidity and leverage. Chaney et
al. (2010) use data on corporate holdings of land to show that shocks to the value of real estate
aﬀect a firm’s ability to invest (see also Gan (2007)). Lemmon and Roberts (2010) use the 1989
collapse of the junk bond market to study the eﬀect of a credit supply shock on bond issuers.
The authors do not find an eﬀect of credit supply on leverage. Our paper contributes to this
literature by providing systematic evidence (across firms, time, and industries) of first-order
eﬀects of credit supply on firm leverage. Our analysis pins down a well-defined channel – the
   2
     Notably, the overarching theme of our analysis is to investigate capital structure dispersion across firms.
While we use standard regression analysis to get at this question, we need to make sure our findings are robust to
unobserved time-invariant firm heterogeneity. As such, our methods emphasize the use of fixed-eﬀects models.
   3
     Relatedly, Benmelech et al. (2005) find a positive relation between the liquidation value of commercial
real estate and the size of mortgage contracts.



                                                        4
redeployability of tangible assets – in identifying how credit frictions aﬀect capital structure.4
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the data
and compares our sample to those of standard capital structure studies. Section 3 presents our
central results on the eﬀect asset tangibility (and its various components) on capital structure.
Section 4 contrasts results across sample partitions where firms are likely to face diﬀerent
degrees of financing frictions. It also contrasts our findings across times of tight and easy
credit in the economy. Section 5 compares the impact of asset tangibility with that of other
leverage determinants discussed in recent studies. Section 6 concludes the paper.


2     Base Analysis
2.1     Sampling and Variable Construction
Our sample consists of active and inactive firms from COMPUSTAT with main operations in
the U.S. from 1984 through 1996. We focus on that time window because one of our goals is to
gauge the relative importance of the diﬀerent components of firms’ PP&E and COMPUSTAT
does not report that decomposition in other years. The raw sample includes all firms for which
we can gather information on the diﬀerent components of PP&E except, financial, lease, REIT
and real estate-related, non-profit, and governmental firms. We exclude firm-years for which
the value of total assets or net sales is less than $1 million. We further exclude firm-years
observing an increase in size or sales of more than 100%, or for which market-to-book ratios
are greater than 10. Similarly, we exclude firms involved in major restructurings, bankruptcy,
or merger activities.
    We combine COMPUSTAT with several other data sources. We do this in order to imple-
ment an instrumental variables approach that deals with the endogeneity of asset tangibility.
We model the endogeneity of tangibility as a function of industry characteristics, real estate
market conditions, and the liquidity of the secondary market for machinery and equipment,
among others. To streamline the discussion, we dedicate the remainder of this section to
describing sample statistics, variable construction, and regression models that are commonly
found in the literature. We discuss our instruments in detail in the next section.
    The basic left-hand side variable of the models we estimate is market leverage. Following
the literature, MarketLeverage is the ratio of total debt (COMPUSTAT’s items dltt + dlc) to
market value of total assets, or at — ceq + (prcc_f ×cshpri). In every estimation performed,
    4
      In contemporary work, Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) report evidence of positive correlation between
fixed assets (PP&E) and leverage. In contrast to our study, however, those authors do not look at the
redeployability of tangible assets, do not diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent types of tangible assets, nor account
for the endogeneity of tangibility.

                                                      5
we also look at book values of debt, where we compute BookLeverage as the ratio of total debt
to book value of total assets (at). The drivers of leverage that we examine are also standard,
coming from an intersection of papers written on the topic over the last two decades.5 Size
is the natural logarithm of the market value of total assets (measured in millions of 1996
constant dollars). Profitability is the ratio of income before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization (oibdp) to book value of total assets. Q is the ratio of market value of total
assets to book value of total assets. EarningsVolatility is the ratio of the standard deviation
of income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total book assets, computed
from four-year windows of consecutive firm observations. MarginalTaxRate is Graham’s (2000)
marginal tax rate, available from John Graham’s website. RatingDummy is a dummy variable
that takes a value of 1 if the firm has either a bond rating (splticrm) or a commercial paper
rating (spsticrm), and set to 0 otherwise.
       Our focus is on asset tangibility and its components. We denote the standard measure
of asset tangibility by OverallTangibility, which is defined as the ratio of total tangible assets
(ppent; or “PP&E”) to book value of total assets. Land&Building is the ratio of net book value
of land and building (ppenli + ppenb) to the book value of total assets. Machinery&Equipment
is the ratio of net book value of machinery and equipment (ppenme) to book value of total as-
sets. OtherTangibles is the ratio of plant and equipment in progress and miscellaneous tangible
assets (ppenc + ppeno) to book value of total assets.

2.2       Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of our data. Our sampling methods and variable
construction approaches are similar to those used in existing capital structure studies and, not
surprisingly, the associated descriptive statistics mimic those of existing papers. Faulkender
and Petersen (2006), for example, report average market and book leverage of, respectively,
19.9% and 26.1%. This is very similar to the corresponding averages of 20.2% and 25.6% that
we find for our sample. Similarly, the average OverallTangibility of 35.6% that we report is
comparable to the average of 34% reported in the Lemmon et al. (2008) and Frank and Goyal
(2003) studies; or the 33.1% figure reported by Faulkender and Petersen.
       A novel feature of our study is the decomposition of asset tangibility. Table 1 shows that
Land&Building and Machinery&Equipment are both key components of OverallTangibility.
These items are also quite relevant in terms of the total asset base of the firms in COMPUS-
   5
    The literature we follow in our variable selection process includes Barclay and Smith (1995), Rajan and
Zingales (1995), Graham (2000), Baker and Wurgler (2002), Frank and Goyal (2003), Korajczyk and Levy
(2003), Faulkender and Petersen (2006), Flannery and Rangan (2006), and Lemmon et al. (2008).



                                                    6
TAT. The mean (median) ratio of Land&Building to total assets is equal to 11.8% (10.3%). For
Machinery&Equipment the mean (median) ratio is 18.9% (16.1%). In contrast, OtherTangibles
accounts for only 1.5% of total assets.

                                        Table 1 About Here

2.3       Standard Leverage Regressions
We verify that our sample is representative of previous capital structure studies by running
standard leverage regressions for both the 1984—1996 window (which we use due to data avail-
ability) and a larger 1971—2006 window (for comparability with other papers). Similar to
previous studies, we estimate a benchmark regression model for Leverage (either market or
book values) of the following form:
                                                                   X                X
           =  +  + X +               +         +     (1)
                                                                                   

where the index  denotes a firm,  denotes a year, c is a constant, and X is a matrix contain-
ing the standard control variables just described (Size, Q, Profitability, etc.). Firm and Year
absorb firm- and time-specific eﬀects, respectively. Our current focus is on the importance and
robustness of the coeﬃcients returned for OverallTangibility. We will use these estimates as
a benchmark for the tests conducted later in the paper.6 All of our regressions are estimated
with heteroskedasticity-consistent errors clustered by firm (Petersen (2009)).
       The results are reported in Table 2. The standard leverage regression (Eq. (1)) is esti-
mated four times, considering diﬀerent combinations of leverage definitions (MarketLeverage
vs. BookLeverage) and sample periods (1984—1996 vs. 1971—2006). For our purposes, the
key finding from Table 2 is that the coeﬃcients returned for OverallTangibility are of similar
magnitudes across the 1984—1996 and 1971—2006 windows. The coeﬃcients are also similar to
those reported in prior studies. For the MarketLeverage model, we find that the coeﬃcient on
OverallTangibility is 0.212 in the 1984—1996 baseline sample, compared to 0.220 in the 1971—
2006 extended sample.7 These estimates are economically and statistically indistinguishable
from each other. Inferences are similar for the BookLeverage model. The magnitudes of the
coeﬃcients associated with the other regressors are also generally similar across samples.8

                                        Table 2 About Here
   6
     Our inferences are the same whether or not we lag the right-hand side variables of Eq. (1).
   7
     In the capital structure literature, coeﬃcients for OverallTangibility range from 0.18 in Frank and Goyal
(2003) to 0.32 in Rajan and Zingales (1995).
   8
     To avoid repetition, we discuss the coeﬃcients of the other regressors in the tests of the next section.


                                                      7
3     Main Results
We now examine whether redeployability of a firm’s assets is a first-order determinant of ob-
served dispersion in capital structure. We do so by partitioning the commonplace measure of
asset tangibility (PP&E over assets, which we call OverallTangibility) into its identifiable com-
ponents from COMPUSTAT (Land&Building, Machinery&Equipment, and OtherTangibles).
We then adopt an instrumental approach that considers redeployability across diﬀerent classes
of tangible assets. Finally, we further characterize the redeployability—leverage channel using
a natural experiment approach.

3.1    The Components of Asset Tangibility
The estimation of Eq. (1) – the standard leverage model – restricts the coeﬃcients on the
diﬀerent components of asset tangibility to a single estimate. We refer to that equation as
the “restricted model.” In this section, we re-estimate Eq. (1) under diﬀerent econometric
approaches. More importantly, we also allow diﬀerent components of asset tangibility to at-
tract individual coeﬃcients. We call this alternative model the “unrestricted model.” The
unrestricted tangibility model of leverage can be written as:

  =  +1 & +2 & +3  
                       X          X
             + X +     +       +                                  (2)
                                     

where Leverage, c, and X are defined similarly to Eq. (1), with Firm and Year absorbing firm-
and time-specific eﬀects, respectively.
    The standard approach to the estimation of equations such as Eqs. (1) and (2) is the OLS
model. One should be concerned, however, with the potential for empirical biases in this esti-
mation. While the tangibility of a firm’s assets – the type and mix of assets it uses – might
be independently determined by the line of business it operates, one can argue that the firm
ultimately makes decisions about the proportion of inputs employed in its production process
(e.g., diﬀerent levels and combinations of land, machinery, labor, and intangibles), making
observed asset tangibility an endogenous variable. This may bias the estimates of Eqs. (1)
and (2) under the OLS.
    It is diﬃcult to argue away the biases that arise from OLS estimations in this context. A
reverse-causality story, for example, could yield a positive association between leverage and
tangibility if the firm raises debt to acquire tangible assets. Alternatively, an omitted variable
story could be told in which good firm fundamentals may lead to both higher use of external
financing (in the form of debt) and higher fixed asset acquisition. Our tests, in turn, look for

                                                8
variation coming from the redeployability of diﬀerent types of assets under an instrumental
approach that is helpful in dealing with potential endogeneity between leverage and tangibility.
We supplement these tests using a unique natural experiment.

3.2        An Instrumental Approach
Much of the analysis in this paper focuses on inferences based on instrumental variables (IV)
approaches to modeling the relation between a firm’s leverage and the various components of
its tangible assets.9 The issue of endogeneity of tangibility has not been previously addressed
in the empirical capital structure literature. This task is challenging due to the heterogeneity
that is imbedded in the traditional measure of tangibility, which includes assets as diverse as
vacant land and machines in progress. Econometrically, this implies finding valid instruments
for each identifiable type of tangible assets. We experiment with multiple sets of instruments,
which we describe in turn. Admittedly, any IV approach is subject to some degree of skep-
ticism. Beyond standard checks of instrument validity and relevance, we make sure that our
results do not hinge on any particular instrument choice and are robust to the exclusion of
individual instruments. The tests we propose are useful and robust to a number of concerns
associated with leverage estimations that use asset tangibility as an input.

3.2.1       Sets of Instruments

Our analysis has shown that land and buildings are major components of tangible assets and
our first set of instruments contains drivers of supply and demand conditions in the real estate
markets where firms operate.
       Existing research shows that corporate demand for real estate increases with the volatility of
rental rates (Rosen et al. (1984), Ben-Shahar (1998), Sinai and Souleles (2005)). This happens
because real estate ownership provides insurance against fluctuations in rental costs. Parallel to
the insurance rationale, rental cost volatility is unlikely to be a first-order driver of firm capital
structure choices, other than through its impact on the demand for real estate facilities. These
observations suggest that rental cost volatility can function as an instrument in the relation
between firms’ holdings of commercial real estate and their leverage. We proxy for the volatility
of rental costs in local real estate markets with the average income volatility of commercial
real estate lessors operating in the firm’s headquarters state. The data used to compute this
proxy are taken from the SNL—Datasource. We expect this time-varying instrument (denoted
RentalVolatility) to attract a positive sign in the first stage of our IV estimations.10
   9
       For completeness and comparability, however, we also report results from standard OLS models.
  10
       One concern is whether firms’ major facilities and headquarters are located in the same real estate market.


                                                         9
    Land economics research also shows that firms operating in areas where buildings and
production facilities are not readily available from the market hold more of those facilities in
their balance sheets (see Malpezzi and Green (1996) and Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2002)).
This evidence is consistent with theoretical work from the search literature, where parties hold
longer onto assets with illiquid secondary markets since selling and repurchasing these assets
too often entails high trading costs (see Diamond (1982) and Duﬃe et al. (2005)).11 Existing
evidence also suggests that the presence of Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) in a local
real estate market is indicative of the liquidity of the market for commercial properties used
by firms. Indeed, REITs were introduced with the Real Estate Act of 1960 to enhance the
liquidity of commercial real estate assets, and various studies show that REITs increase the
supply of real estate in local markets (see Chan et al. (2003) and Geltner et al. (2007)).12 We
proxy for the depth of the supply of local commercial real estate facilities using the log of the
number of REITs operating in a firm’s state (denoted LogSuppliers). Since firms are expected
to hold less real estate assets when local real estate markets are more liquid, we expect this
instrument to enter our estimations with a negative sign.
    To supplement our set of real estate markets instruments, we include a proxy for the sale
of real estate by the Federal Government (GovernmentDisposal). The Federal Government
is the largest real estate “supplier” in the U.S., and disposals of land and buildings by the
Government – which can be massive at times – are known to impact local commercial
real estate markets.13 The Federal Properties Disposition Act of 1949 regulates the process of
disposal and management of U.S. Government properties. The purpose of the Act is to restrain
federal spending and one can argue that the Federal Government’s need to dispose of land is
plausibly exogenous to economic circumstances of local real estate markets and firms operating
in those markets. Building on extant research, one can conjecture that firms operating in state-
years where the Government disposes of real estate assets will hold less land and buildings in
Denis et al. (2002) find that 70% of non-financial firms in COMPUSTAT conduct their entire operations
within one geographical area (largely, the same state). Gao et al. (2008) find that of out those firms with
operations residing outside of the headquarters’ state, the median firm has operations in only one additional
state (often a neighboring state). While relatively scant, the available evidence suggests that the bulk of
operating facilities of most firms (headquarters and major plants) are located together in the same state,
consistent with our identification strategy.
  11
     Related work by Gavazza (2011) on real asset markets is discussed in further detail below.
  12
     REITs hold property portfolios that are both highly focused on a specific property segment (e.g., oﬃce
buildings or industrial facilities) and geographically concentrated.
  13
     Land ownership by the Federal Government varies greatly across states. In the Northeastern states of
New York and Connecticut, for example, the U.S. Government owns less than 1% of total state-land acreage,
while land ownership is as high as 44% in California and 52% in Oregon. The origin of this variation dates
back to the Northwest Territory Ordinance of 1787, by which new states (beyond the original 13 colonies)
were obligated to transfer massive amounts of land to the fledgling U.S. Government.



                                                     10
their balance sheets due to the lower price volatility (Sinai and Souleles (2005)) and higher
availability (Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2002)) of those assets. We obtain a state-year panel data
on U.S. dealings in real estate assets by filing a request under the Freedom of Information Act.14
       Our second set of instruments looks at the market for machinery and equipment. Our first
instrument in this set considers the liquidity of machinery and equipment within the indus-
try in which firms operate. Firms operating in industries with an active secondary market
for their equipment will be more likely to carry those assets at a lower cost in their balance
sheets (Almeida and Campello (2007)). In particular, since those assets can be easily found in
secondary markets, they need not be built (custom made) for the firm. Instead, they can be
bought as used goods and integrated in the firm’s production process at a lower user cost (see
Gavazza (2011)). Following Schlingemann et al. (2002), we use the 4-digit SIC industry-year
ratios of sales of PP&E to the sum of sales of PP&E and capital expenditures (COMPUSTAT’s
sppe/(sppe + capx )) as a proxy for the liquidity of machinery and equipment in the industry
a firm operates (see also Sibilkov (2009)). This proxy is denoted IndustryResale.
       Prior literature also shows that manufacture structure (machinery and equipment) and
labor configuration are correlated decisions (see MacKay and Phillips (2005) and Garmaise
(2008)). Following Garmaise, we use the 4-digit SIC industry-year ratios of the number of
employees scaled by total assets as an additional instrument for fixed capital. The idea is that
while diﬀerent firms may use diﬀerent levels of capital and labor in their production process,
depending on considerations such as capital vintage and utilization, one might expect these
two quantities to move together along the investment expansion path. We use industry-level
measures of that relation (IndustryLabor) so as to capture variation that is not part of the
individual firm’s policy set.15
       Before moving to the estimation of leverage models (the focus of the analysis) it is impor-
tant that we assess the quality of our instruments. To streamline the flow and provide detail,
we dedicate a separate appendix (Appendix A) to a full-fledged discussion of the battery of
tests we perform in order to assess the properties of our instruments. Tests for instrument rel-
evance and instrument validity lend strong support to our empirical implementation. Perhaps
more important, the economic priors we utilize to select our instruments are confirmed in the
first-stage regressions reported in Table A.1 in the appendix.
  14
     These data are compiled by the Real Property Disposal Division (General Services Administration (GSA)),
under the U.S. Department of Commerce.
  15
     Our results could be biased if the employees-to-asset ratio varies across industries in a way that is
correlated with leverage. To assess this concern, we check whether the employees-to-asset ratio is correctly
excluded from the second stage leverage regressions. Our examination suggests that the exclusion-restrictions
are met in the data.



                                                     11
3.2.2   Core Business, Real Estate Markets, and Assets Holdings: The Case of
        Wal-Mart

Our identification strategy is centered on the acquisition process of corporate properties. To
illustrate the economic rationale of this process in relation to our identification strategy, we
provide an example using a firm from our COMPUSTAT sample: Wal-Mart. Our focus is on
how rental volatility works in governing the decision to own or lease corporate properties that
are linked to that firm’s core business.
   Wal-Mart’s strategy towards real estate assets includes a combination of owned and leased
properties. Wal-Mart Realty Department — one of the largest worldwide — plays a key role in
identifying, managing, and maintaining properties that are strategic to the growth objectives of
the firm, while maintaining economic eﬃciency. The interlink between core-retail business and
property-selection process is summarized in the following statement from the firm’s website:
“As Fortune’s #1 retailer, we’re responsible for building thoughtfully, leaving no waste for
landfills, as well as economically, so we can pass on the savings of smart, simple construction
to the consumer.”
   As of 2011, the firm owned 3,883 and leased 596 properties across the U.S. The language
in the annual report is unequivocal on how the lease arrangements are structured. These
contracts are linked to conditions in the rental market via a “rental escalation clause,” which
states that the firm might opt for owning real properties in those markets that have experienced
an increase in the rental rate. To understand this asset management policy in more detail, we
analyze the firm behavior with respect to its real-property portfolio in a period characterized
by a significant change in the market for rental properties. We focus on 1992 (one of our
sample years). In that year, rental volatility increased, one average, by 70% in the locations
where the firm operated; from 10% in 1991 to 17% in 1992. Following this increase, balance
sheet data show that firm’s holdings of land and buildings increased by almost 37% (from 19%
of total assets in 1991 to 26% in 1992). Additional evidence based on rental expenses from the
firm income statement is also consistent with a decreased reliance on leased properties. Rental
costs decreases by 47%; from 17% of sales in 1991 to 8% in 1992.

3.2.3   The Restricted Tangibility Model

Second-stage coeﬃcients for the restricted model (which includes only OverallTangibility) are
reported in Table 3. We first discuss the statistical properties of these estimates (economic
magnitudes are discussed shortly).
   We start by noting that OverallTangibility enters both the MarketLeverage and BookLever-
age regressions with a positive, highly statistically significant coeﬃcient. Turning to the control

                                                12
variables, they also attract the expected signs. Size enters the leverage regressions with a pos-
itive sign, although statistically weak. Profitability has a strong negative eﬀect on leverage, a
result that is commonly associated with Myers’s (1984) pecking order story. The coeﬃcient
on Q obtains the expected negative sign, a finding often seen as consistent with the argument
that firms with significant growth opportunities use less debt to avoid underinvestment (cf.
Myers (1977) and Hart (1993)). Cash flow volatility may increase the cost of financial distress.
Accordingly, EarningsVolatility enters the leverage regressions with the expected negative sign,
although statistically insignificant. Firms with a high marginal tax rate should increase leverage
to shield their tax burden. Contrary to this prediction, MarginalTaxRate enters the leverage
regressions with a negative coeﬃcient, a finding that is similarly reported by Faulkender and
Petersen (2006). Consistent with Faulkender and Petersen’s argument that firms with access
to the public debt market are less opaque and can borrow more, we find that our bond market
access indicator (RatingDummy) enters all regressions with a positively significant coeﬃcient.

                                         Table 3 About Here

    The economic eﬀects of the regressors of the leverage model are reported in square brackets
in Table 3. These eﬀects are displayed in terms of percentage change in leverage relative to its
sample mean as each regressor increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile (one interquartile
range (IQR) change), while all other variables are kept at their sample mean. The existing liter-
ature has paid little attention to the relative economic importance of the various forces driving
observed capital structure, focusing instead on their statistical significance. This makes our
exercise particularly interesting. At the same time, we are cautious about the interpretation
of these results since the estimates are derived from reduced-form-type equations.
    Despite concerns about the precision of estimates from standard capital structure regres-
sions, the results in Table 3 highlight the importance of asset redeployability as a driver of
leverage. The results in the table suggest that OverallTangibility is a main determinant of
MarketLeverage. For example, a one-IQR change in OverallTangibility leads MarketLeverage
to increase by 0.066, which is a 32.4% increase relative to the sample mean leverage of 0.202.
In this regression, the coeﬃcient for Q also implies a sizeable eﬀect, but it is only half of that
of tangibility under the experimental design we consider.16 Other important variables such as
Size and Profitability have more limited economic impact on MarketLeverage. OverallTangibil-
ity is also a first-order driver of BookLeverage. Since our estimates are similar to those of many
  16
     We also considered experiments where we perturb the variable of interest with shifts measured in terms of
standard deviations. Because some variables are highly skewed (such as Q), this purely parametric approach
could lead us to conclude that those variables have disproportionately larger economic eﬀects. As it turns out,
however, our conclusions also hold when we consider standard deviation shifts in our experimental design.

                                                      13
other papers in the capital structure literature, our findings highlight the relatively low degree
of attention researchers have paid to economic role of asset tangibility as a driver of leverage.
       Because OverallTangibility (or PP&E over assets) is a coarse collection of diﬀerent types of
assets, it is important that we do a better job of identifying the connections between tangible
asset structure and capital structure. This is the goal of the next set of tests.

3.2.4      The Unrestricted Tangibility Model

Our approach allows for the fact that corporate assets diﬀer in their degree of redeployabil-
ity. This dimension has not been examined in the existing empirical literature. We are able
to do so by decomposing the standard measure of asset tangibility (OverallTangibility) into
various components: Land&Building, Machinery&Equipment, and OtherTangibles. With this
decomposition, we can re-estimate the models of Table 3 and then assess the significance of
individual components of a firm’s tangible assets.
       The results from our asset decomposition analysis are in Table 4, where we report estimates
of economic significance. One can readily recover the original regression coeﬃcients from the
estimations in Table 4 with the use of Table 1. For example, the original slope coeﬃcient for
Land&Buildings is 0.207 in the OLS model, which can be backed out by multiplying 13.0%
from Table 4 by the average leverage of 0.202, divided by the interquartile range of 0.127 from
Table 1. The tabulated regression coeﬃcients are also available from the authors.
       To characterize the role played by redeployability, we present estimates that are obtained
from ordinary least squares (OLS), least squares with fixed eﬀects (FE), and instrumental vari-
ables with fixed eﬀects (IV). Focusing on the IV specification, Land&Building appears as the
most important determinant of leverage (either book- or market-based measures). At the same
time, Machinery&Equipment is far less relevant. In the MarketLeverage model (under column
3), a one-IQR shift in Land&Building is associated with an increase of 27.7% in the firm’s
leverage. This is almost twice as high as the eﬀect of Q (which is 17.0%) and multiple times
larger than any other traditional determinant of leverage. These contrasts are even sharper in
the BookLeverage specification. In that model (column 6), a one-IQR change in Land&Building
causes leverage to increase by 19.9%. This is about six times the eﬀect of traditional drivers of
capital structure, such as Profitability and Q. The only regressor in the BookLeverage model
that has comparable economic magnitude is Size, which is not statistically significant.17

                                       Table 4 About Here
  17
    The results we report are robust to the inclusion of operating leases in our models. In particular, our
conclusions remain unchanged if we capitalize operating leases as in Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) and
add this value to leverage and tangibility in our regressions.


                                                    14
   We note that while our redeployability-leverage argument is mainly cross-sectional in na-
ture, the fixed-eﬀects estimator tends to capture the times series eﬀects of the relation of
interest. Our main motivation in the choice of such estimator is to ensure that our results are
robust to unobserved, time-invariant heterogeneity. Given the focus of our analysis, it is impor-
tant to isolate the relative eﬀect of the cross-sectional variation in Land&Building on leverage.
With this in mind, we re-estimate our FE-IV models in Table 4 by way of IV without firm-fixed
eﬀects. This estimation shows that the coeﬃcient on Land&Building is large in nominal terms
in the IV specification without firm-fixed eﬀects and compares with the estimate from the IV
specification with fixed eﬀects that we report. For instance, in the market leverage regression,
the coeﬃcient on Land&Building is equal to 0.44 in the FE-IV estimation and 0.39 in the
IV specification without firm-fixed eﬀects. This implies that a 1% increase in Land&Building
generates an increase in leverage of about 40% that increase with both the FE-IV estimator
and the simple IV estimator without firm-fixed eﬀects, suggesting that Land&Building is an
important determinant of leverage both within-firm over time as well as across firms.
   Summing up our results, for either definition of leverage (market or book leverage) and
under alternative estimation approaches (OLS, FE, or IV), we find evidence pointing to land
and buildings – presumably, the least firm-specific, most redeployable assets – as a first-order
driver of leverage. Estimates for the other components of tangibility imply smaller, weaker ef-
fects. Importantly, as highlighted in the comparisons between the IV model and the other least
square-based approaches, it is the component of land and buildings that responds to redeploya-
bility in secondary markets that explains the observed dispersion in corporate leverage. Diﬀer-
ently put, our results show that tangible assets enable firms to sustain higher borrowing capac-
ity, but only to the extent that those assets are redeployable. This evidence is new to the litera-
ture and is consistent with theories suggesting that contracting frictions such as limited enforce-
ability condition firms’ borrowing on their ability to oﬀer collateral with high liquidation value.

3.3    Evidence from a Natural Experiment: Military Base Closings
       in The Post Cold War Era
Our proposed redeployability—leverage channel can be shown to operate in the data via an
alternative identification strategy. In this section, we isolate changes in capital structure that
are caused by exogenous shifts in the supply of real estate assets. Our tests build on the
intuition used above regarding the sale of real estate by the Federal Government. However, we
now focus on a surrogate natural experiment: the sale of military bases and supporting real
estate facilities by the U.S. Government following the end of the Cold War.



                                                15
3.3.1    Institutional Setting

Following the fall of the Iron Curtain, the U.S. military initiated the largest disarmament
program in its history.18 One of the steps of the program was the disposition of military in-
stallations across the country. This event is unique in that it created a shock to the supply
of corporate-type assets that was not caused by changes in local economic fundamentals, but
rather by a massive sale of assets that became superfluous with the end of the Cold War. It
is estimated that these dispositions generated an influx of more than 100,000 acres of land
and thousands of buildings suitable for redevelopment into oﬃce parks and industrial zones
(Murphy (2003)). In the greater Chicago area, for example, the closure of Glenview Naval Air
Station released 1,000 acres of real estate for development. The closure of Joliet Army Arsenal,
freed up an additional 2,000 acres of land and facilities, which were later scheduled to house
the largest industrial park in metro Chicago. We take a careful look at this innovation to com-
mercial real estate markets to study how firms adjusted their holdings of land and buildings
and whether these adjustments had an eﬀect on their debt capacity.
   Before proceeding, we stress that simply exploring an event of this nature may not be
suﬃcient to establish a causal link between a firm’s asset structure and its leverage. Our iden-
tification strategy could be compromised if the Government’s selection of disposable bases was
driven by the value of the properties they occupy. This could be problematic for our purposes
because that value is generally correlated with the conditions of the local economies and, ar-
guably, these conditions could also aﬀect the growth opportunities and leverage decisions of
local firms. To isolate the link between tangible assets and leverage, we need the Government’s
selection of bases suitable for closure to be independent of the economic fundamentals of their
location. To achieve identification we exploit the procedures for base closure and liquidation
that were established by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act (H.R. 101-665). As
we discuss below, our test strategy works because decisions about base closures under the Act
were governed by a strict “national security first” doctrine, rather than by local economic
circumstances. To ensure the robustness of our findings, however, we use a test approach that
accounts for potential deviations from that principle.

3.3.2    Data and Experimental Design

Data on U.S. dealings in real estate assets are compiled by the General Services Administra-
tion (GSA), under the Department of Commerce. To identify transactions involving military
installations, we intersect the GSA database with data from the Base Closure Division of the
 18
    The U.S. Department of State reports that military spending was cut by over 20% from 1986 to 1994 (cf.
World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers (1995)).

                                                   16
Pentagon. Consistent with the security-first doctrine, the data show that the DBCRA led to
a significant number of base closures in areas that are not considered “strategic regions of the
country,” as defined by the Oﬃce of Economic Adjustment, under the Department of Defense.19
Closure activity was particularly pronounced in the Midwest, and our tests focus on the neigh-
boring states of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Missouri, and Wisconsin – which we call
the “experimental region.” As we discuss below, this choice is made to mitigate the influence
of confounding factors in our analysis as these states’ economies are fairly comparable.
       Illinois was the state with the largest number of base dispositions in the experimental region
following the DBCRA (21 large dispositions). By comparison, there were no disposition activ-
ities in Kentucky and Wisconsin, and only small activities in Indiana, Iowa, and Missouri. The
data show that the intensity of disposition activities was associated with the larger presence
of military installations in Illinois relative to the other states in the region. This helps with
our identification strategy as it suggests that the Government’s decision to focus on Illinois
was primarily driven by considerations about the large military footprint in that state in 1990.
Indeed, the DBCRA states in its “procedures for closure recommendations” (Section 2903)
that the Secretary of Defense must not consider the economic circumstances of communities
aﬀected by base closures when deliberating on closure decisions.20
       Our basic prediction is that firms headquartered in Illinois – “treated firms” – should
reduce their holdings of land and buildings following the DBCRA relative to similar firms in
the other experimental states (Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Missouri, and Wisconsin). To wit,
theoretical work suggests that firms have long-term strategic plans and these plans include the
future utilization of real estate assets (see, e.g., Gavazza (2011)). When firms operate in areas
where the supply of commercial real assets is large, they have less need to hoard those assets
in their own balance sheets, since the assets can be more promptly purchased from the open
market when needed. In our test setting, we hypothesize that when more real estate assets come
to the market due to the DBCRA, firms in the aﬀected areas will have a lower need to hoard
those assets in their balance sheets and will respond by disposing of some of those assets.21
Our proposed redeployability—leverage channel would imply that this exogenous downward
adjustment in real estate holdings should lead to a decline in leverage for firms in Illinois.
       Naturally, diﬀerences between treated and untreated firms in our cross-state comparisons
  19
     Strategic regions are the coastal states, those bordering Mexico, and some areas in the border with Canada.
  20
     For each base closure decision, one can find recommendations of the Secretary of Defense on a webpage
supported by the Base Closure Division of the Pentagon (www.hqda.army.mil/acsimweb/brac/).
  21
     We note that this increase in supply might make it relatively harder for firms to sell real assets. This
countervailing eﬀect could reduce the extent of disposition activities in the data with the result of dampening
our estimates. We thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this issue.



                                                      17
could be confounded by other sources of heterogeneity. We address this issue using a diﬀerence-
in-diﬀerences matching estimator approach. To be precise, we pair-up treated firms with a
subsample of “matched controls” that are extracted from the population of non-treated firms
(firms in other Midwestern states). Firms in the counterfactual set are identified as the closest
matches in terms of size, profitability, Tobin’s Q, earnings volatility, marginal tax rate, and
credit rating. Treated—control matches are also confined to the same 2-digit SIC categories
(we exclude any observations from the defense industry). The purpose of the approach is to
ensure that treated firms are comparable to controls on multiple observable dimensions, with
the “only” diﬀerence being the extent to which the local real estate markets were aﬀected by
the disposition of military bases. Our final sample consists of 97 firms for which data necessary
to build our matching variables are available in COMPUSTAT.
   The DBCRA became Law (P.L. 101-510) in fiscal-year 1991. We measure outcome variables
in changes (from 1991 to 1992) because variables in levels of the treated and control firms could
be diﬀerent prior to the treatment – the DBCRA – and those diﬀerences could carry over after
the treatment, biasing our inferences. We perform tests of the average eﬀect of the treatment on
the treated (ATT) using the Abadie and Imbens (2006) estimator, as implemented by Abadie
et al. (2004). The Abadie-Imbens estimator produces “exact” matches on categorical variables
such as credit ratings and industry. Naturally, the matches on continuous variables will not be
exact. The procedure recognizes this diﬃculty and applies a bias correction to the estimates
of interest. The estimator conveniently produces heteroskedastic-robust standard errors.

3.3.3   Results

Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences matching estimation results for our experiment are reported in Ta-
ble 5. Panel A shows that firms headquartered in Illinois reduced corporate holdings of
Land&Building from 0.139 to 0.133 between 1991 to 1992. In economic terms, this repre-
sents a decline of 4.06% in their holdings of real estate assets. By comparison, their control
matches increased corporate holdings of Land&Building by 1.60% over the same time period.
The simple diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimation is equal to 5.67% and is statistically significant
at the 1% level. The estimate increases to 8.82% when we use the Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected
estimator; also highly statistically significant.
   The results in Panel A suggest that the DBCRA had a significant impact on corporate hold-
ings of real estate assets. It is important to note that the changes reported are not explained
by a drop in the value of real estate held by firms, but rather by actual sales of properties in
their portfolios. Indeed, accounting figures for Land&Building in COMPUSTAT are recorded
at historical book values following U.S. GAAP. These figures do not reflect changes in market

                                                    18
valuation. We further check the accuracy of our inferences by gathering information on the
actual sales of real estate properties by companies in Illinois. Data from companies’ 10-Ks
confirm that their real estate holdings decline between 1991 and 1992 by way of active real
estate sales activities.
                                     Table 5 About Here

   Having documented the eﬀect of the DBCRA on corporate holdings of land and buildings,
we next analyze the implications of the experiment for corporate leverage. Diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerences estimation results for market and book leverage measures are reported in Panels
B and C of Table 5. Panel B shows that treated firms reduced MarketLeverage from 0.216 to
0.180 between 1991 and 1992. This corresponds to a proportional drop of 16.55% in treated
firms’ leverage. By comparison, control firms decreased their leverage by only 1.04% over the
same time period. The simple diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate for MarketLeverage is 15.51%.
The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate increases to 17.83% after employing the Abadie-Imbens
method. Panel C shows a very similar pattern for BookLeverage.
   We note that while land and buildings fell from 0.139 to 0.133 (a change equivalent to 0.6%
of assets) for treated firms as a result of the Act-induced supply shock, the decline in leverage
was sizably larger, ranging from 3.6% (from 0.216 to 0.180) for market leverage to 3.1% for
book leverage (Table 5, Column 1, Panels A - C). To understand the larger economic eﬀect on
leverage, it is helpful to recognize that the increase in the supply of commercial real estate in the
experimental region works through two diﬀerent channels. First, it reduces a firm need to hoard
real assets, causing the reduction in corporate holdings of land and buildings that we observe
in the data. Second, it might aﬀect the market value of commercial properties. According to
U.S. GAAPs, firms are required to report their corporate holdings of Land&Building only at
book value (firms do not report property-acquisition prices in their annual reports — “Item 2
— Properties”). As a result, we can observe dispositions of corporate land and buildings, but
it is not possible to obtain an accurate measure of change in value of these same properties.
Although we cannot measure market value changes at the firm level, we note that corporate-
type real estate assets lost about 3% of their value in the Midwest (our experimental region)
in the second half of 1991 (Source: NCREIF). Firms responded to this overall change in their
collateral capacity by reducing net debt by 2.0% and increasing net equity by 1.5%; where these
leverage adjustments could have been dictated, for instance, by covenants in place. Overall,
these combined figures imply a leverage adjustment of roughly -3.5%, which compares to the
-3.6% to -3.1% leverage adjustment (book and market) documented in Table 5.
   The results in Table 5 show that local supply shocks to real state assets lead firms to hold
less of those assets which in turn led to a reduction in their leverage. These results are new

                                                 19
and reveal a strong connection between firm collateral and financial decisions by tracing out
the redeployability—leverage channel in a precisely-identified setting.

3.3.4   Robustness Tests

Note that our DBCRA-based estimations could still be biased if our matching variables do
not adequately capture heterogeneity in local business fundamentals and firm characteristics.
In particular, one could be concerned that the closure of military installations might cause
a recession in local economies, and this eﬀect could make local firms demand less debt. We
address this concern with a battery of robustness checks.
   In a first test, we analyze the implications of base closures for corporate holdings of machin-
ery and equipment. If the disposition of military installations causes treated firms to cut on
holdings of real estate by way of a local recession channel, we should observe a similar eﬀect on
treated firms’ other production inputs as well, including machinery and equipment. At a more
basic level, the local economy recession story should also lead to a decline in treated firms’ sales.
   Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences test results comparing the average change in machinery and equip-
ment holdings as well as sales for treated and control firms are reported in Table 6. Panel A
shows that Machinery&Equipment declined for treated firms by 0.99% between 1991 and 1992
(from 0.185 to 0.183). By comparison, control firms experienced a decline of 0.93%. The
Abadie-Imbens estimator points to a diﬀerence of —0.30% across the two groups of firms.
These estimates are both economically and statistically insignificant. The evidence in Panel B
leads to very similar conclusions. Sales increased by 1.52% for treated firms between 1991 and
1992. By comparison, sales increased by 2.34% for control firms. The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences
estimation based on the Abadie-Imbens method is statistically insignificant. Results in Table
6 cast doubt on the argument that a local recession channel associated with the disposition of
military installations underlie our leverage results.

                                     Table 6 About Here

   In a second test, we control directly for the economic conditions of the local economies by
excluding from our sample those firms that sell goods and services primarily in the markets
where their headquarters are located. In other words, we focus on firms for which cash flows
are largely disassociated from local economic conditions, thus largely unaﬀected by the dispo-
sition of military installations in their locations. The data necessary to perform this test are
obtained from the Directory of Corporate Aﬃliations (DCA) database. This database con-
tains information on firms’ sales distribution across diﬀerent regions. Using this information,
we exclude treated firms that sell more than 25% of their products in their headquarters’ state.

                                                 20
      Table 7 reports diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimation results for corporate holdings of land
and buildings as well as leverage using this subset of firms. Panel A shows that the Abadie-
Imbens estimator for Land&Building is economically large, equal to —9.71%, and statistically
significant at the 1% level. Results for MarketLeverage are reported in Panel B. Market lever-
age declines by 22.53% (from 0.216 to 0.167) for treated firms relative to the control group
following the DBCRA. Panel C documents a very similar pattern for BookLeverage. The re-
sults in Table 7 mimic those of the base-analysis of Table 5, suggesting that local economic
conditions do not explain our characterization of the redeployability—leverage channel.

                                           Table 7 About Here

3.3.5      Further Falsification Tests

Finally, we perform a set of falsification tests in checking the internal logic of our findings.22
First, we simulate the implementation of the DBCRA test as if the Act took place in 1989.
Assigning once again firms in Illinois to the treatment group, we find no changes in corporate
holdings of real estate assets and leverage between 1989 and 1990. We repeat the same placebo
tests for 1988 and find similar patterns. These results suggest that our base test results are not
simply capturing diﬀerential trends in leverage across firms in Illinois vis-à-vis those in other
states in the region. Second, we look for a state with a comparable amount of base closings
also in the Midwest (a “false counterfactual”). Analysis of the GSA database reveals that Ohio
observed 10 dispositions activities of military installations following the DBCRA. Using Ohio
as a control match, we should find less pronounced eﬀects associated with our Illinois-based
treatment assignment. This is exactly what we find in the data. These additional tests make
it harder to argue that confounding eﬀects – and not the experimental treatment we designed
– can explain the results in Table 5.


4       Credit Frictions and Macroeconomic Movements
The evidence thus far is consistent with the argument that the redeployability of tangible as-
sets aﬀects leverage ratios because it relaxes financing frictions (provides liquid collateral to
creditors). Taking this argument to its next logical steps, in this section we first contrast firms
that are more likely to face financing frictions – for which collateral should be particularly
important in raising debt finance – with firms that are less likely to face those problems. In a
second set of experiments, we examine whether asset redeployability becomes a stronger driver
 22
      The tabulations are omitted in the interest of brevity but are readily available from the authors.



                                                        21
of leverage in times when financing frictions are likely to be heightened, such as periods of
aggregate credit contractions.

4.1       Cross-Sectional Variation in Credit Constraints and Leverage
We investigate whether asset tangibility is a particularly important driver of leverage for firms
that are more likely to face financing constraints. The first step in this analysis is to sort firms
into “financially constrained” and “financially unconstrained” categories. The literature oﬀers
a number of plausible approaches to this sorting and we consider three alternative schemes:

       • Scheme #1: We rank firms based on their asset size over the sample period, and assign to
         the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms in the bottom (top) three
         deciles of the size distribution. The rankings are performed on an annual basis. This ap-
         proach resembles that of Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), who also distinguish between
         groups of financially constrained and unconstrained firms on the basis of size. Fama
         and French (2002) and Frank and Goyal (2003) also associate firm size with the degree
         of external financing frictions. The argument for size as a good observable measure of
         financing constraints is that small firms are typically young, less well known, and thus
         more vulnerable to credit imperfections.

       • Scheme #2: We retrieve data on firms’ bond ratings and classify those firms without a
         rating for their public debt as financially constrained. Given that unconstrained firms
         may choose not to use debt financing and hence not obtain a debt rating, we only assign
         to the constrained subsample those firm-years that both lack a rating and report positive
         long-term debt (see Faulkender and Petersen (2006)).23 Financially unconstrained firms
         are those whose bonds have been rated. Related approaches for characterizing financing
         constraints are used by Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995) and Almeida et al. (2004).

       • Scheme #3: In every year over the sample period, we rank firms based on their payout ra-
         tio and assign to the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms in the bot-
         tom (top) three deciles of the annual payout distribution. We compute the payout ratio as
         the ratio of total distributions (dividends and repurchases) to operating income. The intu-
         ition that financially constrained firms have significantly lower payout ratios follows early
         work by Fazzari et al. (1988). In the capital structure literature, Fama and French (2002)
         use payout ratios as a measure of diﬃculties firms face in assessing the financial markets.
  23
    Firms with no bond rating and no debt are excluded, but our results are not aﬀected if we treat these
firms as either constrained or unconstrained.


                                                   22
   Table 8 reports second-stage IV estimation results for our three credit friction partition
schemes. For ease of exposition and comparability, we report estimates for OverallTangibil-
ity, Land&Building, Machinery&Equipment, and OtherTangibles in terms of their marginal
economic eﬀects.
   For the three subsamples of constrained firms (small, unrated, and low dividend payout
firms), Land&Building appears as the main driver of capital structure. Panel A, for example,
shows that a one-IQR change in Land&Building is associated with a 39% increase in Mar-
ketLeverage for the small-firm partition. This is equivalent to a shift in market leverage from its
mean of about 22% to nearly 31%. Other categories of tangible assets (Machinery&Equipment
and OtherTangibles), in contrast, allow for less debt financing (their economic eﬀect is smaller
and statistically insignificant). Alternative leverage determinants (untabulated estimates) also
have small economic eﬀects when compared to Land&Building. For example, within the same
small-firm partition, a one-IQR change in Q is associated with a 12% change in MarketLever-
age. A similar experiment using Size yields a change of 11% in MarketLeverage. Notably, the
economic eﬀects of both Q and Size are less than one-third of the eﬀect of Land&Building.
We reach very similar conclusions when we examine the other constrained firm partitions; as
shown in the results for unrated and low dividend payout firms (columns 4 and 6, respectively).
   In contrast to the above findings, asset tangibility does not aﬀect leverage across uncon-
strained firms (large, rated, and high payout firms). The tangibility proxies enter the market
leverage regressions with generally negative, statistically insignificant coeﬃcients. These con-
trasting results imply that only constrained firms have their capital structures explained by
credit supply-side considerations (creditworthiness based on redeployable collateral).
   Panel B reports regressions featuring BookLeverage as the dependent variable. In these
regressions, Land&Building more sharply dominates other categories of asset tangibility (Ma-
chinery&Equipment is now always small and insignificant) as well as competing drivers of lever-
age (the economic eﬀects of Q, Size, and Profitability are also much smaller). For the small-firm
partition, for example, a one-IQR change in Land&Building causes BookLeverage to increase
by 28% from its mean, compared to an eﬀect of only 3% for Machinery&Equipment and 1% for
Q. One reaches similar conclusions by examining the unrated and low payout firm partitions.

                                    Table 8 About Here

   Our finding that financially unconstrained firms have lower coeﬃcients for Land&Building
could be questioned if large, rated, and high payout firms were more likely to have corporate
properties dispersed across states. In particular, if this dispersion remains unaccounted for,
it could create concerns about the impact of mismeasurement in the regressions performed

                                                23
in Table 8. Arguably, we could introduce attenuation biases that diﬀerentially aﬀect firms in
financially unconstrained partitions.
       To investigate this issue, we resort to the SEC’s Edgar database (http://www.sec.gov/edgar/
searchedgar) to retrieve the annual reports of each of the firms in our unconstrained partitions.
Looking at the 1996 reports, we collect from “Item 2 - Properties” detailed information on each
property on a firm’s balance sheet, its location (state), ownership status (owned or rented),
and size (square feet).24 Using property-level information, we construct a weighted measure of
the headquarters-specific instruments that accounts for the geographic dispersion of corporate
properties (owned properties only). Consider, for example, the measurement of RentalVolatil-
ity for a hypothetical firm. If the firm has 80% of its properties in NY (headquarters), 15% in
MA, and 5% in CT, rather than using the rental volatility of NY, we use a measure of rental
volatility that is 80% the rental volatility in NY, plus 15% the rental volatility in MA, plus 5%
the rental volatility in CT. We then use this “dispersion-weighted” version of RentalVolatility
as an instrument in our regressions. We follow a similar approach for LogSuppliers and Gov-
ernmentDisposal. Using these geo-weighted versions of our instruments, we replicate the tests
performed in Table 8 (and also those in Table 9 below for robustness). While we omit this
table for brevity, our findings confirm the results based on headquarters-specific instruments
reported above. We also use a version of our geo-weighted instruments that directly account for
property size and again we are able to replicate the patterns documented in Tables 8 and 9.25
       It is worthwhile discussing our results in a broader context. The estimates in Table 8 suggest
that Land&Building is the most important driver of leverage, with its eﬀect concentrated among
firms that are likely to face greater credit frictions (firms that are small, unrated, and pay low
dividends). These results are interesting in their own right and also add context to tests com-
monly conducted in the capital structure literature. In particular, standard capital structure
models tend to consider asset tangibility as a “general driver” of leverage, presumably aﬀecting
all companies in a homogenous fashion (Rajan and Zingales (1995) is a classical example). Our
  24
      On-line filings in the Edgar Database only started in 1996, the last year of our window. Notably, evidence
suggests that firms generally do not change significantly their holdings of corporate properties, at least in
terms of their geographic locations. Pirinsky and Wang (2006) find that of the 5,000 firms that they considered
in their analysis, only 118 relocated during the sample period 1992-1997 (which partially overlaps with our
sample period).
   25
      All these results are readily available. As an additional check, we replicated the estimations in Table
8 using a simple OLS-FE specification test. One advantage of this approach is that it does not depend on
the geographic relevance of the instruments. Our findings are qualitatively similar under this approach. In
particular, we find that the eﬀect of Land&Building on leverage is economically and statistically significant for
all three financially constrained partitions. The eﬀect of Land&Building on leverage is, in contrast, small and
insignificant for financially unconstrained partitions. We also experimented with various combinations of our
instruments, trying to minimize the inclusion of those that could impart greater concerns with geographical
dispersion. Doing this also rendered results that are similar to those in Tables 8 and 9.


                                                       24
evidence suggests, instead, that the channel through which asset tangibility aﬀects leverage
might be concentrated within particular categories of firms (e.g., small and unrated firms).26
       The estimates in Table 8 also imply that the types of tangible assets that are less suit-
able to resolving financing frictions (e.g., machinery and equipment) are also economically and
statistically less relevant in explaining leverage. These results are consistent with the notion
that the eﬀect of asset tangibility on capital structure operates through its ability to amelio-
rate contracting frictions between lenders and borrowers: tangible assets allow for more credit
conditional on their redeployability.

4.2       Macroeconomic Movements and Leverage
We now focus on the role of asset tangibility in explaining capital structure when credit con-
ditions shift as a result of macroeconomic shocks. According to Bernanke and Gertler (1995),
examining firm financing patterns over the business cycle is important because during those
times credit frictions become more acute (e.g., agency problems are heightened). During con-
tractions, tangibility should more significantly aﬀect the availability of credit for firms that are
most aﬀected by financing constraints. If, as we argue, tangible assets are first-order drivers of
leverage because they ease borrowing through a collateral channel, then the redeployability—
leverage relation should strengthen during credit contractions. We test this hypothesis in turn.
       A number of empirical studies have used economy-wide shocks to study firms’ leverage
decisions (e.g., Korajczyk and Levy (2003)), liquidity management (Almeida et al. (2004)),
and inventory behavior (Carpenter et al. (1994)). While these papers have not examined the
role of tangible assets in driving capital structure over the business cycle, we build on their
approach to examine this association. Here, we follow the two-step procedure used in Kashyap
and Stein (2000). The Kashyap-Stein two-step approach essentially provides validation for
micro-level relations – in our case, between corporate asset structure and capital structure –
using plausibly exogenous macroeconomic variation.
       The first step of the procedure consists of estimating the baseline regression model (Eq. (2))
every year for our sample period. From the sequence of cross-sectional regressions, we collect
the coeﬃcients returned for Land&Building (i.e., 1 ) and ‘stack’ them into the vector Ψ , which
  26
    We took the additional step of running standard leverage regressions (similar to Eq. (1)) across partitions
of small and large firms, as well as rated and unrated firms. Our simple OLS-FE estimations of Eq. (1)
show that the traditional proxy for asset tangibility – the ratio of PP&E over total assets, which is labeled
OverallTangibility in our paper – is only significant across small and unrated firm partitions. This basic check
might invite more careful conceptualization of models that are meant to be all-encompassing in describing
corporate leverage using asset tangibility as an input.




                                                      25
is then used as the left-hand side variable in the following (second-stage) time-series regression:

                                          X
                                          3
                               Ψ =  +          ∆− +   +                  (3)
                                          =1

The term ∆ represents innovations to the supply of credit, which is proxied by changes
in the Fed funds rate (Fed Funds). We replicate our estimations using the LIBOR rate (Li-
bor). Relative to the Fed funds rate, the LIBOR rate allows us to assess the eﬀect of credit
tightening while controlling for possible variation in credit risk over time or across firm types.
The impact of shocks to credit supply on the sensitivity of MarketLeverage to Land&Building
is gauged from the sum of the coeﬃcients 0 s on the lags of Fed Funds (Libor). A time trend
( ) is included to capture secular changes in capital structure. To control for changes
in the demand for credit, in multivariate versions of Eq. (3) we include the log of GDP
and the log of consumer expenditures.27 These regressions are estimated with Newey-West
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (Newey and West (1987)).
      The results from the second-step estimation are reported in Table 9. The estimates in the
table suggest that the role of land and buildings as a first-order driver of leverage becomes
noticeably more important during credit contractions. Using the univariate model from the
full sample as an example (Panel A), the positive estimate for Fed Funds (i.e., the sum of the
coeﬃcients for the three lags of the Fed funds) implies that the coeﬃcient on Land&Building
increases by 0.187 when the Fed funds rate increases by 100 basis points. This is a significant
shift given that the Land&Building coeﬃcient equals 0.442 in the first-stage IV. By compari-
son, the coeﬃcient on Libor is 0.122, which is somewhat smaller but still very sizable relative to
the coeﬃcient associated with the Fed Funds. Notably, this smaller eﬀect suggests that the Fed
funds rate might overestimate the eﬀect of Land&Building in ameliorating credit tightening if
the econometrician does not take into account variation in credit risk, which in our context
is achieved with the use of the LIBOR rate. The estimates in Panels B and C show that our
conclusions hold steady after we control for shifts in the demand for credit using GDP (Panel
B) and both GDP and consumer expenditures (Panel C).
      The results in Table 9 also show that the increased sensitivity of MarketLeverage to
Land&Building is especially strong for firms in the high financing friction partitions. In par-
ticular, the coeﬃcient on Fed Funds is positive and highly statistically significant for the
small, unrated, and low payout firms. In contrast, the same macroeconomic variable attracts
coeﬃcients that are very small in magnitude and generally statistically insignificant for uncon-
 27
      These series are obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                       26
strained firms.
                                       Table 9 About Here

       The recent sub-prime crisis has spurred a debate on whether the Fed funds rate is an
adequate indicator for the amount of credit available in the economy. Evidence suggests that
the ability of the Fed to implement eﬀective counter-cyclical monetary policies is significantly
diminished when market rates are close to zero (e.g., Iwata and Wu (2006)). This should not be
a strong concern for our analysis because the Fed funds rate was far from zero during our sample
period, averaging at around 6.5%. Nevertheless, we re-estimate Eq. (3) using a measure of
changes in lending standards from the Loan Oﬃcer Opinion Survey that is now commonly used
in monetary economics research (e.g., Lown and Morgan (2006)).28 All the findings reported
in Table 9 are robust to this alternative measure of credit contraction. To be specific, we find
that the sensitivity of Leverage to Land&Building increases significantly following a tightening
of the lending standards, but mainly for firms in the high-financing friction partitions.
       The results of this section suggest that asset redeployability facilitates borrowing by firms
that are likely to be credit constrained (small, unrated, and low payout firms) during times
when credit constraints bind the most (monetary tightenings). In all, they substantiate the ar-
gument that credit supply eﬀects play a key role in the time-series and cross-sectional variation
of corporate leverage ratios; especially for firms that are likely to face credit imperfections.


5        Comparisons with Recent Studies
Our analysis thus far uses standard leverage models to facilitate comparisons with the broader
capital structure literature. Our arguments, however, are not model-specific and our results
should hold under specifications used in papers that are closely related to ours. We experi-
ment with this idea in turn. We first build on Faulkender and Petersen’s (2006) credit-supply
study, introducing our asset tangibility decomposition into their empirical model. Within their
framework, we assess the economic eﬀect of asset tangibility. We then consider Lemmon et
al.’s (2008) leverage model. Lemmon et al. find that traditional drivers of leverage become
virtually irrelevant when one accounts for firm-specific, time-invariant eﬀects. We subject our
tangibility proxies to a similar experiment, using those authors’ approach.
  28
    The Loan Oﬃcer Opinion Survey data are available on the Federal Reserve Board webpage starting from
1997. We are grateful to Donald Morgan from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for making the earlier
data available to us.




                                                  27
5.1     Asset Tangibility and Credit Ratings
Faulkender and Petersen (2006) hypothesize that access to the public debt markets mitigates
credit rationing, allowing firms to increase their borrowings. Using credit ratings as a proxy
for access to those markets, the authors find a significant impact of ratings on leverage. In
particular, estimates in Table 5 of their paper show that a ratings dummy increases a firm’s
market leverage ratio by 0.051 (see column 3). Relative to the average ratio of 0.222 that the
authors report in their Table 1, this corresponds to an increase in leverage of 22.9%. The au-
thors report that leverage increases range from 0.057 to 0.063 in instrumental variable models
that tackle the endogeneity of ratings (see their Table 8). These numbers correspond to an
increase in leverage in the order of 25.7% to 28.4% relative to the sample average leverage.
    We use our sample to replicate the tests of Faulkender and Petersen (2006); see, e.g., Table
4 in their paper. In columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 below, we report OLS and IV results for
our restricted leverage model. In column 3, we report IV results for the unrestricted model.
Notably, the results reported in Table 10 are very similar to those in Faulkender and Petersen.
Focusing on the ratings dummy (their key variable), column 3 shows that access to the public
debt market increases leverage by 0.045. Relative to the average of 0.203, this corresponds
to a 22.3% increase in leverage relative to the sample mean, which very closely resembles the
22.9% estimate of Faulkender and Petersen’s paper.

                                        Table 10 About Here

    Once we replicate Faulkender and Petersen’s findings, our main task is to gauge the relative
importance of our measures of tangibility. Table 10 reports, in square brackets, the percentage
change in leverage relative to its sample mean as each variable increases from the 10th to the
90th percentile while all the other variables are kept at their mean.29 The only exception is the
ratings dummy, which should be interpreted as the percentage change in leverage relative to
its sample mean for firms with a credit rating relative to those without one.
    The estimates of Table 10 imply that asset tangibility remains as a key driver of lever-
age even under Faulkender and Petersen’s specification. One finds, for example, that as
Land&Building increases from the 10th to the 90th percentile, leverage increases by 0.106.
Relative to the sample mean of 0.203, this corresponds to a 52.0% increase in leverage. This is
more than twice as large as the increase associated with the rating dummy, which is 22.3%. We
draw similar inferences for the more standard measure of asset tangibility, OverallTangibility
(see column 2). This is an interesting finding since both our main arguments and Faulkender
  29
     We use the 10th −90th percentile change for continuous variables in the tests of this section so as to more
closely mimic the impact of a dummy variable (similar to Faulkender and Petersen’s credit rating dummy).

                                                      28
and Petersen’s central theory revolve around supply-side determinants of capital structure.
The more substantive contribution of our findings is that, rather than using a broadly-defined
measure of access to credit (ratings), we identify a specific channel through which creditworthi-
ness aﬀects capital structure. Our results add to those of Faulkender and Petersen in further
characterizing the supply-side determinants of observed leverage dispersion.

5.2       Asset Tangibility and Firm Eﬀects in Leverage Regressions
Lemmon et al. (2008) show that most of the empirical variation in corporate leverage can be
explained by unobserved, time-invariant firm eﬀects. On this basis, the authors argue that
capital structure models estimated via OLS might overestimate the marginal eﬀects of the
traditional determinants of leverage. Consistent with this argument, they report that coeﬃ-
cients of traditional leverage determinants drop on average by about 60% after accounting for
firm-fixed eﬀects. Their paper gives a “dim picture” (p. 1605) of existing models’ ability to
explain capital structure.
       We replicate the tests reported in Table V of Lemmon et al. using our sample. The re-
sults are shown in Table 11. Comparing OLS estimates (columns 1 and 3) with those of the
firm-fixed eﬀects IV specifications (columns 2 and 4), we find a clear pattern of decline in the
size of the coeﬃcients attracted by traditional determinants of leverage, similar to the pattern
reported by Lemmon et al.30 However, our findings point to a diﬀerent pattern with respect
to our tangibility proxies. For OverallTangibility, a comparison of results across columns 1
and 2 shows an increase in the magnitude of the coeﬃcient from 0.164 to 0.260. In economic
terms, this implies that a one-standard deviation increase in OverallTangibility makes leverage
increase by 21.2% from its mean, compared to 13.4% in the OLS specification.31 Remarkably,
we find a much sharper increase if we compare the coeﬃcient estimates for Land&Building
across columns 3 and 4 (unrestricted model). In this case, the tangibility coeﬃcient increases
by a factor of almost 3 (from 0.171 in the OLS to 0.437 in the IV specification).32

                                        Table 11 About Here

       We also compare the economic eﬀects of Land&Building and “initial leverage” (the firm’s
leverage at the time it first appears in COMPUSTAT). We do so replicating Table II (full
  30
     As in Lemmon et al., one exception to this pattern is the estimate for Log(Sales).
  31
     For comparability with Lemmon et al., in this section we assess the economic significance of our estimates
using one-standard deviation shifts.
  32
     These results are not surprising in the context of fixed-eﬀects econometrics. Overall, our findings suggest
that while within-firm variation in the traditional determinants of leverage has generally limited ability in
explaining variation in leverage, land and buildings seem to play an important role in explaining variation in
leverage not only in the cross-section but also within firm in the time series.

                                                      29
model) of Lemmon et al.33 This is an interesting comparison since Lemmon et al. argue that ini-
tial leverage is one of the key predictors of capital structure. In this test, we emulate the impact
of firm-fixed eﬀects by subtracting firm-centered averages for all variables except initial leverage
(which is fixed within firm). Results are reported in column 5 of Table 11. Our estimates imply
that a one-standard deviation increase in initial leverage causes leverage to increase by 0.07.
Relative to our sample mean, this change corresponds to an increase of about 36%. This result
is consistent with the evidence in Lemmon et al., who report in Table II (column 6) of their pa-
per that a one-standard deviation increase in initial leverage causes leverage to increase by 0.07.
More importantly, a comparison of the results across columns 4 and 5 shows that the coeﬃcient
of Land&Building becomes stronger in the model with initial leverage. As it turns out, the im-
pact of Land&Building is sizable and comparable to the impact of initial leverage. In particular,
we find that a one-standard deviation increase in Land&Building causes leverage to increase
by about 0.06. Relative to the sample mean, this figure implies an increase in leverage of 31%.
       The tests of this section show that, unlike traditional determinants of leverage, our mea-
sures of asset tangibility strengthen after one controls for firm idiosyncratic characteristics,
such as initial leverage and standard fixed eﬀects. Simply put, they pass the “firm-eﬀects
stress tests” proposed by Lemmon et al. (2008). These results highlight the importance and
robustness of the redeployability—leverage channel we propose. More generally, they imply
that one potential problem with traditional leverage determinants is that their proxies might
be too crude. Our findings provide a “brighter picture” of leverage models in suggesting that
the statistical properties of other traditional leverage determinants might also improve upon
better empirical characterization.


6        Concluding Remarks
Understanding the role of collateral in borrowing is important because of its implications for
corporate financing. In the presence of contracting frictions, assets that are tangible are more
desirable from the point of view of creditors because they are easier to repossess in bankruptcy
states. Tangible assets, however, often lose value in liquidation. It is thus unclear whether and
how they aﬀect a firm’s debt capacity.
       The results of this paper suggest that the redeployable component of tangible assets drives
observed leverage ratios. Furthermore, across the various categories of tangible assets, it is land
  33
     For comparability, in Table 11 we rely on a model specification that adheres closely to Lemmon et al.’s.
Because of missing information in COMPUSTAT related to additional variables used by Lemmon et al. and
due to the use of lagged explanatory variables, the number of observations for the tests reported in Table 11
is lower than the number of observations displayed in some of the previous tables in our paper.


                                                     30
and buildings – presumably, the least firm-specific assets – that have the most explanatory
power over leverage. The evidence we present implies that financing frictions are key determi-
nants of capital structure. While prior literature has considered the notion that these credit
imperfections are potentially relevant, we show that they have first-order eﬀects on leverage.
   Our analysis sheds additional light on the eﬀect of credit market imperfections on leverage
by comparing firms that are more likely to face financing frictions (small, unrated, and low
dividend firms) and firms that are less likely to face those frictions (large, rated, and high pay-
out firms). We find that our redeployability—leverage results are pronounced across the first
set of firms. In contrast, for unconstrained firms, redeployability does not explain leverage.
These firm-type contrasts are consistent with the financing friction argument: variation in asset
redeployability only aﬀects the credit access of those firms that are credit-constrained. Further
tests show that redeployability eases borrowing the most when the supply of credit is tightened.
   Our paper identifies a well-defined channel – the redeployability of tangible assets – to
characterize the impact of credit frictions on leverage. We believe future research should more
carefully consider trade-oﬀs between credit constraints, credit supply, and firms’ demand for
debt financing. It should do so emphasizing concrete aspects (and frictions) of real-world
financial contracts. More generally, this strategy can be useful for research focusing on the
interplay between access to collateral, corporate financing, and investment. The importance
of connections between access to collateral and corporate policy, for example, came to the
forefront of the economic debate during the recent financial crisis. One could argue that more
work on this topic can be useful for researchers as well as economic policy-makers.




                                                31
References
Abadie, A., and G. Imbens, 2006, “Large Sample Properties of Matching Estimators for
   Average Treatment Eﬀects,” Econometrica 74, 235-267.
Abadie, A., D. Drukker, J. Herr, and G. Imbens, 2004, “Implementing Matching Estimators
   for Average Treatment Eﬀects in Stata,” Stata Journal 4, 290-311.
Acharya, V., S. Bharath, and A. Srinivasan, 2007, “Does Industry-Wide Distress Aﬀect De-
    faulted Firms? Evidence from Creditor Recoveries,” Journal of Financial Economics 85,
    787-821.
Almeida, H., and M. Campello, 2007, “Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corpo-
   rate Investment,” Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429-1460.
Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2004, “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,”
   Journal of Finance 59, 1777-1804.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, “Market Timing and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance
    57, 1—32.
Barclay, M., and C. Smith, 1995, “The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt,” Journal of
    Finance 50, 609-631.
Baum, C., M. Schaﬀer, and S. Stillman, 2003, “Instrumental variables and GMM: Estimation
   and Testing,” Stata Journal 3, 1-31.
Ben-Shahar, D., 1998, “On the Optimality of the Hybrid Tenure Mode,” Journal of Housing
    Economics 7, 69-92.
Benmelech, E., 2009, “Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from 19th Century
   American Railroads,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545-1583.
Benmelech, E., and N. Bergman, 2009, “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics
   91, 339-360.
Benmelech, E., M. Garmaise, and T. Moskowitz, 2005, “Do Liquidation Values Aﬀect Fi-
   nancial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1121-1154.
Berger, P., E. Ofek, and I. Swary, 1996, “Investor Valuation and Abandonment Option,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 42, 257—87.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, 1995, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
    Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27-48.
Campello, A., 2006, “Debt Financing: Does it Boost or Hurt Firm Performance in Product
   Markets?” Journal of Financial Economics 82, 135-172.
Carpenter R., Fazzari S., and R. Hubbard, 1994, “Inventory Investment, Internal-Finance
    Fluctuations, and the Business Cycle,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 2, 75-138.
Chan, S., J. Erickson, and K. Wang, 2003, Real Estate Investment Trusts: Structure Perfor-
   mance, and Investment Opportunities, New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar, 2010, “The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate
   Shocks Aﬀect Corporate Investment,” NBER Working Paper #16060.


                                           32
Denis, D., D. Denis, and Y. Keven, 2002, “Global Diversification, Industrial Diversification,
    and Firm Value,” Journal of Finance 57, 1951-1979.
Duﬃe, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. Pedersen, 2005, “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econometrica
   73, 1815-1847.
Fama, E., and K. French, 2002, “Testing Trade-Oﬀ and Pecking Order Predictions about
   Dividends and Debt,” Review of Financial Studies 15, 1-33.
Faulkender, M., and M. Petersen, 2006, “Does the Source of Capital Aﬀect Capital Struc-
    ture?” Review of Financial Studies 19, 45-79.
Fazzari S., R. Hubbard, and B. Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints and Corporate In-
    vestment,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195.
Flannery, M., and K. Rangan, 2006, “Partial Adjustment Toward Target Capital Structure,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 79, 469-506.
Frank, M., and V. Goyal, 2003, “Testing the Pecking Order Theory of Capital Structure,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.
Gao, W., L. Ng, and Q. Wang, 2008, “Does Geographic Dispersion Aﬀect Firm Valuation?”
    Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 674-687.
Gan, J., 2007, “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a Nat-
    ural Experiment,” Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709-734.
Garmaise, M., 2008, “Production in Entrepreneurial Firms: The Eﬀects of Financial Con-
   straints on Labor and Capital,” Review of Financial Studies 21, 543-577.
Gavazza, A., 2011, “The Role of Trading Frictions in Real Asset Markets,” American Eco-
    nomic Review 101, 1106-1143.
Geltner, D., N.. Miller, J. Clayton, and P. Eichholtz, 2007, Commercial Real Estate Analysis
    and Investments, 2 Ed., Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western.
Gilchrist, S., and C. Himmelberg, 1995, “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 541-572.
Graham, J., 2000, “How Big are the Tax Benefits of Debt?” Journal of Finance 55, 1901-1941.
Hansen, L., 1982, “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments Estimators,”
    Econometrica 34, 646-660.
Hart, O., 1993, “Theories of Optimal Capital Structure: A Managerial Discretion Perspec-
    tive”, M. Blair, editor: The Deal Decade. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1994, “A theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
    Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
    Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 3, 663-691.
Iwata, S., and S. Wu, 2006, “Estimating Monetary Policy Eﬀects When Interest Rates Are
    Close to Zero,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 1395-1408.
Kashyap, A., and J. Stein, 2000, “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the
    Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review 90, 407-428.

                                            33
Kleibergen, F., and R. Paap, 2006, “Generalized Reduced Rank Tests Using the Singular
    Value Decomposition,” Journal of Econometrics 127, 97-126.
Korajczyk, R., and A. Levy, 2003, “Capital Structure Choice: Macroeconomic Conditions
    and Financial Constraints,” Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75-109.
Lemmon, M., and M. Roberts, 2010, “The Response of Corporate Financing and Investment
   to Changes in the Supply of Credit,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45,
   555-587.
Lemmon, M., M. Roberts, and J. Zender, 2008, “Back to the Beginning: Persistence and the
   Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 63, 1575-1608.
Lown, C., and D. Morgan, 2006, “The Credit Cycle and the Business Cycle: New Findings
   Using the Loan Oﬃcer Opinion Survey,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38,
   1575-1597.
MacKay, P., and G. Phillips, 2005, “How Does Industry Aﬀect Firm Financial Structure?”
   Review of Financial Studies 18, 1433-1466.
Malpezzi, S., and R. Green, 1996, “What Has Happened to the Bottom of the Housing
    Market?” Urban Studies 33, 1807-1820.
Murphy, H., 2003, “The Drill on Military Base Conversion,” National Real Estate Investor
   25, 101-106.
Myers, S., 1977, “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of financial Economics 5,
   147-175.
Myers, S., 1984, “The Capital Structure Puzzle,” Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, “A Simple Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
   Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Ortalo-Magne, F., and S. Rady, 2002, “Tenure Choice and the Riskiness of Non-housing
    Consumption,” Journal of Housing Economics 11, 266-279.
Ortiz-Molina, H., and G. Phillips, 2009, “Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital,” Working
    paper. University of British Columbia and University of Maryland.
Petersen, M., 2009, “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
    Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.
Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1995, “What Do We Know about Capital Structure? Some Evi-
    dence from International Data,” Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.
Rampini, A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, “Collateral and Capital Structure,” Working paper.
   Duke University.
Rosen, H., K. Rosen, and D. Holtz-Eakin, 1984, “Housing Tenure, Uncertainty, and Taxation,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 66, 405-416.
Schlingemann, F., R. Stulz, and R. Walkling, 2002, “Divestitures and the Liquidity of the
     Market for Corporate Assets,” Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117-144.
Shea, J., 1997, “Instruments Relevance in Multivariate Linear Models: A Simple Measure,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 79, 348-352.
Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1992, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
     librium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.

                                           34
Sibilkov, V., 2009, “Asset Liquidity and Capital Structure”, Journal of Financial and Quan-
     titative Analysis 44, 1173-1196.
Sinai, T., and N. Souleles, 2005, “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 763-789.
Stock, J., and M. Yogo, 2005, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” In D.
    Andrews and J. Stock, eds., Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays
    in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
U.S. ACDA, 1995, World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers, Washington DC: U.S.
    Government Printing Oﬃce.




                                           35
Appendix A. Instrument Quality Assessment
    It is important that we verify the validity and relevance of our proposed instruments. Test
statistics that speak to these properties are reported in Table A.1. The table displays the slope
coeﬃcients returned from four diﬀerent first-stage regressions featuring, alternatively, Over-
allTangibility, Land&Building, Machinery&Equipment, and OtherTangibles as the endogenous
variable. The instruments considered deliver results that agree with our priors. For example,
proxies for rental volatility and the supply of rentable real estate in a firm’s location load,
respectively, positively and negatively on the firm’s propensity to acquire land and buildings.
Likewise, liquidity in the market for machinery and equipment leads firms to carry less of those
assets in their balance sheets, while the ratio of employees to assets is positively associated
with the demand for capital. Some of the instruments we include based on our priors prove to
have somewhat low (individual) explanatory power, nonetheless. It is thus important that we
carefully examine the statistical relevance of our instrumental set.
    The first instrument relevance test statistic we consider is Shea’s Partial R2 (Shea (1997)).
Shea’s R2 measures the overall relevance of the instruments for the case of multiple endogenous
variables. Table A.1 shows that the Shea’s R2 s associated with our instruments are relatively
large for panel tests of the type we conduct, in the range of 5.7% to 8.3%. The simple Partial
2 s are, respectively, 6.7% for the Land&Building model and 8.6% for Machinery&Equipment.
Baum et al. (2003) recommend as a rule of thumb that if the Shea’s Partial 2 and the
simple Partial 2 are of similar magnitude, then one can infer that instruments used in the
identification have adequate explanatory power. Our instruments perform well under that
metric.
    We also conduct first-stage exclusion F -tests for our set of instruments and the associated
p-values for those tests are all much lower than 1% (confirming the explanatory power of
our instruments). One potential concern with the first-stage F -test in the case of multiple
endogenous regressors is that it might have associated low p-values for all first-stage regressions
even if only one instrument is valid (see Stock and Yogo (2005)). To address this issue, we
conduct the Kleibergen-Paap test for weak identification (Kleibergen and Paap (2006)). In the
case of multiple endogenous variables, this is a test of the maximal IV bias that is possibly
caused by weak instruments. For the unrestricted model, the Kleibergen-Paap F -test statistic
is 10.6. Since the corresponding Stock and Yogo critical value for a maximal IV bias of 10%
is 9.4, the maximal bias of our IV estimations will be below 10%. Following Stock and Yogo,
for further robustness, we re-estimate our models using the Limited Information Maximum
Likelihood (LIML) estimator and the Fuller’s modified LIML estimator, which are both robust
to weak instruments. Our results are invariant to the use of maximum likelihood estimators.
In all, these various checks collectively suggest that our results are robust to concerns about
weak instruments.

                                                36
    Finally, we examine the validity of the exclusion restrictions associated with our instru-
ments. This helps address concerns about whether our instruments belong in the leverage
(second-stage) equation. We do this using Hansen’s (1982) J -test statistic for overidentifying
restrictions. The p-values associated with Hansen’s test statistic are reported in the last row of
Table A.1. The high p-values reported in the table imply the acceptance of the null hypothesis
that the identification restrictions that justify the instruments chosen are met in the data.
Specifically, these reported statistics suggest that we do not reject the joint null hypothesis
that our instruments are uncorrelated with the error term in the leverage regression and the
model is well-specified.
                                   Table A.1 About Here




                                               37
Table 1. Sample Descriptive Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the main variables used in the paper’s empirical estimations. All
firm level data, with the exception of the marginal tax rate, are obtained from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes
over the sample period 1984-1996. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-
related, non-profit, and governmental firms.   is the ratio of total debt (COMPUSTAT’s items
 + ) to market value of total assets, or ( −  + _ ∗ ).  is the ratio of total
debt to book value of total assets ().   is the ratio of total tangible assets () to book
value of total assets. & is the ratio of net book value of land and building (+) to the
book value of total assets.  & is the ratio of net book value of machinery and equipment
() to book value of total assets.   is the ratio of plant and equipment in progress and
miscellaneous tangible assets ( + ) to book value of total assets.  is the natural logarithm of
the market value of total assets (measured in millions of 1996 dollars using the Producer Price Index (PPI)
published by the U.S. Department of Labor as the deflator).    is the ratio of earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization () to book value of total assets.  is the ratio of market
value of total assets to book value of total assets.   is the ratio of the standard deviation of
earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization using four years of consecutive observations to
the average book value of total assets estimated over the same time horizon.    is Graham’s
(2000) marginal tax rate.  is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the firm has either a
bond rating () or a commercial paper rating () and zero otherwise.

 Variables                                                      Sample Statistics
                                    Mean         Median       St. Dev.     25th Pct.    75th Pct.       Obs.
                       0.202        0.163         0.175        0.056         0.307       10,128

                         0.256        0.227         0.222        0.095         0.367       10,128
   (  &)        0.356        0.327         0.175        0.244         0.452       10,015

 &                       0.118        0.103         0.113        0.035         0.162       10,015

  &                0.189        0.161         0.129        0.104         0.237       10,015
                       0.015        0.000         0.043        0.000         0.014       10,014

                                 5.038        4.860         1.945        3.620         6.253       10,128

                        0.107        0.133         0.169        0.068         0.187       10,128
                                    1.621        1.298         1.054        1.026         1.808       10,128

                   0.091        0.067         0.089        0.042         0.110       10,078
                      0.321        0.340         0.104        0.298         0.360       10,128
                          0.164        0.000         0.370        0.000         0.000       10,128
Table 2. Standard Leverage Regressions

This table reports regression results for OLS with firm-fixed eﬀects estimations of the restricted model (Eq. (1)
in the text) for both our sample and an extended COMPUSTAT sample (ranging from 1971-2006). Estimations
also include year dummies. All firm level data are from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. Refer to Table 1 for
detailed variable definitions. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related,
non-profit, and governmental firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic
consistent errors adjusted for clustering across observations of a given firm (Petersen (2009)).

                                          Market Leverage                                          Book Leverage
                                  1984-1996                1971-2006                    1984-1996                    1971-2006

                 0.212***                 0.220***                     0.231***                    0.245***
                                    (0.028)                  (0.010)                      (0.038)                     (0.014)

                                 0.005                  0.018***                       0.016                     0.021***
                                    (0.006)                  (0.002)                      (0.014)                     (0.003)

                     -0.115***                 -0.141***                    -0.121***                   -0.179***
                                   (0.019)                   (0.007)                      (0.039)                     (0.014)

                                 -0.048***                 -0.044***                     -0.013*                      -0.001
                                   (0.004)                   (0.001)                      (0.007)                     (0.003)

                   -0.028                   -0.009                       -0.203                      0.004
                                    (0.064)                  (0.016)                      (0.279)                     (0.030)

                   -0.169***                 -0.189***                    -0.218***                   -0.224***
                                   (0.026)                   (0.010)                      (0.035)                     (0.015)

                        0.042***                 0.039***                     0.068***                    0.059***
                                    (0.008)                  (0.003)                      (0.013)                     (0.004)
 Obs.                                9,748                    97,154                       9,748                      97,154
 Adj.-2                             0.213                    0.203                        0.090                      0.085
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 3. Second Stage Regression Estimates: Restricted Model

This table reports second stage regression results for fixed eﬀects instrumental variables estimations of the
restricted model (Eq. (1) in the text). Estimations also include year dummies. The figures in square brackets
reported under the standard errors represent the percentage changes [%] in leverage relative to its sample mean
as each continuous regressor increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile, while all other regressors are kept
at their sample mean. The exception is , for which we report the raw regression coeﬃcient.
For example, as   increases from its 25th to its 75th percentile, market leverage increases
by 0.066, which is a 32.42% increase relative to the sample mean leverage of 0.202. All firm level data are
from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. Refer to Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The sample includes
all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related, non-profit, and governmental firms. Standard
errors reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic consistent errors adjusted for clustering across
observations of a given firm (Petersen (2009)).

                                           Market Leverage                                       Book Leverage

                              0.321***                                             0.260***
                                                 (0.082)                                              (0.101)
                                                [32.42%]                                             [20.76%]

                                              0.004                                                0.015
                                                 (0.006)                                              (0.014)
                                                 [5.11%]                                             [15.39%]

                                   -0.108***                                            -0.110***
                                                  (0.020)                                              (0.039)
                                                 [-6.23%]                                             [-5.03%]

                                               -0.046***                                            -0.014**
                                                  (0.004)                                             (0.007)
                                                [-17.43%]                                            [-4.15%]

                                 -0.026                                              -0.215
                                                  (0.065)                                             (0.284)
                                                 [-0.87%]                                            [-5.61%]

                                 -0.156***                                            -0.209***
                                                  (0.026)                                              (0.036)
                                                 [-4.24%]                                             [-4.50%]

                                     0.045***                                             0.071***
                                                 (0.009)                                              (0.013)
                                                  [0.05]                                               [0.07]

 Obs.                                             8,887                                                8,887
          2
 Adj.-                                           0.205                                                0.088
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 4. Economic Significance (Unrestricted Model): Interquartile Change Eﬀects

This table reports regression results for ordinary least squares (OLS), firm eﬀects least squares (FE), and fixed
eﬀects instrumental variables (IV) estimations of the unrestricted model (Eq. (2) in the text). Estimations also
include year dummies. Results are displayed in terms of percentage changes in leverage relative to its sample
mean as each continuous regressor increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile, while all other regressors are
kept at their mean. The exception is the , for which we report the raw regression coeﬃcient
multiplied by 100. All firm level data are from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. Refer to Table 1 for detailed
variable definitions. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related, non-
profit, and governmental firms.

                                            Market Leverage                                     Book Leverage
                                    % Change in Response to IQR Shift                  % Change in Response to IQR Shift
                                      OLS        FE           IV                        OLS        FE            IV
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)                        (4)       (5)          (6)

 &                       13.00***      19.24***         27.65***           13.05***      17.26***        19.85**

  &                12.07***       9.10***            9.43            11.99***        5.51*           1.68

                         0.55          1.04**          2.68**               0.56        0.79**           0.95

                                -11.53***       6.04***            4.05             -6.13**        15.29          15.64

                        -6.54***       -7.04***        -6.61***           -8.03***      -5.91***        -5.44***

                                   -22.94***      -18.36***       -16.97***             -3.53*       -3.80*          -3.80*

                    -5.30**         -0.87           -0.91              -2.72*        -5.38          -5.58

                      -6.58***       -5.14***        -4.33***           -7.68***      -5.21***        -4.57***

                          6.35***        4.01***         4.21***             9.49***      6.65***         6.75***

 Obs.                                  9,748          9,748           8,887              9,748         9,748          8,887
          2
 Adj.-                                0.231          0.213           0.203              0.102         0.089          0.086
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 5 - Change in Corporate Holdings of Land&Building and Leverage for Treated and
Control Firms Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act

This table reports the average change in corporate holdings of & and  (market and
book) from 1991 to 1992. The figures in square brackets represent the percentage changes [%] in land and
buildings and leverage from 1991 to 1992. For example, treated firms’ & declines from 0.139
in 1991 to 0.133, which is a 4.06% decline relative to the average value in 1991. Treated firms are those
headquartered in Illinois. Untreated firms are those headquartered in the neighboring states of Indiana, Iowa,
Kentucky, Missouri, and Wisconsin. Control firms are a subsample of the untreated firms selected as the closest
match based on size, profitability, Tobin’s Q, earnings volatility, marginal tax rate, credit rating, and industry.
There are 39 treated firms and 58 untreated firms. All firm level data are from the COMPUSTAT industrial
tapes. The Government disposition data are obtained from the General Services Administration, under the
U.S. Department of Commerce. These data are released under the Freedom of Information Act. ATT is the
Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected average treatment eﬀect matching estimator for the treated. Standard errors
reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic consistent estimations.

    Panel A: Avg. Ch. in Land&Building Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                       [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                              -0.006                  0.002                    -0.008                   -0.012
                                            [-4.06%]                 [1.61%]                 [-5.67%]                 [-8.82%]
                                                                                            (2.07)***                (2.96)***

   Panel B: Avg. Ch. in MarketLeverage Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                       [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                             -0.036                   -0.002                  -0.034                   -0.039
                                           [-16.55%]                 [-1.04%]               [-15.51%]                [-17.83%]
                                                                                            (5.15)***                 (9.03)**

     Panel C: Avg. Ch. in BookLeverage Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                        [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                             -0.031                  <-0.001                  -0.031                   -0.037
                                           [-12.38%]                 [-0.02%]               [-12.36%]                [-15.15%]
                                                                                             (3.81)**                 (6.86)**

Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 6 - Change in Corporate Holdings of Machinery&Equipment and Sales for Treated and
Control Firms Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act

This table reports the average change in corporate holdings of  & and  (market and
book) from 1991 to 1992. The figures in square brackets represent the percentage changes [%] in machinery
and equipments and sales from 1991 to 1992. Treated firms are those headquartered in Illinois. Untreated
firms are those headquartered in the neighboring states of Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Missouri, and Wisconsin.
Control firms are a subsample of the untreated firms selected as the closest match based on size, profitability,
Tobin’s Q, earnings volatility, marginal tax rate, credit rating, and industry. There are 39 treated firms and 58
untreated firms. All firm level data are from the COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The Government disposition
data are obtained from the General Services Administration, under the U.S. Department of Commerce. These
data are released under the Freedom of Information Act. ATT is the Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected average
treatment eﬀect matching estimator for the treated. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on
heteroskedastic consistent estimations.
    Panel A: Avg. Ch. in Machinery&Equipment Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                         [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                Treated                    Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                           Firms                      Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                           -0.002                     -0.002                <-0.001                    -0.001
                                          [-0.99%]                   [-0.93%]               [-0.05%]                 [-0.30%]
                                                                                              (1.92)                   (3.09)

               Panel B: Avg. Ch. in Sales Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                                [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                Treated                    Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                           Firms                      Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                           <0.001                    <0.001                 <-0.001                  <-0.001
                                           [1.52%]                   [2.34%]                [-0.82%]                 [-2.10%]
                                                                                              (1.53)                   (2.50)

Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 7 - Change in Corporate Holdings of Land&Building and Leverage for Treated and
Control Firms Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act: National-Sale Firms

This table reports the average change in corporate holdings of & and  (market and
book) from 1991 to 1992. The figures in square brackets represent the percentage changes [%] in land and
buildings and leverage from 1991 to 1992. Treated firms are those headquartered in Illinois, but with less
than 25% of their sales in the headquarters’ state. Untreated firms are those headquartered in the neighboring
states of Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Missouri, and Wisconsin. Control firms are a subsample of the untreated
firms selected as the closest match based on size, profitability, Tobin’s Q, earnings volatility, marginal tax rate,
credit rating, and industry. There are 32 treated firms and 58 untreated firms. All firm level data are from
the COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The Government disposition data are obtained from the General Services
Administration, under the U.S. Department of Commerce. These data are released under the Freedom of
Information Act. ATT is the Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected average treatment eﬀect matching estimator for
the treated. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic consistent estimations.

    Panel A: Avg. Ch. in Land&Building Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                       [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                              -0.007                  0.002                    -0.009                   -0.013
                                            [-4.88%]                 [1.47%]                 [-6.35%]                 [-9.71%]
                                                                                            (2.26)***                (3.02)***

   Panel B: Avg. Ch. in MarketLeverage Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                       [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                             -0.040                   -0.002                  -0.038                   -0.049
                                           [-18.32%]                 [-1.07%]               [-17.25%]                [-22.53%]
                                                                                            (5.27)***                (8.39)***

     Panel C: Avg. Ch. in BookLeverage Following the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act
                                        [in percentage points]

 Treated vs. Control Firms                  Treated                  Control           Treated - Control             Matching
                                             Firms                    Firms                 Firms                    Estimator
                                                                                                                      (ATT)
                                             -0.037                  <0.001                   -0.037                   -0.050
                                           [-15.09%]                 [0.07%]                [-15.16%]                [-20.36%]
                                                                                            (4.02)***                (6.58)***

Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 8. Low/High Credit Market Frictions: Interquartile Change Eﬀects

This table reports second stage regression results for fixed eﬀects instrumental variables estimations of the un-
restricted model (Eq. (2) in the text). Estimations also include control variables and year dummies (omitted).
Results are displayed in terms of percentage changes in leverage relative to its sample mean as each continuous
regressor increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile, while all other regressors are kept at their mean. The
exception is the , for which we report the raw regression coeﬃcient. All firm level data are
from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. Refer to Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The sample includes all
firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related, non-profit, and governmental firms. Small (Large)
Firms are firms in the bottom (top) 3 deciles of the annual sample size distribution. Unrated (Rated) Firms
are firms without (with) a debt rating and positive leverage. Low (High) DivPayout firms are firms in the
bottom (top) 3 deciles of the annual sample payout distribution.

 Panel A: Market Leverage
 % Change in Response                   Full
 to IQR Shift                          Sample               Size                    Ratings                    Div. Payout
                                                       Small     Large        Unrated     Rated              Low        High
                                                       Firms     Firms         Firms      Firms            DivPayout DivPayout
                                         (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)               (6)        (7)

 &                        27.65***        38.66***      0.83      39.32***        -6.26         31.55***    -27.92

 &                    9.43           12.04        -4.45       12.49*            1.57       12.98       2.86

                         2.68**           3.69        -3.21       2.50**        -4.07         1.35***    -10.57*

 Panel B: Book Leverage
 % Change in Response                   Full
 to IQR Shifit                         Sample                Size                       Ratings                 Div. Payout
                                                       Small        Large     Unrated         Rated          Low       High
                                                       Firms        Firms      Firms          Firms        DivPayout DivPayout
                                         (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)       (7)

 &                        19.85**         27.87**       -21.43    28.54***        -13.2          24.52*     -35.11

 &                    1.68            3.10        -8.21        1.92             0.70        0.37      -5.55

                          0.95            -1.40       -1.18        0.89             2.00        0.61      -9.67

Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 9. Macroeconomic Eﬀects: The Impact of Land and Buildings on Leverage during Credit
Contractions

The dependent variable is the annual series of the estimated coeﬃcients on & from the fixed
eﬀects instrumental variable regression with market leverage (Eq. (3) in the text). In Panel A, the dependent
variable is regressed on the 3 lags of the    or  (only sum of coeﬃcients tabulated). In Panel
B, the dependent variable is regressed on the 3 lags of the    (only sum of coeﬃcients tabulated) and
 (omitted). In Panel C, the dependent variable is regressed on the 3 lags of the    (only sum
of coeﬃcients tabulated)  (omitted), and  (omitted). All regressions include a
constant and a trend variable (omitted). The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real
estate-related, non-profit, and governmental firms. Newey-West consistent standard errors with 4 lags and
robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.

                                 Full Sample                 Size                  Ratings                    Div. Payout
                                                     Small          Large     Unrated Rated                Low         High
                                                     Firms          Firms     Firms   Firms             DivPayout    DivPayout
 ∆Credit


 Panel A: Univariate
                           0.187*            0.402*      0.051        0.251**     0.056           0.195*      0.125**
                                   (0.080)           (0.165)    (0.027)       (0.063)    (0.109)          (0.079)     (0.031)

                              0.122**           0.190**     0.036        0.151*** 0.079             0.135***     0.059**
                                   (0.028)           (0.059)    (0.019)       (0.023) (0.039)             (0.024)     (0.015)

 Panel B: Bivariate
                           0.182*            0.392**     0.052        0.201**     0.135           0.240**      0.064
                                   (0.066)           (0.119)    (0.026)       (0.061)    (0.061)          (0.046)     (0.065)

                              0.140**           0.247**     0.046        0.173*** 0.084              0.155**     0.064*
                                   (0.040)           (0.062)    (0.020)       (0.061) (0.060)             (0.037)     (0.024)

 Panel C: Multivariate
                           0.161*            0.364*      0.047        0.182*      0.119           0.234**      0.075
                                   (0.047)           (0.123)    (0.038)       (0.047)    (0.053)          (0.046)     (0.076)

                              0.121*            0.265*      0.102        0.172**     -0.004          0.146*     0.156***
                                   (0.032)           (0.073)    (0.038)       (0.038)    (0.063)          (0.043)     (0.014)
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 10. Asset Tangibility and the Credit Ratings

This table reports results from replicating the basic regression model in Faulkender and Petersen (2006) for our sample
based on OLS and fixed eﬀects instrumental variable estimations (IV-FE) for both our restricted and unrestricted
models. Estimations also include year dummies. The dependent variable is market leverage. We follow Faulkender
and Petersen (2006) in defining variables and model specifications but in Column 3 we use our &,
& and   instead of the traditional tangibility proxy. All firm level data are from
COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related,
non-profit, and governmental firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic consistent
errors adjusted for clustering across observations of a given firm (Petersen (2009)). To resemble closely the impact of a
dummy variable, the figures in square brackets reported under the standard errors represent the percentage changes in
leverage relative to its sample mean as each continuous regressor increases from the 10th to the 90th percentile, while
all other regressors are kept at their sample mean.

                                                     Restricted Model                                    Unrestricted Model
                                           OLS                              IV-FE                              IV-FE
                                            (1)                               (2)                                (3)
 OverallTangibility                      0.190***                          0.271***
                                          (0.024)                           (0.069)
                                         [40.85%]                          [58.25%]
 &                                                                                                 0.423***
                                                                                                                (0.130)
                                                                                                               [52.04%]
 &                                                                                            0.198**
                                                                                                                (0.097)
                                                                                                               [26.63%]
                                                                                                  0.384**
                                                                                                                (0.184)
                                                                                                                [7.78%]
 Firm has a debt rating                  0.067***                          0.047***                            0.045***
                                          (0.010)                           (0.009)                             (0.009)
                                         [33.24%]                          [23.21%]                            [22.26%]
 Ln(market assets)                       -0.007***                           0.002                               0.000
                                           (0.002)                          (0.006)                             (0.006)
                                         [-18.28%]                          [4.77%]                             [1.07%]
 Ln(1 + firm age)                           -0.007                          0.063**                             0.057**
                                           (0.007)                          (0.025)                             (0.025)
                                          [-2.81%]                         [25.62%]                            [22.98%]
 Market-to-book                          -0.064***                         -0.048***                           -0.046***
                                           (0.003)                           (0.004)                             (0.004)
                                         [-56.65%]                         [-42.59%]                           [-41.23%]
 R&D/sales                               -0.080***                           -0.019                              -0.017
                                           (0.025)                          (0.026)                             (0.026)
                                          [-3.66%]                         [-0.86%]                            [-0.78%]
 Advertising/sales                         -0.133*                           -0.200                              -0.185
                                           (0.076)                          (0.167)                             (0.169)
                                          [-2.83%]                         [-4.24%]                            [-3.93%]
 Profits/sales                             -0.026*                           -0.008                              -0.007
                                           (0.014)                          (0.010)                             (0.010)
                                          [-3.02%]                         [-0.88%]                            [-0.80%]
 Marginal Tax Rate                       -0.296***                         -0.218***                           -0.220***
                                           (0.036)                           (0.026)                             (0.026)
                                         [-42.21%]                         [-31.12%]                           [-31.29%]

 Obs.                                      8,719                             8,719                               8,719
        2
 Adj.-                                    0.236                             0.201                               0.195
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
Table 11. Asset Tangibility and Firm-Fixed Eﬀects

This table reports results from replicating Table V in Lemmon et al. (2008) for our sample based on OLS
and fixed eﬀects instrumental variable estimations (IV-FE) for both our restricted and unrestricted models.
Estimations also include year dummies. The dependent variable is market leverage. We follow Lemmon et
al. in defining variables and model specifications but in Columns 3, 4 and 5 we use our &,
 & and   instead of the traditional tangibility proxy. All firm level data
are from COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and
real estate-related, non-profit, and governmental firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on
heteroskedastic consistent errors adjusted for clustering across observations of a given firm (Petersen (2009)).
The figures in square brackets reported under the standard errors represent the percentage changes in leverage
relative to its sample mean as each continuous regressor increases one standard deviation, while all other
regressors are kept at their sample mean.

                                       Restricted Model                                    Unrestricted Model
                                     OLS            IV-FE                       OLS              IV-FE                IV-FE
                                     (1)              (2)                       (3)                (4)                  (5)

 OverallTangibility                0.164***             0.260**
                                    (0.030)             (0.104)
                                   [13.38%]            [21.21%]
 &                                                               0.171***              0.437**           0.559***
                                                                              (0.044)              (0.185)            (0.172)
                                                                              [9.46%]             [24.12%]           [30.85%]
 &                                                         0.136***              0.127               -0.090
                                                                              (0.044)             (0.145)             (0.159)
                                                                              [8.03%]             [7.49%]            [-5.29%]
 OtherTangibles                                                                0.152              0.690***            0.587**
                                                                              (0.094)              (0.231)            (0.244)
                                                                              [2.70%]             [12.20%]           [10.39%]
 InitialLeverage                                                                                                     0.482***
                                                                                                                      (0.033)
                                                                                                                     [36.13%]
 Log(Sales)                          0.003             0.026***                0.004              0.026***           0.041***
                                    (0.003)             (0.008)               (0.003)              (0.008)            (0.009)
                                    [2.93%]            [23.85%]               [3.49%]             [23.65%]           [37.91%]
 Market-to-book                   -0.059***            -0.026***             -0.058***           -0.025***           -0.025***
                                    (0.004)              (0.003)               (0.004)             (0.004)             (0.004)
                                  [-26.14%]            [-11.29%]             [-25.70%]           [-10.94%]           [-11.14%]
 Profitability                     -0.058**             -0.036*               -0.058**             -0.037*           -0.048**
                                    (0.027)             (0.021)                (0.027)             (0.022)            (0.024)
                                   [-5.71%]            [-3.58%]               [-5.76%]            [-3.67%]           [-4.72%]
 Indus. med. lev.                  0.224***              0.045*              0.235***              0.051*              0.044
                                    (0.042)             (0.027)               (0.042)             (0.028)             (0.030)
                                   [10.88%]             [2.19%]              [11.38%]             [2.49%]             [2.12%]
 Cash flow vol.                     -0.121*              0.053                  -0.109             0.058               0.085
                                    (0.072)             (0.074)                (0.074)            (0.074)             (0.079)
                                   [-4.08%]             [1.79%]               [-3.70%]            [1.97%]             [2.88%]
 Dividend payer                   -0.078***              -0.012              -0.083***              -0.011            -0.015*
                                    (0.010)             (0.008)                (0.010)             (0.008)            (0.008)
                                  [-37.56%]            [-5.87%]              [-39.94%]            [-5.52%]           [-3.51%]

 Obs.                                6,073               6,073                 6,073               6,073               6,073
 Adj.-2                             0.219               0.107                 0.213               0.103               0.105
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
                                                    Appendix


Table A.1. First Stage of IV Regressions

This table reports the first stage of instrumental variable regressions. For the Restricted Model the dependent
variable is  . For the Unrestricted Model the dependent variables are &,
 &, and  . We only tabulate coeﬃcients on excluded instruments in
the interest of space. Estimations also include firm- and year-fixed eﬀects. All firm level data are from
COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. Instrumental variables are obtained from several sources and are described
in detail in the text. The sample includes all firms except, financial, lease, REIT and real estate-related,
non-profit, and governmental firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses are based on heteroskedastic
consistent errors adjusted for clustering within firm.

                                                          Restricted                         Unrestricted Model
                                                            Model
                                                           Overall               Land             Machinery          Other
                                                          Tangibility              &                  &
                                                                                Building          Equipment

 Panel A: Real Estate Markets
                                           0.019***              0.039**            0.160**           -0.001
                                                            (0.005)              (0.017)            (0.065)          (0.006)
                                               -0.013***             -0.006**           -0.006*           -0.001
                                                            (0.005)               (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.001)
                                           0.002               -0.003*            0.003*            0.001
                                                            (0.003)              (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.001)
 Panel B: Machinery&Equipment Market
                                             -0.039***              -0.008            -0.019**          -0.001
                                                            (0.011)              (0.006)             (0.007)         (0.003)
                                               0.484**               0.124            0.408***           -0.009
                                                            (0.230)              (0.165)            (0.143)          (0.049)

 Obs.                                                        8,887                8,887              8,887            8,887
                   2
 Shea’s Partial  (Excluded Instruments)                     0.054                0.057              0.083            0.071
 Standard  -test (Excluded Instruments)                   23.28***             10.08***           16.47***          5.19***
 Kleibergen-Paap’s Statistic                                 23.28                                   10.59
 Hansen’s -Statistic -  -Value                              0.19                                    0.57
Note: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% (two-tail) test levels, respectively.
