                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE DOLLAR AND ITS DISCONTENTS

                                             Olivier Jeanne

                                         Working Paper 18143
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18143


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




This paper was prepared for the keynote address at the fourth Journal of International Money and Finance
Conference at the University of California at Santa Cruz (September 23-4 2011). It benefited from
comments received at that conference and at a presentation at the Peterson Institute for International
Economics. I thank Ted Truman for detailed comments on the first draft of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Dollar and its Discontents
Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 18143
June 2012
JEL No. F02,F3,F31,F33

                                            ABSTRACT

Has the US dollar delivered the benefits that the rest of the world is expecting from its holdings of
international liquidity? US government debt has been liquid and safe, and it is supplied in sufficient
quantity. But it has given a low return to the countries that accumulated the most reserves, especially
when those returns are measured in terms of the countries' own consumption. I argue in this paper
that the countries that accumulate the most reserves should expect a low return in terms of their own
consumption, and that there is little that international monetary reform can do to change that fact.


Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
454 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu
    1     Introduction

    A bird’s-eye view of the international monetary system could be described as follows. There
    is a center and there is a periphery. The periphery uses assets of the center as reserves.
    There are three necessary conditions for the system to be viable (i.e., to deliver satisfactory
    outcomes for its participants):
        (i) the center’s assets must be liquid and safe,
        (ii) they must be provided in sufficient quantity, and
        (iii) they must deliver an appropriate return.1
        There are debates about whether the US dollar is meeting these conditions, and about
    its ability to satisfy them going forward. First, the 2008 financial crisis has put into question
    the safety and liquidity of US assets. Second, it is not clear whether the US economy will be
    able to satisfy the ever-increasing demand for international liquidity. And third, the central
    role of the US dollar in the current system has been criticized on the grounds that the return
    on the dollar is determined by the domestic objectives of the US authorities rather than a
    concern to provide a stable store of value for the rest of the world. This has led to debates
    about whether the international monetary system should evolve toward a more multipolar
    arrangement with a greater role for the euro and perhaps (in the longer term) the renminbi
    or the Special Drawing Rights (SDR).2
        The purpose of this paper is to review these arguments, with special emphasis on the
    third one. Overall, I do not see much grounds for forecasting a rapid decline of the dollar on
    the basis of the first two criteria. The crisis has reduced the safety and liquidity of certain


1
  In addition, if there are fixed exchange rates, the monetary policy of the center must be acceptable to the
  periphery. With floating exchange rates this is not as important, although minimum stability is necessary
  to satisfy condition (i).
2
  For the view that the supply of safe dollar assets might become insufficient to satisfy the global demand, see
  Fahri, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) and Obstfeld (2011). The critique of the dollar as an unstable store of
  value was developed most notably by Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China (Zhou,
  2009). See Eichengreen (2011) for a forward-looking discussion of the role of the dollar in the international
  monetary system.


                                                       1
US dollar assets, but US Treasury debt played its role of safe haven. The government debt
crisis in the euro area has durably reduced the competition that US Treasury debt faces in
maintaining its status as the main global safe asset. And the data suggest that there is little
risk of an imminent shortage of safe US debt—although it may become a constraining factor
in the long run.
   Most of the paper focuses on the third criterion—the performance of the dollar as a
store of value. Measuring this is more difficult than first meets the eye. I argue that for
countries that accumulate international reserves through the current account (through trade
surpluses), the appropriate way of assessing how well the dollar does as a store of value is
by looking at the real return that countries have received on their dollar reserves in terms
of their own consumption. And if one measures the return on dollar reserves in this way, it
was indeed very low and is likely to continue to be low in the future.
   To illustrate, I find that the consumption-based cumulated return that China received
on its dollar reserves in the 2000s was negative, and equal to minus 17 percent. That is,
by investing the equivalent of 100 units of Chinese consumption in US Treasury bills at the
beginning of 2000 and rolling over this position for ten years, the Chinese authorities were left
with enough dollars to buy 100-17=83 units of Chinese consumption at the end of 2010. The
consumption-based return on dollar reserves was even lower for the other BRIC countries
(Brazil, India and Russia). These low consumption-based returns are explained largely by
the fact that the currencies of those countries have appreciated in real terms relative to the
dollar. As a result, they have made a loss on the value of their dollar reserves in terms of
their own consumption.
   These findings are not due to the fact that the 2000s was a period in which the dollar hap-
pened to depreciate against all currencies. Looking at a larger sample of 28 emerging market
economies shows a variety of experiences, with a number of countries receiving a positive
consumption-based return on their dollar reserves. Furthermore, the larger sample reveals


                                               2
an interesting fact: there is a negative cross-country correlation between the consumption-
based return that a country receives on its reserves and the level of reserve accumulation.
That is, countries that accumulated the most international reserves also received the lowest
consumption-based returns on those reserves.
   I propose a simple model to explain this finding. The model features a small open
economy that accumulates international reserves to resist the real appreciation of its currency,
or to accumulate international liquidity in pace with the growth in the domestic tradable
good sector. In both cases, the country tends to accumulate more reserves at the same time
as its currency appreciates in real terms, which decreases the consumption-based return on
the reserves. Thus, there is a kind of “saver’s curse” in international finance: countries that
accumulate more net foreign assets also tend, in equilibrium, to have a lower consumption-
based return on those assets.
   The implications of my analysis for the debate on reforming the international monetary
system are discussed in the last section. The main point is that if the consumption-based
return on dollar reserves is low for the reasons conjectured in this paper, it is not a problem
that the international monetary system should try to solve. If reserves are accumulated
primarily by countries that resist the appreciation of their currencies, or whose currency
appreciates because of the Balassa-Samuelson effect, then the consumption-based return on
their reserves must be low in equilibrium.
   The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses whether US dollar debt remains
liquid, safe and abundant enough to support the role of the dollar as the main reserve
currency. Section 3 looks at the performance of the dollar as a store of value. Section 4
concludes with a brief discussion of the policy implications.




                                               3
2     Safety, Liquidity and Abundance

The dollar, with a share of about 60 percent of global reserves, remains the main reserve
currency. This section assesses the performance of the dollar from the perspective of the first
two criteria stated in the introduction. Did dollar debt assets provide liquidity and safety?
Were those assets supplied in sufficient quantity? I consider each question in turn.


2.1      Safety and liquidity

There is little doubt that US financial markets provided an abundance of liquid and safe
assets to the rest of the world until the crisis. This is especially true of US Treasury bonds,
the main asset of investment for international reserves, and the US Treasury has benefited
from this by paying a lower interest rate on its debt (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,
2010).
    Has this perception changed during the crisis? It has certainly changed for the asset
classes that were the most directly affected by the crisis, such as asset-backed securities or
corporate bonds. Foreign private and official investors, who had diversified their holdings of
US securities in the decades preceding the crisis, rushed back to the safety of Treasury debt
after 2008. Figure 1 shows the shares of foreign holdings of US debt securities respectively
invested in Treasury securities, corporate bonds, and agency and GSE-backed securities
between 1980 and 2010. The share of foreign holdings of US debt securities invested in
Treasuries decreased from about 80 percent in 1980 to less than 40 percent before the crisis.
This trend was reversed by the crisis and in 2010, the share of Treasury debt was back to
the level observed ten years earlier. This shift in investors’ preferences was also observed in
the relative prices of the different kinds of debt in the Fall of 2008, with a sharp increase in
the spreads on US private debt relative to Treasury debt.
    The main impact of the crisis, thus, was not to reduce the perceived safety of US assets
as a whole but rather to revive old lines of differentiation between different kinds of debt


                                               4
            90.0


            80.0


            70.0


            60.0

                                                                   Treasury securities
            50.0

                                                                   Corporate bonds
            40.0

                                                                   Agency and GSE-backed
            30.0
                                                                   securities

            20.0


            10.0


             0.0
                   1980
                   1981
                   1982
                   1983
                   1984
                   1985
                   1986
                   1987
                   1988
                   1989
                   1990
                   1991
                   1992
                   1993
                   1994
                   1995
                   1996
                   1997
                   1998
                   1999
                   2000
                   2001
                   2002
                   2003
                   2004
                   2005
                   2006
                   2007
                   2008
                   2009
                   2010
Figure 1: Shares of foreign holdings of US debt securities invested in Treasury securities, cor-
porate bonds, and agency and GSE-backed securities (percent, 1980-2010). Source: Federal
Reserve Flow of Funds Data.

that had been perceived as more and more substitutable before the crisis. US Treasury debt
successfully served its function of “safe haven” and became again the first-choice asset during
the crisis (McCauley and McGuire, 2009).


2.2    Triffin dilemma redux

Triffin (1960) famously pointed to an internal contradiction that was undermining the Bret-
ton Woods fixed exchange rate system. The quantity of dollars that the US needed to create
in order to satisfy the rest of the world’s demand for international liquidity grew at a faster
rate than the US gold reserves, so that the fixed parity between the dollar and gold would
be increasingly difficult to maintain (without global deflation). Triffin’s argument was about
the problem of maintaining a fixed peg between the dollar and gold but it is now being up-
dated and applied mutatis mutandis to today’s system of floating exchange rates by Fahri,
Gourinchas and Rey (2011) and Obstfeld (2011).
   These authors have proposed a fiscal variation on Triffin’s dilemma that can be summa-


                                               5
                 100.0

                  90.0

                  80.0

                  70.0

                  60.0                                                                                     ROW Dollar
                                                                                                           Reserves/ROW GDP
                  50.0
                                                                                                           US Treasury
                  40.0
                                                                                                           Securities/ROW GDP
                                                                                                           US Nonfinancial Sector
                  30.0                                                                                     Debt/ROW GDP

                  20.0

                  10.0

                   0.0
                         1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010




    Figure 2: Global dollar reserves, US Treasury securities and US nonfinancial sector debt
    as shares of the rest of the world’s GDP (percent, 1995-2010). Sources: Federal Reserve
    Flow of Funds Data, IMF World Economic Outlook and COFER, and World Development
    Indicators.

    rized as follows. As international reserves are primarily composed of US government debt,
    and the share of the US in the global economy is shrinking, the US progressively loses its
    fiscal capacity to satisfy the rest of the world’s demand for international liquidity. Thus,
    there is a dilemma between the objective of satisfying the global demand for international
    liquidity, which requires a secular increase in the ratio of US government debt to US GDP,
    and the objective of maintaining US government debt safe, which requires stabilizing this
    ratio.
       The fiscal Triffin dilemma is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows global dollar reserves as
    well as the outstanding stocks of US Treasury securities and the debt of the US nonfinancial
    sector. These variables are expressed as shares of the rest of the world’s (i.e., non-US) GDP.3
    Several facts stand out.
       First, comparing the global stock of dollar reserves with the outstanding stock of US
3
    The global dollar reserves were estimated by multiplying the global stock of reserves (minus gold) by the
    share of the dollar in the allocated reserves reported in the IMF COFER data. This is not an exact measure
    because the COFER data do not report the currency composition of reserves for all countries.


                                                                             6
    Treasury securities suggests that there is some truth to the “fiscal Triffin dilemma” view.
    The global stock of dollar reserves was increasing at a faster pace than the stock of US
    Treasury securities before the crisis, so that by 2007 the two curves were about to cross
    each other. This trend was interrupted by the crisis and the stock of US Treasury securities
    started to increase faster than global reserves, but this was only thanks to US fiscal deficits
    that were clearly unsustainable in the long run.
       Second, the picture is rather different if one compares the global stock of dollar reserves
    with the total stock of US nonfinancial sector debt. This larger debt aggregate includes—in
    addition to Treasury securities—municipal securities, commercial paper, corporate bonds,
    mortgages and consumer credit.4 The debt of the US nonfinancial sector provides a rough
    measure of the total stock of dollar debt that foreign central banks can invest in, directly or
    indirectly (through asset-backed securities or by holding claims on the US financial sector).
    And indeed, foreign central banks were diversifying their reserve portfolio away from Trea-
    suries and into other forms of US debt before the crisis.5 This trend of diversification was
    interrupted by the crisis, but looking forward, one can well imagine that foreign investors
    will view US Treasury securities and other US debt securities as more and more substi-
    tutable again. The stock of US nonfinancial sector debt amounts to more than 70 percent
    of non-US GDP, which leaves significant room before the global demand for dollar liquidity
    is constrained.
       Another lesson from Figure 2 is that any dollar shortage comes from an increase in the
    rest of the world’s demand for reserves relative to its own GDP, not from the fact that the
    US economy is producing less debt or that its economy is shrinking relative to the rest of the
    world. The stock of US debt securities has been roughly constant as a share of the rest of
    the world’s GDP, but the stock of international dollar reserves almost doubled between 2000

4
  These data come from the Federal Reserve flow of funds data, Table L.2 (Credit Market Debt Owed by
  Nonfinancial Sectors).
5
  According to the flow of funds data, the foreign official sector’s investment in US agency and GSE-backed
  securities was larger than its investment in US Treasury securities in 2007.


                                                     7
    and 2010, from about 6 percent to about 12 percent of non-US GDP. Clearly, extrapolating
    this trend—assuming that the rest of the world will continue raising its reserves-to-GDP
    ratio by 6 percent every decade as it did in the 2000s—will sooner or later result in a dollar
    shortage. It is not clear, however, why the rest of the world would accumulate international
    reserves at such a pace. There is no historical precedent for such a trend, and no convincing
    theoretical explanation for why it should continue. In fact, to the extent that emerging
    market economies “graduate” and start looking more like advanced economies, they should
    lower rather than increase their holdings of international reserves as a share of their GDP.
        It is not even clear that the increase in global reserves observed in the 2000s reflects
    primarily a larger demand for international liquidity. The countries with an authentic need
    for international liquidity are emerging market economies that have an open capital account
    and are exposed to capital flow volatility and sudden stops. But these economies account
    for a relatively small share of reserve accumulation. A large fraction of the reserves were
    accumulated by oil-exporting countries and by China for reasons that seem to have little to do
    with liquidity per se. Oil-exporting countries save oil revenue for future generations. China
    accumulates reserves for reasons that are debated but most likely to resist the appreciation
    of its currency.6 It is in the interest of these countries to diversify their publicly-held foreign
    assets into equity, as indeed they have started to do, in a limited way, with their sovereign
    wealth funds.
        Another concern is that US Treasury debt might lose its quality as a “safe asset”, as some
    euro area government debts already have. It is not clear, however, that the US should brace
    itself to face the same problems as the euro area. The main lesson from the euro crisis is
    probably the huge difference that it makes to have a central bank that is expected to provide
    a monetary backstop to a government debt rollover crisis and prevent a default. As long as


6
    As argued in Jeanne (2011), the Chinese authorities do not need liquid foreign assets for that purpose—
    illiquid foreign assets would do the job. In addition, China does not really need international liquidity to
    deal with capital flow volatility and the risk of sudden stops, given its relatively closed capital account.


                                                         8
market participants expect that (i) the US Fed would prevent a default of the US Treasury
in the event of a rollover crisis and (ii) a US fiscal adjustment will occur (sooner or later),
the debt of the US will remain a safe asset, from the point of view of both the default risk
and the inflation risk. The governments at the periphery of the euro area do not enjoy the
same leeway because the European Central Bank does not satisfy the first condition (Jeanne,
2012). The euro area debt crisis seems to have been caused by factors that are specific to
the euro, and it should strengthen rather than diminish the status of the dollar as the main
reserve currency.
    Overall, a shortage of safe US debt securities does not seem likely to become a binding
constraint soon for reserve-accumulating countries. This does not mean, however, that indi-
vidual countries will not feel at times constrained in their access to international liquidity,
as they did for example at the time of the Lehman crisis in the Fall of 2008. The provision
of swaps by the US Fed was important, at that time, to restore a measure of confidence in
the global banking system (Aizenman, Jinjarak and Park, 2011). The fact that those swaps
were perceived to restore confidence even in countries that had a comfortable buffer stock of
reserves raises important questions about the extent to which dollar reserves can provide a
good substitute to international lending-in-last-resort in dollars. These questions have been
actively discussed in debates about “global financial safety nets”. The problem revealed by
the crisis, however, is not so much a shortage of international liquidity as the fact that in a
world where the wholesale dollar funding market is a source of financing for non-US banks,
there is a need for the US Fed to sometimes act as international lender of last resort.


3     The Dollar as a Store of Value

The third question is whether the dollar has performed well as a global store of value. There
is more to this question than meets the eye, and indeed I will spend the rest of the paper
discussing it. Those who claim that the dollar is not a good store of value point to two facts:


                                              9
    that the interest rate on US debt is low and that the dollar is depreciating. However, it is not
    completely clear how these two facts should be combined to measure the opportunity cost of
    holding dollar reserves. I attempt to clarify these conceptual issues in the first subsection.
    I then present some measures of the real return on dollar reserves for emerging market
    economies. Finally, a model is presented to help explain and interpret some of my findings.


    3.1     Measuring the return on dollar reserves: conceptual issues


    A common approach to estimating the opportunity cost of reserves is to assume that each
    dollar of reserves could instead be used to repay the country’s long-term external dollar
    debt.7 According to this approach, the opportunity cost of holding reserves is the difference
    between the return on the reserves and the (usually higher) interest rate that the country
    pays on its external dollar debt. The implicit assumption is that an additional dollar of
    reserves is financed, at the margin, by issuing one more dollar of external debt—i.e., through
    the financial account. Note that in this case, a dollar depreciation should not be considered
    as a cost, since it also reduces the value of the debt that has been issued to buy the reserves.
       The premise of this approach is that reserves are accumulated through the financial ac-
    count (with capital inflows) rather than through the current account (with a trade surplus).
    If this were true, we should not a priori expect to observe a relationship between reserve
    accumulation and trade surpluses. However, we do observe such a relationship in the data.
    Figure 3 plots, for a sample of 28 emerging market countries, the accumulation of interna-
    tional reserves between 2000 and 2007 (vertical axis) against the trade balance cumulated
    over the same period (horizontal axis).8 There is a statistically and economically significant
    positive correlation between the two variables, suggesting that countries accumulate more


7
    See, for example, Edwards (1985), Rodrik (2006), Jeanne (2007), Jeanne and Rancière (2011).
8
    The countries are Argentina, Brazil, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Hungary, India,
    Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
    Russia, South Africa, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela.


                                                       10
                   2
                                                                                    RUS
                   1.5




                                                               CHN
                   1




                                               UKR                                   NGA


                                                                                   MYS
                   .5




                               MAR   IND
                                                         THA
                                                     KOR
                                                      PER
                                     TUN
                                      HUN
                              PHL   POL        BRA
                               PAK  TUR   ZAF
                                     EGY COL                IDN
                                  DOM MEX PAN
                                        ECUURY                           VEN
                                                ARG
                   0




                         -1                0                         1         2            3


     Figure 3: Cumulative trade balance (horizontal axis) and increase in international reserves
     (vertical axis) over 2000-07 normalized by 2000 GDP. Source: World Development Indicators.

     reserves by having larger trade surpluses.9
        Figure 3, obviously, does not say anything about the direction of causality, which could
     flow both ways, or from a third variable. It could be that countries have current account
     surpluses or deficits for reasons that have nothing to do with reserve accumulation and
     that part of the accumulated foreign assets end up as reserves at the central bank.10 But,
     as argued in Jeanne (2011), the causality could also go the other way around, from the
     accumulation of reserves to a current account surplus. This is especially likely to be the case
     in countries where, because of capital controls or other financial frictions, the accumulation
     of foreign assets by the public sector cannot be “undone” by capital inflows to the private
     sector. Then the accumulation of reserves results in an accumulation of net foreign assets for
     the country as a whole, and thus a current account surplus. We do not really know which

 9
     The correlation is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
10
     This view is adopted in most of the recent literature; see for example Carroll and Jeanne (2009) or Song,
     Storesletten and Zilibotti (2011).


                                                                11
     view is correct (more research is needed),11 but I would like to explore the consequences of
     assuming the second view for the opportunity cost of accumulating reserves.
        If one assumes that international reserves are accumulated at the margin by raising the
     trade balance, then the decision to accumulate reserves should be viewed as, essentially,
     an intertemporal consumption-saving decision. Accumulating one more dollar of reserves
     means, for the country as a whole, saving this dollar by reducing domestic absorption, in the
     same way as an individual saver accumulates wealth by postponing his consumption.12 For
     the same reason that individuals should determine their consumption and saving by looking
     at the real (rather than nominal) interest rate, the authorities of a country that accumulate
     net foreign assets on behalf of the domestic citizens should care about the return on those
     assets expressed in terms of domestic consumption.
        Accordingly, I will measure the consumption-based real return on dollar reserves as,


                                          rt = i$t + ∆st+1 − ∆pt+1 .                                     (1)


     The consumption-based return on a dollar bond is equal to the dollar interest rate, plus the
     rate of nominal depreciation of the domestic currency relative to the dollar (which gives the
     return on the dollar bond in terms of domestic currency), minus the domestic CPI inflation
     rate (which gives the return on the dollar bond in terms of domestic consumption).


     3.2     Consumption-based returns on dollar reserves for the BRICs


     This subsection provides estimates of the consumption-based real return on the dollar re-
     serves of the four BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and China), which are also the four
     emerging market countries that have accumulated the most international reserves over the

11
     Gagnon (2012) presents evidence suggesting that reserve accumulation raises the current account balance.
12
     Alternatively, the country could be reducing investment rather than increasing saving. The evidence in
     Gourinchas and Jeanne (2011), however, suggests that the margin of adjustment is saving rather than
     investment.


                                                       12
     last decade.13 If a country invests 100 units of domestic consumption in dollar bonds in
     January 2000, how many units of domestic consumption can the country purchase by selling
     those bonds at a later date? The answer is given in Figure 4 for the BRIC countries. For
     each country, the purchasing power of the dollar assets in terms of domestic consumption
     was computed by cumulating the consumption-based real interest rate from equation (1),
     starting from a base of 100 in January 2000.14
        A country has a positive (negative) consumption-based return on its dollar bonds between
     January 2000 and a given month if the index is above (below) 100 in that month. For
     example, the fact that the index fell to 83.0 in December 2010 for China, means that investing
     100 units of Chinese consumption in dollar bonds in January 2000 yielded the equivalent of
     83 units of Chinese consumption at the end of the decade. As shown in Figure 4, all four
     countries had a negative consumption-based return on dollar bonds in 2010.
        These results suggest that the dollar has not performed well as a store of value. In fact,
     the return on dollar reserves is worse than most people think once it is measured in terms
     of the countries’ own consumption. These low returns are driven in part by the low level of
     US interest rates, but for the most part they reflect the fact that the currency of the BRIC
     countries appreciated in real terms relative to the dollar, implying that the dollar reserves
     have depreciated in terms of home consumption.15
        The return is not as low for China as for the other BRIC countries because China has
     resisted the appreciation of its currency relative to the dollar. One problem with return
     estimates based on observed exchange rates is that they do not take into account the real
     exchange rate adjustments that we may expect to take place in the future. For example,
     China may have a certain level of pent-up appreciation that was not observed in 2010 but

13
   China is the country that accumulated the most reserves by far ($2,710 billion between 2000 and 2010).
   Russia came second, with $435 billion of reserves accumulation. Brazil and India accumulated about the
   same amount of reserves (around $250 billion).
14
   I used monthly data and took the three-month US Tbill interest rate for the dollar interest rate. The
   investment was staggered over time, with one-third of the foreign assets reinvested every month.
15
   The Brazilian Real depreciated sharply relative to the dollar from 2000 to 2003 but appreciated after that.


                                                      13
                   200

                   180

                   160

                   140

                   120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               China
                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Russia
                   80                                                                                                                                                                                                          India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                   60

                   40

                   20

                    0
                         Jan-00


                                           Jan-01


                                                             Jan-02


                                                                               Jan-03




                                                                                                                   Jan-05


                                                                                                                                     Jan-06




                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-09
                                  Jul-00


                                                    Jul-01


                                                                      Jul-02


                                                                                        Jul-03
                                                                                                 Jan-04
                                                                                                          Jul-04


                                                                                                                            Jul-05


                                                                                                                                              Jul-06
                                                                                                                                                       Jan-07
                                                                                                                                                                Jul-07
                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-08
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-08


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-10
     Figure 4: Consumption-based payoff on dollar reserves for the BRIC countries (2000:01-
     2010:12)

     was “in the pipeline”.


      Table 1. Consumption-based return on dollar reserves in the BRIC countries
                                                                                                    (2000:01-2007:12)

                                                                                                            Brazil                            Russia                              India                        China

                                                      Observed                                             -27.8% -60.4% -21.4%                                                                                -4.9%

                                           FEER-adjusted -31.1% -62.0% -26.6% -27.7%


         One way of adjusting for such unrealized appreciation is to estimate the consumption-
     based returns on dollar reserves that would be observed if the real exchange rate were
     equal to its “fundamental equilibrium value”. According to the fundamental equilibrium
     exchange rate estimates of Cline and Williamson (2008),16 the Brazilian Real, the Russian
16
     The concept of fundamental equilibrium exchange rate was developed by Williamson (1994). In a nutshell,
     the fundamental equilibrium exchange rate is the real exchange rate that one would observe if the current
     account balance satisfied a certain norm of sustainability. The estimates depend on the assumptions that are
     made about the norm for current account sustainability and the trade elasticities. See Cline and Williamson
     (2008) for details.


                                                                                                                                     14
     Ruble, the Indian Rupee and the Chinese Renminbi were undervalued by, respectively, 4.8
     percent, 4.2 percent, 7.1 percent and 31.5 percent relative to the US dollar in February
     2008. Table 1 reports the consumption-based returns on dollar reserves that were observed
     in the four countries between January 2000 and December 2007 (first row) as well as the
     counterfactual return that would have been observed if the exchange rates had been equal
     to their fundamental equilibrium levels as measured by Cline and Williamson (2008). The
     adjusted consumption-based return is now close to -30 percent for China, close to the levels
     of Brazil and India.
         The BRIC received a low consumption-based return on their dollar reserves primarily
     because of the real appreciation of their currencies, not because US interest rates were
     lowered by the “exorbitant privilege”.17 The recent literature offers a range of estimates
     for the amount by which US interest rates are lowered by the foreign demand for US debt.
     The regressions in Warnock and Warnock (2009) suggest that foreign official inflows reduced
     the 10-year Treasury yield by 50 basis points in 2005 but that the impact on short-term
     interest rates was smaller. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) find that if the
     foreign official sector were to sell all its holdings of Treasury bonds in 2008, the short-term
     yield on those bonds would increase by 40 to 60 basis points relative to corporate bonds.
         If I assume that foreign official demand for Treasury bonds lowered the US 3-month T
     bill interest rate by 0.5 percent on average over 2000-07 (probably an overestimate in view
     of the evidence mentioned above), then it reduced the cumulated return on dollar assets
     by about 4 percent. This is only a fraction of the valuation loss that the BRIC countries
     incurred on their dollar reserves because of the appreciation of their currencies.




17
     The fact that the US government can pay lower interest rate on its debt because of the foreign demand for
     dollar reserve assets is sometimes called the “exorbitant privilege”. The term is also used by Gourinchas
     and Rey (2007) in a slightly different sense, to denote the apparent excess return that US investors earn on
     their foreign portfolios compared with what foreigners earn on their US portfolios.


                                                         15
3.3    A broader look at the data

This subsection looks beyond the BRIC countries and takes a broader look at the consumption-
based returns that emerging market economies have received on their dollar reserves. I show
that the consumption-based return on dollar reserves between 2000 and 2007 exhibits a high
degree of cross-country heterogeneity. Furthermore, the consumption-based return is neg-
atively correlated with the accumulation of reserves—that is, countries that accumulated
more reserves tended to have a lower return.
   For a given country, the consumption-based real return on a dollar of reserves between
time t and t0 is given by,
                                              (1 + i$ )S 0 /P 0
                                     1+r =                      ,                             (2)
                                                  S/P
where S and S 0 are the nominal exchange rates (domestic currency per dollar) and P and
P 0 are the domestic currency prices of domestic consumption, at respectively time t and
t0 , and i$ is the nominal interest rate on the dollar cumulated between time t and t0 . The
denominator is the number of units of domestic consumption that one dollar buys at time
t, and the numerator is the number of units of domestic consumption that the same dollar
invested in dollar bonds at time t buys at time t0 . This relationship is essentially the same
as equation (1) but cumulated between time t and t0 .
   Defining the real exchange rate as the price of US consumption in terms of domestic
consumption, Q = SPU S /P , the consumption-based real return can also be written,

                                                          Q0
                                      1 + r = (1 + r$ )      ,                                (3)
                                                          Q

where 1+r$ = (1+i$ )PU S /PU0 S is the US real interest rate. The domestic consumption-based
real return, thus, is the US real interest rate plus the rate of real depreciation of the domestic
currency relative to the US.
   I measured the consumption-based real return on dollar reserves for the same sample of



                                                16
     28 emerging market countries as in Figure 3 by applying equation (3) between t =2000 and
     t0 =2007 (before the financial crisis). Taken together, the countries in my sample have accu-
     mulated $2,890 billionn between 2000 and 2007, 60 percent of global reserve accumulation.
     The country that accumulated the most reserves was of course China, which accounts for 47
     percent of the reserves accumulated by this group.18
        In order to see how the consumption-based real return on dollar reserves varies across
     countries, Figure 5 plots the real return, r (on the vertical axis), against the logarithmic
     increase in international reserves, log(R2007 /R2000 ) (on the horizontal axis).19 Two facts are
     noteworthy.
        First, there is significant cross-country dispersion in the cumulated return on dollar re-
     serves. The consumption-based return on dollar reserves was negative on average, but a
     number of countries received a positive consumption-based return on their dollar reserves
     (because their currencies depreciated against the dollar). Thus, the negative returns that we
     have obtained for the BRIC countries are not a feature of the whole sample—the dollar did
     not depreciate against all currencies.
        Second, there is a negative correlation between the return on dollar reserves and the
     increase in reserves. That is, countries that increased their reserves the most also received
     the lowest consumption-based returns on those reserves, because their currencies tended to
     appreciate the most against the dollar. The correlation is negative and significant at the 5
     percent level.20 It is also economically significant. For example, it implies that other things

18
   The US nominal cumulative interest factor was obtained by cumulating the average interest rate on 3-month
   Treasury bills between January 2000 and December 2007, which gives 1 + i$ = 1.284 and the result was then
   divided by the ratio of the US CPI in December 2007 to the US CPI in January 2000, PU0 S /PU S = 1.249,
   which gives 1 + r$ = 1.028. The average US real interest rate was thus positive over the sample period,
   although quite small (0.36 percent per year on average). The changes in the real exchange rate with the
   US dollar between 2000 and 2007 were similarly computed using the countries’ CPIs and nominal exchange
   rates with the dollar. For the nominal exchange rate I used the average levels in 2000 and 2007 to smooth
   out high-frequency noise.
19
   The estimated returns for the BRIC countries are not exactly the same as in the previous section (for
   example, China now has a slightly positive return) because the underlying data are different. In particular,
   I now use annual averages for the exchange rates and CPI instead of monthly data.
20
   This result is driven in part by the cases of Argentina, Russia and Ukraine. The correlation is still negative


                                                        17
                                   ARG




                 1
                 .5



                                           EGY
                                  URY

                                    VEN
                                              PAN
                                            MEX
                                                                            CHN
                                                     MYSDOM
                                                   PER
                 0




                                                         TUN                PAK
                                           PHLTHA
                                                            ZAF
                                                             MAR      IND
                                           COL KOR             BRA

                                     IDN
                                           POL                 NGA
                                                    TUR                                 UKR
                                         HUN
                 -.5




                                                                                  RUS

                       0                       1                      2           3
                                                    log_R2007_R2000



Figure 5: Consumption-based real return on dollar reserves (vertical axis) and reserve accu-
mulation (horizontal axis) (2000-07)

equal, an increase in the reserves-to-GDP ratio of the magnitude observed in China should
be correlated with a 24 percent fall in the cumulated consumption-based return on the dollar
reserves.
    Why do countries that accumulate the most international reserves also receive the lowest
consumption-based return on those reserves? I now present a simple model that explains
this result.


3.4     A model

The purpose of the model is to understand how the consumption-based return on interna-
tional reserves is related to the level of reserve accumulation in equilibrium. The model has
two periods t = 1, 2 and features a small open economy with a representative consumer who
consumes a tradable good and a nontradable good. Domestic consumption is a Cobb-Douglas


but no longer statistically significant if one excludes these countries.


                                                          18
     index of the consumptions of nontradable good and tradable good, C = CN1−α CTα . By an
     abuse of language that is common in the literature, I will call the tradable good “dollar” and
     the inverse of the price of domestic consumption in terms of dollar the “real exchange rate”.
     Denoting the real exchange rate by Q, the consumption-based real gross return on dollars is
     given by
                                                                  Q2
                                             1 + r = (1 + r$ )       ,                                 (4)
                                                                  Q1
     where r$ is the (exogenous) dollar return. This equation is the analog of (3).
        The consumer receives exogenous endowments of tradable and nontradable goods, respec-
     tively, denoted by YT t and YN t (t = 1, 2). The endowment of nontradable good is constant
     (YN 1 = YN 2 = YN ) but the endowment of tradable good can change over time.
        An important variable of the model is the change in the real exchange rate between
                                                                                                   −(1−α)
     period 1 and period 2. One can see that the real exchange rate Q is proportional to CT                 ,
     so that (4) can be rewritten,21
                                                                      1−α
                                                                CT 1
                                        1 + r = (1 + r$ )                     .                        (5)
                                                                CT 2

        Next, I assume that reserves are the only foreign assets. This assumption could be
     interpreted as the fact that the country’s capital account is closed, but it also captures more
     generally the existence of frictions that prevent the accumulation of reserves to be offset by
     private capital flows. The amount of reserves accumulated in period 1, thus, is equal to the
     trade surplus,
                                               R = YT 1 − CT 1 .                                       (6)

     As for the consumption of tradable good in period 2, it is equal to the tradable endowment




21
     Given the Cobb-Douglas preferences, spending on the tradable good is a fraction α of total spending,
     Qt CT t = αCt , which implies Qt = α(CN t /CT t )1−α . Then noting that the consumption of nontradable
     good is constant (since the supply is) one obtains Q2 /Q1 = (CT 1 /CT 2 )1−α .


                                                      19
plus the reserves augmented by the interest payment,


                                    CT 2 = YT 2 + (1 + r$ )R.                             (7)


The expressions for CT 1 and CT 2 can then be used to substitute out the ratio CT 1 /CT 2 in
equation (5), which gives
                                                                 1−α
                                                   YT 1 − R
                            1 + r = (1 + r$ )                            .                (8)
                                              YT 2 + (1 + r$ )R

   This expression shows that the consumption-based return on the reserves, r, decreases
with the level of reserve accumulation, R.

Proposition 1 Other things equal, the consumption-based real rate of return on foreign
reserves is decreasing with the level of reserve accumulation.

   The intuition behind this result involves the fact that reserves are accumulated through
a trade surplus. Increasing the level of reserves implies a larger trade balance in period 1
and a lower trade balance in period 2. But the trade balance is related to the real exchange
rate. Other things equal, the trade balance can increase in period 1 and decrease in period
2 only if the real exchange rate appreciates in period 1 and depreciates in period 2. This
induces a real exchange rate appreciation between period 1 and period 2 that decreases the
consumption-based return on the reserves. The model, thus, brings out a kind of saver’s
“curse” in international finance: accumulating more reserves changes the relative prices in a
way that reduces the consumption-based return on the reserves.
   The positive correlation between reserve accumulation and real appreciation could come
from another mechanism. It is reasonable to assume that countries in which the tradable
sector grows at a higher rate will want to accumulate more reserves. This could be because
more trade requires more international liquidity or because those countries want to resist the
period-1 real appreciation that results from the growth in the tradable sector (as argued by
Aizenman and Lee (2007) or Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004)). Either way, we

                                                 20
     would expect R to be positively correlated with YT 2 across countries in equation (8). But
     this also implies a negative correlation between reserve accumulation and the return on the
     reserves. In this case, the negative correlation comes from the fact that countries that tend
     to accumulate more reserves are also countries whose currencies tend to appreciate because
     of the growth in their tradable sector.


     4     Policy Implications

     I have reviewed the performance of the US dollar as a reserve currency according to three
     criteria: (i) dollar debt assets must be liquid and safe, (ii) they must be provided in sufficient
     quantity, and (iii) they must deliver an appropriate return. I found that the dollar performed
     relatively well according to the first two criteria but rather dismally according to the third
     one. This is not so much because of the exorbitant privilege (which did reduce returns, but
     only moderately) as because of the valuation loss that reserve-accumulating countries incur
     in terms of their own consumption due to the appreciation of their currencies.
         It is not clear, however, how this problem can be fixed by reforming the international
     monetary system. Let us consider various proposals that have been made in the debate on
     reforming the international monetary system.
         One approach is to expand the set of assets eligible to be accumulated as reserves.
     Reserve-accumulating countries could accumulate foreign debt assets denominated in cur-
     rencies other than the dollar or even non-debt assets such as equity or real assets such as
     natural resources.22
         Such diversification should dilute the exorbitant privilege and spread it across a larger
     range of assets. But it will not significantly increase the consumption-based real return on
     the foreign exchange reserves of countries whose currencies have an inherent tendency to
     appreciate. If the countries that accumulate the most reserves do so through trade sur-

22
     As some countries have started to do with their sovereign wealth funds.


                                                        21
     pluses, and their currencies tend to appreciate for fundamental reasons, then those countries
     must have a low return on their reserves in terms of their own consumption. This is true
     irrespective of the foreign assets that they invest in.
        This conclusion also applies to proposals that would use the SDR as a new reserve
     currency.23 If the SDR is simply a denomination unit for a basket of existing currencies in
     which countries can already invest their reserves, investing the reserves in SDR should not
     yield a return higher than the return from investing in the underlying currencies. Governor
     Zhou seems to have had something more ambitious in mind when he proposed to enhance
     the role of the SDR in the international monetary system. First, he argued that “the basket
     of currencies forming the basis for SDR valuation should be expanded to include currencies
     of all major economies, and the GDP may also be included as a weight” (Zhou, 2009). This
     implies that the Chinese currency should enter the SDR basket with a significant weight.
     Second, he proposed that the IMF set up “an open-ended SDR-denominated fund based on
     the market practice, allowing subscription and redemption in the existing reserve currencies
     by various investors as desired”. This implies that China could bring its dollar reserves to
     the Fund, exchange them against reserves that would be in part denominated in its own
     currency, and thus limit the valuation loss coming from an appreciation of the renminbi.
        The question with this proposal is who pays for the valuation loss that China would no
     longer be incurring. If China provides the IMF with sufficient renminbi-denominated assets
     to avoid a currency mismatch in the IMF balance sheet, there would be no benefit to China.
     But if the IMF bears a currency risk, the insurance provided to China would have to be
     backed by transfers from the other members of the IMF. This is why no agreement could be
     reached at the end of the 1970s about the proposal to create a “substitution account” at the
     IMF.24 No country would be willing to provide such a guarantee, and indeed there would

23
   I will not discuss here proposals to use the SDR as an input into global financial safety nets (see, e.g.,
   Obstfeld (2011), (Truman, 2010)). The development of more effective global financial safety nets should
   reduce the demand for international reserves.
24
   The international community discussed in 1980 a proposal to establish an SDR-substitution account at the


                                                      22
be little rationale in terms of efficiency or equity to compensate countries for the valuation
losses that they incur on their reserves because of the appreciation of their currencies.




IMF. Countries would be able to convert dollar reserves into SDR-denominated assets in the account. But if
subsequently the dollar depreciated against the SDR, who would suffer the exchange rate loss? No agreement
was reached on that question and the SDR-substitution account was not created. Kenen (2010)’s analysis
is sympathetic to the proposal but acknowledges that the cost of the SDR-substitution account might have
been significant for the United States if it had been the guarantor.


                                                   23
References
Aizenman, J., and J. Lee. 2007. “International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist
 views, theory and evidence.” Open Economies Review, 18(2): 191–214.

Aizenman, Joshua, Y. Jinjarak, and D. Park. 2011. “International Reserves and Swap
 Lines: Substitutes or Complements?” International Review of Economics and Finance,
 20(1): 5–18.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Olivier Jeanne. 2009. “A Tractable Model of Precau-
 tionary Reserves, Net Foreign Assets, or Sovereign Wealth Funds.” NBER Working Paper
 No. 15228.

Cline, William R., and John Williamson. 2008. “New Estimates of Fundamental Equi-
  librium Exchange Rates.” Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy Brief,
  08-7.

Dooley, M.P., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber. 2004. “The revived bretton woods
 system.” International Journal of Finance & Economics, 9(4): 307–313.

Edwards, S. 1985. “On the Interest-Rate Elasticity of the Demand for International Re-
 serves: Some Evidence From Developing Countries.” Journal of International Money and
 Finance, 4(2): 287–295.

Eichengreen, B.J. 2011. Exorbitant Privilege: The rise and fall of the Dollar and the
  Future of the International Monetary System. Oxford University Press.

Fahri, E., P.O. Gourinchas, and H. Rey. 2011. “Reforming the International Monetary
  System.” Manuscript, UC Berkeley.

Gagnon, Joseph. 2012. “Global Imbalances and Foreign Asset Expansion by Developing
 Economy Central Banks.” Working Paper 12-5, Peterson Institute for International Eco-
 nomics.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World
 Venture Capitalist : US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” In G7 Cur-
 rent Account Imbalances : Sustainability and Adjustment. , ed. R. Clarida. University of
 Chicago Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2011. “Capital Flows to Developing
 Countries: The Allocation Puzzle.” Manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2007. “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much
  of a Good Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2007, 1: 1–79.

                                           24
Jeanne, Olivier. 2011. “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate.”
  Manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2012. “Monetary Dominance and Government Default.” Financial Stabil-
  ity Review, 16: 143–150.

Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière. 2011. “The Optimal Level of Reserves
  for Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications.” Economic Journal,
  121(555): 905–930.

Kenen, Peter B. 2010. “The Substitution Account as a First Step Toward Reform of the
 International Monetary System.” Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy
 Brief, 10-06.

Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2010. “The Aggregate Demand for
 Treasury Debt.” Manuscript, Northwestern University.

McCauley, R.N., and P. McGuire. 2009. “Dollar appreciation in 2008: safe haven, carry
 trades, dollar shortage and overhedging.” BIS Quarterly Review, 4: 85–94.

Obstfeld, M. 2011. “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension.” NBER Working Paper
 No.17379.

Rodrik, D. 2006. “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves.” International Economic
 Journal, 20(3): 253–266.

Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti. 2011. “Growing like China.” The American
  Economic Review, 101(1): 196–233.

Triffin, R. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility. Yale University
  Press (New Haven, CT).

Truman, Edwin M. 2010. “The G-20 and International Financial Institution Governance.”
  Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper, 10-13.

Warnock, F.E., and V.C. Warnock. 2009. “International Capital Flows and US Interest
 Rates.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 28(6): 903–919.

Williamson, J. 1994. Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates. Institute for International
 Economics.

Zhou, X. 2009. “Reform the International Monetary System.” People’s Bank of China.




                                            25
