                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          IS CONFLICTED INVESTMENT ADVICE BETTER THAN NO ADVICE?

                                            John Chalmers
                                           Jonathan Reuter

                                        Working Paper 18158
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18158


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012



We thank the Oregon University System for providing data on the Optional Retirement Plan (scrubbed
of all personally identifiable information) for our use in this project. We also thank Jeff Brown, John
Campbell, Daniel Cooper, Javier Gil-Bazo (discussant), Edie Hotchkiss, Nathan Klinkhammer, David
Laibson, Colleen Flaherty Manchester (discussant), Olivia Mitchell (discussant), Sendhil Mullainathan,
Markus Nöth (discussant), Ali Ozdagli, Jeff Pontiff, Andrei Shleifer, Tyler Shumway, Larry Singell,
Paolo Sodini (discussant), Denis Sosyura, Phil Strahan, Jerome Taillard, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
(discussant), Scott Weisbenner (discussant), and seminar participants at Aalto University, BI Norwegian
Business School, Boston College, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, MIT Sloan, Pennsylvania State University, University of Michigan, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, 2011 SFS Finance Cavalcade, 2011 Netspar Pension Workshop, 2012 FIRS conference, 2013
European Retail Investor Conference, 2013 NBER Behavioral Finance Working Group Meeting, and
2014 American Finance Association Meetings for helpful comments. This research was supported
by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-M-98363-1-02 to the National Bureau
of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. Research funding was
also provided by the Finance and Securities Analysis Center at the University of Oregon. The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. This paper was previously circulated under the title
“What is the Impact of Financial Advisors on Retirement Portfolio Choices and Outcomes?” The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18158.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John Chalmers and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Is Conflicted Investment Advice Better than No Advice?
John Chalmers and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 18158
June 2012, Revised September 2015
JEL No. D14,G11,G23

                                              ABSTRACT

The answer depends on how broker clients would have invested in the absence of broker recommendations.
To identify counterfactual retirement portfolios, we exploit time-series variation in access to brokers
by new plan participants. When brokers are available, they are chosen by new participants who value
recommendations on asset allocation and fund selection because they are less financially experienced.
When brokers are no longer available, demand for target-date funds (TDFs) increases differentially
among participants with the highest predicted demand for brokers. Broker client portfolios earn significantly
lower risk-adjusted returns and Sharpe ratios than matched portfolios based on TDFs—due in part
to broker fees that average 0.90% per year—but offer similar levels of risk. More generally, the portfolios
of participants with high predicted demand for brokers who lack access to brokers comparable favorably
to the portfolios of similar participants who had access to brokers when they joined. Exploiting across-fund
variation in the level of broker fees, we find that broker clients allocate more dollars to higher fee funds.
This finding increases our confidence that actual broker client portfolios reflect broker recommendations,
and it highlights an agency conflict that can be eliminated when TDFs replace brokers.


John Chalmers
Charles H. Lundquist College of Business
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
jchalmer@lcbmail.uoregon.edu

Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu
I. Introduction
                 Providing financial advice to investors is a multi-billion dollar industry. Because invest-
ment returns are volatile, however, it can be difficult for investors—even those who are finan-
cially sophisticated—to distinguish good recommendations from bad. This fact raises important
questions about the quality of the recommendations that investors receive from their brokers.1,2
Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2013), Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2013), Hackethal, Inderst,
and Meyer (2012), Hoechle, Ruenzi, Schaub, and Schmid (2015), and Mullainathan, Nöth, and
Schoar (2012) use a variety of empirical strategies to show that broker recommendations reflect
brokers’ self-interests.3 Nevertheless, demand for broker recommendations is likely to be high-
est among those investors with the lowest levels of financial sophistication. This begs the ques-
tion of whether broker clients are better off holding portfolios based on conflicted recommenda-
tions or holding counterfactual portfolios constructed on their own.
                 The lack of data on counterfactual portfolios has limited the ability of other researchers to
measure the net benefit of brokers to their clients.4 Clients benefit from receiving and following
broker recommendations when the expected utility of doing so (net of fees) exceeds the expected
utility of investing on their own. Everything else equal, this difference in expected utilities de-
pends on the quality of the broker recommendations that they follow. However, broker clients
may rationally prefer biased recommendations to no recommendations. The lower the expected
utility associated with a client’s counterfactual portfolio, the more likely that the client is to ben-
efit even from biased recommendations. For example, in Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015),
brokers increase their clients’ expected utility by increasing equity allocations above counterfac-
tual levels; the high broker fees follow directly from the fact that they are set to split the large
gains to trade. On the other hand, the higher the expected utility associated with a client’s coun-
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
  Note that because the financial advice in our setting comes from brokers, we refer to financial advisors as brokers
and we refer to their advice as broker recommendations.
2
  Georgarakos and Inderst (2010) model the impact of financial literacy, trust in financial advice, and legal rights on
stock market participation. In their model, demand for financial advice falls with the level of financial literacy.
Inderst and Ottaviani (2012) and Calcagno and Monticone (2014) model interactions between financial advice, fi-
nancial literacy, and potential policy interventions.
3
  Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and Del Guercio and Reuter (2014) use fund-level data to show that
broker-sold mutual funds underperform direct-sold funds
4
  For example, it is difficult to measure the net benefit of finance advice in Von Gaudecker (2015) without measures
of counterfactual portfolio diversification. Similarly, while Foerster, Linnainmaa, Melzer and Previtero (2014) are
able to show that broker fixed effects explain client portfolio characteristics and that client portfolios underperform
standard benchmarks, they lack the data on counterfactual portfolios required to measure the net benefit of advice
within their sample of investors. More generally, Hung and Yoong (2013) discuss the limitations of “advice” stud-
ies in many contexts due to selection and reverse causality. Their approach is to combine survey data with con-
trolled lab experiments.

                                                                                                                1
terfactual portfolio, the lower the potential benefit from receiving and following biased (or unbi-
ased) recommendations.
                                                      The innovation in this paper is that we are able to estimate the causal effect of broker
recommendations relative to this elusive counterfactual. An ideal experiment would identify
counterfactual portfolios by withholding recommendations from a random set of real-world in-
vestors who seek to invest through a broker. To measure the causal effect of broker recommen-
dations on portfolio returns, risk levels, and expenses, we would then use the actual portfolios of
these reluctantly self-directed investors to identify the counterfactual portfolios of the broker cli-
ents. Our empirical strategy is similar in that we use time-series variation in investor access to
brokers to identify the counterfactual portfolios of broker clients.
                                                       Our empirical setting is Oregon University System’s (OUS) Optional Retirement Plan
(ORP), a defined contribution retirement plan introduced in October 1996, as an alternative to
the defined benefit retirement plan covering other state employees.5 When joining ORP, partici-
pants choose the (single) investment provider to which their retirement contributions will be sent.
Between October 1996 and October 2007, four providers were available to participants: HIGH,
whose network of brokers provide face-to-face recommendations, and three participant-directed
options: LOW, SMALL, and SMALLER. Effective November 2007, new participants were lim-
ited to investing through either LOW or NEW, neither of which provide the same type of per-
sonalized attention that HIGH continues to provide existing participants. Our empirical strategy
relies on both the availability of brokers and non-brokers through October 2007 and the loss of
brokers in November 2007. With OUS’s help, we were able to match administrative data on
ORP participants with retirement account-level data from HIGH, LOW, and NEW.6 Our ac-
count-level data end in December 2009. Because the employer makes all retirement contribu-
tions in ORP, broker recommendations are limited to asset allocation and fund selection. This
fact allows us to abstract from potentially valuable advice that brokers may provide with respect
to taxes, insurance, or savings rates.
                                                      The availability of HIGH until October 2007 allows us to study the demand for brokers
within a defined contribution retirement plan. When we focus on demographic characteristics,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  See Chalmers, Johnson, and Reuter (2014) for a description of Oregon’s Public Employees Retirement System.
6
  As we show in Table 1, between October 1996 and October 2006, 82.5% of ORP participants choose to invest
through either HIGH or LOW. We lack account-level data for participants who chose to invest through SMALL and
SMALLER because these providers were dropped from ORP on November 2007, which predates our data collection
efforts.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
we find that demand for HIGH is negatively correlated with age, salary, and educational attain-
ment. Demand for HIGH is also significantly lower among participants working in an econom-
ics department or business school. These patterns reinforce our prior that ORP participants are
more likely to seek broker recommendations when they have lower levels of financial literacy or
less investment experience. To provide more direct evidence on the demand for broker recom-
mendations, we administered an online survey to current ORP participants, asking them to
weight the factors that led them to choose their initial ORP provider. We find strong evidence
that demand for HIGH is driven by demand for face-to-face help with asset allocation decisions.
While these findings increase our confidence that client portfolios reflect the recommendations
of their brokers, they simultaneously highlight the need to identify the portfolios that clients
would have held in the absence of broker recommendations.
                                                      The fact that participants joining ORP after October 2007 did not have the option to in-
vest through HIGH allows us to study the extent to which different default investment options
are substitutes for brokers. Using account-level data from HIGH, LOW, and NEW, we identify
participants who, after six months, continue to allocate 100% of their retirement contribution to
their default investment option. Between January 2006 and October 2007, demand for the de-
fault option ranges from 1% for HIGH, where the default is a fixed annuity, to 22% for LOW,
where it is a money market fund. Between November 2007 and December 2009, when new par-
ticipants lack access to brokers, overall demand for default investment options increase signifi-
cantly. It remains 22% for LOW, where the default remains a money market fund, but jumps to
65% for NEW, where the default is a target-date fund (TDF). These observations are broadly
consistent with participants viewing TDFs, which relieve investors of the need to make asset al-
location for fund selection decisions, as effective substitutes for brokers. To provide more direct
evidence on substitution, we show that the model used to predict demand for HIGH in the earlier
period successfully predicts demand for TDFs in the later period.7 Among those participants
with predicted demand for brokers in the top quartile, we find that 47.5% chose to invest in a
TDF (versus 28.7% for participants with predicted demand in the bottom quartile).
                                                      Among the sample of participants for whom TDFs substitute for brokers, we are able to
estimate the causal impact of broker recommendations by comparing the actual portfolios of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
  Our approach both here and below is related to that in Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009), who combine financial
wealth, family size, and educational attainment into a financial sophistication index, and show that higher values of
this index are associated with fewer financial mistakes. The mistakes they consider are under diversification, failure
to rebalance, and the disposition effect.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
broker clients to counterfactual portfolios based on TDFs. We find that broker clients earned
significantly lower after-fee returns, lower risk-adjusted returns, and lower Sharpe ratios than
they would have earned if they had been defaulted into age-specific Fidelity TDFs.8 A signifi-
cant portion of the underperformance is due to broker fees, which average 90 basis points per
year. Point estimates suggest that broker client portfolios are slightly riskier than the counterfac-
tual TDF portfolios, but the differences are not statistically significant at conventional levels.9
                                                      Our next comparison of portfolio risk and returns is motivated by Gennaioli et al. (2015).
Their key prediction, based on the assumption that brokers reduce the disutility associated with
bearing financial risk, is that actual portfolios of broker clients will hold more equity than coun-
terfactual portfolios constructed without access to brokers. To test this prediction, we interact
the predicted probability that a participant chooses to invest through HIGH with dummy varia-
bles indicating whether the participant does or does not invest through HIGH.10 The estimated
differences in risk taking are striking. Participants who are predicted to invest through a broker
and do so hold portfolios with higher total risk (the volatility of monthly return is 1 percentage
point higher) and higher systematic risk (the CAPM beta is 0.27 higher) than participants who
are predicted to invest through a broker but do not.
                                                      Our final approach to measuring the causal effect of brokers is to compare the portfolios
of participant joining before and after HIGH is removed from the set of available providers. This
allows us to compare the full sample of participants with high predicted demand for broker rec-
ommendations, and not just the 47.5% who choose to invest in TDFs. We find little evidence
that participants are harmed by the lack of access to these recommendations. In particular, we
find that the Sharpe ratios of the high-broker-demand portfolios are both higher and less variable
than the Sharpe ratios of participants who had access to brokers.
                                                      We conclude our analysis by studying fund selection. In the cross section, we find that
funds paying higher broker fees receive significantly higher contributions from broker clients.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
  Balduzzi and Reuter (2015) document that Fidelity had the largest share of the market for TDFs at the beginning of
our sample period. Note that the Fidelity Freedom funds that we take as our benchmark have relatively high fees
because they invest in a variety of Fidelity’s actively managed funds.
9
  When we apply the same empirical strategy to self-directed investors, we find that actual portfolio risk is signifi-
cantly lower than it would have been if self-directed investors had invested in TDFs. These differences partially
reflect the finding above that approximately 10% of LOW portfolios remain invested in the default money market
fund. Point estimates suggest that self-directed investors underperformed TDFs by economically significant mar-
gins, but the differences are not statistically significant at conventional levels.
10
   To the extent that participants who are more comfortable bearing market risk are less likely to invest through a
broker, our test will underestimate the impact of brokers on risk taking.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
This complements the finding in Christoffersen et al. (2013) that broker fees influence fund-level
flows. It also increases our confidence that HIGH investors rely on broker recommendations
when deciding how to allocate their retirement contributions across funds. When we shift our
focus from fees to lagged returns, we find evidence of return chasing by both broker clients and
self-directed investors, at least with respect to the initial set of fund choices.
                                                      Our paper contributes to the literature on financial advice in two ways. First, we show
that demand for broker recommendations within a defined contribution retirement plan is driven
by demand for advice on asset allocation and fund selection, especially by less financially expe-
rienced investors.11 Second, we provide direct evidence that TDFs are effective substitutes for
brokers. Our evidence strengthens Mitchell and Utkus’ (2012) interpretation that demand for
TDFs in 401(k) plans reflects an implicit demand for financial advice. More importantly, it al-
lows us to benchmark the portfolios of broker clients against well-identified counterfactual port-
folios based on TDFs. Doing so reveals that broker clients’ portfolios offer similar exposure to
market risk, but earn significantly lower after-fee returns and Sharpe ratios. When we compare
investors who do and do not use brokers during the first part of our sample period, we find dif-
ferences in risk taking that are broadly consistent with the prediction of Gennaioli et al. (2015).
This suggests that broker recommendations may be needed to increase risk taking by investors
operating outside of defined contribution retirement plans with well-designed defaults. Howev-
er, within defined contribution retirement plans, we find that plan participants can achieve simi-
lar exposure to market risk at lower cost through the use of TDFs.


II. Empirical Framework and Literature Review
                                                      We use a simple framework to highlight the challenges that arise when attempting to
measure the causal effect of broker recommendations on their clients’ portfolios. It also high-
lights how our paper contributes to the literature on financial advice. We begin with a stylized
model of investors who differ along two dimensions. The first dimension is whether they seek
broker recommendations on asset allocation and fund selection. The second dimension is wheth-
er they receive and follow these recommendations. There are four possible cases, illustrated in

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
  This is not surprising, since as the scope for broker recommendations within ORP is limited to asset allocation and
fund selection, but it raises the possibility that TDFs are effective substitutes for broker recommendations. Had we
been studying demand for recommendations related to taxable investment strategies or estate planning, for example,
we likely would have found positive correlations with income, age, and educational attainment, and we would have
needed a different strategy to identify investors’ counterfactual choices.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                       Figure 1: Framework for Advice

                                                              Get Advice?                                                            Get Advice?
                                                              Yes                                                                    No

               Want Advice?                                   (Y, Y)                                                                 (Y, N)
               Yes                                            Broker client’s                                                        Broker client’s
                                                              actual portfolio                                                       counterfactual portfolio

               Want Advice?                                   (N, Y)                                                                 (N, N)
               No                                             Self-directed investor fol-                                            Self-directed investor’s
                                                              lows unsolicited advice                                                actual portfolio


Figure 1. We classify investors who seek, receive, and follow recommendations as (Yes, Yes).
These investors are broker clients and their portfolios reflect the recommendations of their bro-
kers. We classify investors who seek but neither receives nor follows recommendations as (Yes,
No). The portfolios of these reluctantly self-directed investors shed light on how broker clients
would have invested in the absence of broker recommendations; the challenge is to identify these
investors in real-world data. We classify intentionally self-directed investors as (No, No). If in-
tentionally self-directed investors have greater financial knowledge or investment experience
than investors seeking broker recommendations, the portfolios of these self-directed investors
will be poor proxies for the counterfactual portfolios of broker clients.12
                 Potential broker client i benefits from receiving and following recommendations when:
                                                                   E[Ui (Yes, Yes)] - E[Ui (Yes, No)] > 0.
This difference in expected utilities depends on the quality of the recommendations that client i
follows. Everything else equal, we expect that clients will benefit more from unbiased recom-
mendations than from biased recommendations:
                                           E[Ui (Yes, Yes(Unbiased))] - E[Ui (Yes, Yes(Biased))] > 0.
However, broker clients may rationally prefer biased recommendations to no recommendations:
                                                         E[Ui (Yes, Yes(Biased))] - E[Ui (Yes, No)] > 0.
This is because the difference in expected utilities also depends on how client i would have in-
vested in the absence of broker recommendations. The lower the expected utility associated with
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12
  Behrman, Mitchell, Soo, and Bravo (2010) find that financial literacy has a causal impact on wealth accumulation,
and that this impact increases with educational attainment.

                                                                                                               6
client i’s counterfactual portfolio (e.g., a money market fund), the more likely he is to benefit
even from biased recommendations. For example, investors with lower levels of financial litera-
cy may be both more likely to seek broker recommendations and more susceptible when invest-
ing on their own to the forms of strategic complexity described in Gabaix and Laibson (2006)
and Carlin (2009). In addition, the lower the expected utility associated with client i’s counter-
factual portfolio, the more biased or expensive may be the recommendation that the client re-
ceives. For example, the fees charged by brokers in Gennaioli et al.’s (2015) model are higher
when the expected benefits of broker services to their clients are larger precisely because there
are larger gains from trade.
                                                      Rather than attempt to test for differences in expected utility, empirical studies of finan-
cial advisors test for differences in portfolio characteristics correlated with expected utility. The
causal effect of broker recommendations on client portfolio characteristic Z is given by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E[Z|(Yes, Yes)] - E[Z|(Yes, No)].
We can estimate the first term using data on the returns, risk exposures, and fees of the actual
portfolios of broker clients, but the second term depends on the characteristics of the portfolios
that broker clients would have held in the absence of broker recommendations.
                                                      The existing literature focuses on the quality of broker recommendations.13 One branch
analyzes fund-level data. Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) show that broker-sold mu-
tual funds underperform direct-sold mutual funds even after adding back the 12b-1 fees used to
pay brokers. Del Guercio and Reuter (2014) rationalize this underperformance by showing that
flows into broker-sold funds chase raw rather than risk-adjusted returns. They show that the un-
derperformance of actively managed funds is limited to the broker-sold segment, where demand
for index funds is extremely low. Christoffersen et al. (2013) show that flows into broker-sold
funds are higher when funds pay higher fees to brokers. These papers reveal that broker-sold
funds are lower quality than direct-sold funds, and they imply that broker recommendations are
conflicted, but they do not shed light on how broker clients would have invested in the absence
of brokers.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
   An interesting exception is Bhattacharya et al. (2012), who use an experimental design to estimate the causal ef-
fect of offering unbiased recommendations to investors who are not actively seeking them. In our framework, this
corresponds to estimating: E[Z|(No, Yes(Unbiased))] - E[Y|(No, No)]. They find that self-directed investors who
choose to receive and follow the recommendations are able to improve their portfolios, but that demand for unsolic-
ited recommendations is low. This is consistent both with the psychology literature on unsolicited advice described
in Hung and Yoong (2013) and with their experimental evidence.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
        The other branch of the literature analyzes account-level data, often obtained from banks
located outside the United States. Hackethal, Haliassos, and Jappelli (2012) and Karabulut
(2013) use German data to show that broker clients underperform self-directed investors. These
comparisons only measure the causal effect of brokers under the strong assumption that broker
clients’ portfolios would have resembled self-directed investor portfolios in the absence of rec-
ommendations. Hackethal, Inderst, and Meyer (2012) also use portfolio-level data from a Ger-
man bank to study trades by broker clients. They find that the bank earns higher revenues from
the subset of clients who self-report placing the most trust in their brokers. Hoechle, Ruenzi,
Schaub, and Schmid (2015) compare broker-initiated trades with self-initiated trades at a Swiss
bank and find that broker-initiated trades generate higher bank profits. Foerster, Linnainmaa,
Melzer and Previtero (2014) find strong evidence that clients of financial advisors in Canada fol-
low their recommendations but little evidence that advisors offer different advice to different cli-
ents. Finally, Mullainathan, Nöth, and Schoar (2012) use an audit study methodology to measure
how recommended portfolios differ from the initial portfolios that the auditors show to brokers.
They find strong evidence that broker recommendations are biased in directions that are likely to
benefit brokers and little evidence that broker recommendations improve upon the initial portfo-
lios.
        These papers raise important questions about whether and how broker recommendations
can be improved, but they are silent on how broker clients would have invested in the absence of
these recommendations. In contrast, the evolution of the ORP investment menu allows us to ex-
ploit unique time-series variation in the access to brokers and show that TDFs are reasonable
counterfactual portfolios for those investors most likely to seek investment advice inside a de-
fined contribution retirement plan.




                                                 8
III. Who Seeks Broker Recommendations?
A. Institutional Details
                                                      In October 1996, Oregon University System (OUS) introduced a defined contribution
plan, known as the Optional Retirement Plan (ORP). The goal was to provide a portable alterna-
tive to the defined benefit plan being offered to public employees, known as the Public Employ-
ees Retirement System (PERS). OUS covers seven campuses and the Office of the Chancellor.
When ORP was introduced, existing OUS employees had to make a “one-time, irrevocable”
choice between ORP and PERS.14 New OUS faculty, administrators, and other employees had
to choose between ORP and PERS six months after they are hired, with the default option being
PERS.
                                                      We study the sample of OUS employees who actively choose ORP over PERS.15 We
begin by exploiting the fact that, unlike a typical defined contribution plan, ORP participants are
allowed to choose from among multiple investment providers. Between October 1996 and Octo-
ber 2007, ORP participants have the choice between two insurance companies (which we refer to
as HIGH and LOW) and two mutual fund families (SMALL and SMALLER). From our per-
spective, the most important distinction between the four providers is that HIGH uses—and mar-
kets itself as using—a network of brokers to provide relatively high levels of “personal face-to-
face service.” In contrast, LOW, SMALL and SMALLER are more representative of investor-
directed providers available through other defined contribution retirement plans in that they
charge lower fees but provide less personalized service.16 Because the ORP retirement contribu-
tion amount is both set by OUS and paid by OUS on behalf of the employee, the scope for bro-
kers to increase savings rates is limited.17 As a result, broker recommendations in our setting are
limited to recommendations on asset allocation and fund selection. This fact is likely to explain
why we find that demand for financial advice is negatively correlated with proxies for financial
literacy (like salary and educational attainment) while surveys and papers studying demand for
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14
   Employees who converted from PERS to the ORP in 1996 may have legacy PERS benefits in addition to any
ORP benefits that have accrued since 1996. However, due to data limitations discussed below, much of our analysis
focuses on OUS employees hired after January 1999.
15
   Chalmers, Johnson, and Reuter (2014) study the retirement timing decisions of Oregon public employees who are
covered by PERS and were never eligible for ORP. Chalmers and Reuter (2012) studies the demand by PERS retir-
ees for life annuities versus lump sums.
16
   LOW eventually begin offering investors the opportunity to meet one-on-one with representative, who would pro-
vide participants with investment guidance, but not until 2006.
17
   Using OUS data we examined the use of supplementary 403(b) retirement plans by ORP participants. We found
that approximately two percent of ORP participants who invest through HIGH open a 403(b) plan versus approxi-
mately one percent of all other ORP participants.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9
financial advice in other settings tend to find that it is positively correlated.
                                                      To identify how broker clients would have invested in the absence of broker recommen-
dations, we exploit time-series variation in the set of investment providers available to new ORP
participants. Effective November 2007, ORP drops HIGH, SMALL, and SMALLER, and adds
NEW, a well-known mutual fund family.18 The crucial change is that ORP participants who join
after October 2007 cannot choose to invest their retirement contributions through a broker.
                                                       We use administrative data from OUS to identify the provider through which each ORP
participant chooses to invest. We report these counts in Table 1.19 Between October 1996 and
October 2007, LOW is the most popular provider. It is chosen by 50.7% of the 5,807 partici-
pants who join ORP during “Regime 1.” HIGH, which offers face-to-face interactions with bro-
kers, is also quite popular, and is chosen by 31.7% of participants. During “Regime 2,” the peri-
od beginning in November 2007 and ending in December 2009, when our administrative data
end, new participants are limited to LOW or NEW. Of the 734 participants who join during Re-
gime 2, 54.8% choose LOW and 45.2% choose NEW.
                                                      The last two columns of Table 1 report the number of ORP-eligible employees who
choose the defined contribution retirement plan, ORP, over the defined benefit retirement plan,
PERS. During Regime 1, 24.3% of ORP-eligible employees choose ORP. During Regime 2, the
fraction falls to 21.0%. This decline is smaller than we expected given our prior that the lack of
access to brokers, combined with the extreme market volatility during Regime 2, would increase
the relative attractiveness of a retirement plan that manages assets on the employee’s behalf
(Brown and Weisbenner (2007)).


B. Participant Characteristics and the Choice of Investment Provider
                                                      Investors may seek broker recommendations because they lack the financial knowledge
and confidence required to allocate retirement contributions across asset classes and funds, be-
cause they derive utility from the one-on-one relationship, or both. An expanding literature links
differences in gender, age, income, ethnicity, and education to differences in financial literacy.
However, because ORP is only available to employees of the Oregon University System, our

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18
   Participants already investing through HIGH and LOW are allowed to continue doing so, while participants al-
ready investing through SMALL or SMALLER have their investments mapped into comparable funds managed by
NEW.
19
   Because OUS switched payroll systems in 1998, the contribution and salary data begin in January 1999. For those
joining ORP between October 1996 and January 1999, the ORP enrollment date is left censored at January 1999.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
sample of defined contribution plan participants is not representative of the general population.
For example, Hispanic women with PhDs may behave differently than the Hispanic women
without PhDs who have been studied in other settings. When interpreting our results, it is im-
portant to keep this caveat in mind. The other important caveat is that we are studying the subset
of employees who choose a defined contribution plan over a defined benefit plan.
                                                       Table 2 reports separate summary statistics for OUS employees who join ORP during
Regime 1 and Regime 2. The sample sizes are lower than in Table 1 because we require data on
each participant’s initial monthly salary, gender, age, job classification, and self-reported ethnici-
ty. The main comparison of interest in Table 2 is between participants who choose to invest
through HIGH during Regime 1 (column (2)) and those who choose to invest through LOW,
SMALL, or SMALLER (column (3)). This comparison allows us to determine which demo-
graphic characteristics are correlated with demand for broker recommendations within our sam-
ple of investors. Because we only possess account-level data for HIGH and LOW, column (4)
reports statistics for participants who choose LOW, allowing a direct comparison between HIGH
and LOW. We use job classification codes to identify research faculty (i.e., job classification
includes the string “Teach/Res”), participants who are employed by a business school or eco-
nomics department, and participants who are employed by another “quantitative department”
(i.e., organizational description includes a reference to business, computer sciences, engineering,
life sciences, mathematics, physical sciences, or social sciences). We only possess data on edu-
cational attainment at the time of employment for 57.6% of ORP participants, because these data
were only collected by a subset of campuses and (surprisingly) only through December 2004.
                                                       Univariate comparisons between HIGH and the other providers (or LOW) reveal interest-
ing differences. First, HIGH participants earn 14.1% lower monthly salaries than other partici-
pants who join ORP during Regime 1. Second, demand for HIGH is substantially higher in the
under-30 age group (21.2% versus 15.6%), which likely includes participants with both the long-
est investment horizons and the least investment experience. Third, demand for HIGH decreases
with educational attainment. Of those choosing HIGH, 39.7% have a Ph.D. versus 52.8% of
those choosing to invest through other providers. These three differences suggest that—even
within our relatively homogenous sample of faculty and administrators—demand for brokers
falls with income, age, and education.20 Consistent with studies that find lower levels of finan-
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20
  Income and education are well accepted proxies for financial literacy. For example, Campbell (2006) shows that
homeowners with higher income and more education are more likely to refinance their mortgage when interest rates

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11
cial literacy among females and minorities (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell (2007b) and Lusardi and
Tufano (2009)), we also find higher demand for brokers among female participants. However,
we find little evidence that demand for brokers varies with ethnicity.
                                                      Table 2 also allows us to compare the characteristics of employees who choose ORP dur-
ing each sample period. In an ideal experiment, the 4,680 participants in Regime 1 would close-
ly resemble the 614 participants in Regime 2. A comparison of columns (1) and (5), however,
reveals several differences. Participants joining during Regime 2 have higher (nominal) salaries,
are much more likely to be female, are younger, and are much less likely to be faculty members.
To control for changes in participant composition across sample periods, we include all of these
characteristics in the model that we use to predict demand for brokers. Because we lack data on
educational attainment for the participants in Regime 2, however, we cannot directly control for
any differences in education.


C. Predicting Demand for Broker Recommendations
                                                      We estimate a series of probits to identify those investor characteristics that predict de-
mand for broker recommendations. The dependent variable in Table 3 is one if participant i’s
initial ORP retirement contribution is directed to HIGH and zero otherwise. Column (1) of Table
3 reports coefficients estimated on the full sample of ORP participants described in Column (1)
of Table 2. This sample includes participants for whom we do not observe the date of the choice
(because all choices made before February 1999 are coded as January 1999), and it includes par-
ticipants for whom we do not observe educational attainment. In Columns (2) and (3) of Table
3, we restrict the sample to participants for whom we observe the actual date of the initial ORP
contribution. This restriction allows us to compare specifications that do and do not include a
separate fixed effect for the year and month of the choice. The fixed effects allow us to control
for time-varying economic conditions. In Columns (4) and (5), we further restrict our sample to
those campuses and years for which data on educational attainment are available. We report
marginal effects, along with standard errors clustered on the year and month of the choice.21
                                                      The marginal effects in Table 3 are largely consistent with the univariate comparisons.
Given the fact that one-third of ORP participants choose to invest through HIGH, they are also
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
fall. Lusardi and Tufano (2009) provide a comprehensive overview of the literature on financial literacy and retire-
ment behavior.
21
   Since choices made before February 1999 are coded as January 1999, and these choices are included in the sample
used to estimate coefficients in Column (1), in this sample, we allow for clustering in all of the early choices.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
economically significant. Increasing an employee’s monthly salary by one standard deviation
reduces demand for a broker by approximately seven percentage points. Similarly, employees
who are less than 30 years old when hired (the omitted category) are approximately seven per-
centage points more likely to invest through a broker. Participants with PhDs are approximately
11 percentage points less likely to invest through a broker, and those employed by a business
school or economics department are between 9 and 17 percentage points less likely to invest
through a broker. The one notable difference between Table 2 and Table 3 is that when we re-
strict the sample to those participants for which we observe data on educational attainment, we
find female participants are approximately 5 percentage points less likely to invest through a
broker. With respect to ethnicity, many of the estimated coefficients are positive and economi-
cally significant (relative to the omitted category “White”), but only the dummy variable indicat-
ing whether participant i reports being Asian is statistically significant. When we include fixed
effects to control for market conditions in the year and month of the choice, we find that the es-
timated coefficients on participant characteristics are quantitatively similar to those obtained in
specifications that exclude these fixed effects.
       When we turn our attention to the campus fixed effects, we find that demand for HIGH is
significantly lower at Oregon State University, the Office of the Chancellor, and one of the three
regional campuses than at University of Oregon (the omitted category). The lower demand for
brokers at Oregon State University, which houses the engineering school, is consistent with the
evidence that numeracy is an important determinant of financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell
(2007a)). Another explanation—more likely to apply to the regional campuses—is that across-
campus differences in demand for HIGH reflect variation in the quality or accessibility of the
broker(s) assigned to each campus.
       Overall, our evidence on which participants choose HIGH is consistent with the existing
literature on financial literacy. Older, more highly educated, and more highly paid employees
are more likely to be financially literate and less likely to value investment recommendations
from brokers. The lower demand for brokers by employees of business schools and economics
departments lends further support to this interpretation. In the next section, we use survey evi-
dence to shed additional light on the demand for broker recommendations. In later sections, we
use the predicted values from the probits estimated in Table 3 to predict demand for default in-
vestment options and to explain variation in portfolio risk taking and returns.



                                                   13
D. Survey Evidence on the Demand for Broker Recommendations
       OUS emailed a survey to the 3,588 current participants of the Optional Retirement Plan
in April 2012. While the survey was primarily intended to measure participant satisfaction with
existing plan design and to solicit feedback on several potential changes, we were permitted to
add several questions related to the use of brokers, financial literacy, and risk aversion. Of the
1,380 (38%) completed survey responses, 980 are from ORP participants who chose either
HIGH (313) or one of the other providers (667) during Regime 1. The survey responses for the-
se investors provide us with another opportunity to determine why some investors choose to in-
vest through a broker and others do not. The limitation is that we are using investors’ attitudes
and traits measured in April 2012 to assess choices made as far back as October 1996.
       Table 4 Panel A reinforces the idea that investors choose HIGH when they lack the con-
fidence to invest on their own. Investors who originally chose HIGH are significantly more like-
ly to have “an ongoing relationship with a financial advisor” (58.7% versus 32.7%; p-value of
0.000), and significantly less likely to agree or strongly agree with the statement “I would feel
comfortable making changes to my equity and bond balance without consulting my advisor”
(24.7% versus 39.8%; p-value of 0.000). Moreover, when asked how they primarily decided on
the fraction of their portfolio to invest in equity, those choosing HIGH were significantly more
likely to select the “recommendation of an advisor” (74.3% versus 45.1%; p-value of 0.000).
       Panel B reveals that 85.0% of the investors who still invest through HIGH meet with their
broker at least once a year. It also reveals that those still investing through HIGH are more likely
to implement advice quickly (43.4% versus 27.1%) and less likely to ignore advice (8.2% versus
15.2%) than other investors. Interestingly, only 23.1% of HIGH investors agree or strongly
agree with the statement “I understand how much money my advisor earns on my account.”
Panel C reinforces the idea that investors invest through brokers because they value their invest-
ment advice. It also reveals that HIGH investors seek “peace of mind” from an advisor that they
can trust, lending support to a key assumption in Gennaioli et al. (2015).
       Panel D describes the weights that ORP participants place on four provider characteris-
tics: “Access to face-to-face meetings with a financial advisor,” “The number of equity fund
choices available,” “The level of fund expenses,” and “Historical investment performance.”
Consistent with earlier answers, we find that investors who chose HIGH are significantly more
likely to rank access to face-to-face meetings as important or very important (69.9% versus
38.2%; p-value of 0.000). The fact that HIGH provides access to both broker recommendations

                                                  14
and a larger menu of investment options raises the possibility that demand for HIGH is also driv-
en by demand for the larger menu. For example, in October 1996, HIGH offers access to 40 dif-
ferent investments—four times the number of investments available through LOW. (We sum-
marize the investment options available through HIGH and LOW in the Appendix.) We find that
slightly fewer HIGH investors rate “The number of equity fund choices available” as important
or very important (57.4% versus 55.7%; p-value of 0.653), but the difference is neither economi-
cally large nor statistically significant. The fact that HIGH investors claim to place slightly less
weight on historical fund returns when choosing between providers (80.8% versus 87.2%; p-
value of 0.011) is interesting in light of our findings in section V.B. that HIGH investors appear
more likely to chase lagged returns when initially choosing which funds to invest in.
       Finally, Panel E reveals only modest differences in financial literacy and risk aversion.
To measure financial literacy we include three questions that Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) creat-
ed for the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), on compounding, inflation, and the risk associ-
ated with investing in a single stock versus a stock mutual fund, plus an additional question on
compounding. For each participant, we calculate the fraction of correct answers. While Lusardi
and Mitchell find that only one-third of respondents were able to correctly answer all three of
their questions, the fraction is significantly higher among our sample of younger, more highly
educated investors. Specifically, 90.0% of HIGH investors answered all four questions correctly
versus 92.8% of LOW investors. While the 2.8% difference is statistically significant at the 10-
percent level (p-value of 0.061), it is not economically large. In other words, to the extent that
demand for investment recommendations is driven by variation in financial literacy, that varia-
tion is not well captured by answers to standard financial literacy questions. Finally, to measure
risk aversion, we include a question from “HRS 2006 – Module 2” that asks individuals to
choose between “Job 1” (which guarantees them their current total lifetime income) and “Job 2”
(which is equally likely to cause their total lifetime income to go up by x% or to go down by
y%). Our finding that HIGH investors are less likely to prefer “Job 2” across all three scenarios
suggests that they are more risk averse, on average, but none of the differences are statistically
significant at conventional levels.


IV. Default Investments as Substitutes for Broker Recommendations?
       The fact that demand for HIGH is driven by demand for recommendations on asset allo-
cation and fund selection begs the question how would broker clients invest without their bro-

                                                  15
kers’ recommendations? We are able to answer this question in our setting, by exploiting OUS’s
decision to drop HIGH from the set of investment providers available to new participants in No-
vember 2007. We hypothesize that removing access to brokers recommendations from ORP will
increase demand for default investment options by those investors who would have otherwise
chosen to invest through HIGH. Because TDFs reduce their exposure to equity as the target re-
tirement date draws near, they offer participants the opportunity to invest in a single fund that
bundles asset allocation with portfolio management. Therefore, we further hypothesize that the
substitution of default investment options for broker recommendations will be strongest when the
default is a TDF.
       OUS provided us with account-level data from HIGH, LOW, and NEW. A key feature of
the account-level data is that they allow us to identify those participants who allocate 100% of
their retirement contributions to their provider’s default investment option. To allow for the pos-
sibility that it takes investors several months to actively choose their investments, for both HIGH
and LOW, we focus on participant i’s contribution five months after his initial contribution. For
NEW, which only provides us with data on quarterly account balances, we focus on participant
i’s holdings in his second quarterly statement.
       Table 5 summarizes demand for default investment options during Regime 1, when
HIGH and LOW are available to new members, and Regime 2, when only LOW and NEW are
available. Note that the default investment option differs across the three providers. For HIGH,
it is a fixed annuity; for LOW, it is a money market fund; and for NEW, it is a TDF with the tar-
get retirement date chosen based on the participant’s age. Panel A focuses on the full sample of
ORP participants, and Panel B focuses on the sample of participants for which we possess the
administrative data required to estimate the model in Column (2) of Table 3 (regardless of
whether the participant joined ORP during Regime 1 or Regime 2). The fraction of participants
who demand the default option varies across the two samples of participants, but only slightly.
       Table 5 reveals several interesting patterns. First, the fraction of participants that remain
invested in the default increases sharply after HIGH is dropped from the set of providers, from
less than 10% in Regime 1 to more than 40% in Regime 2. When we only focus on those partic-
ipants joining during the end of Regime 1 (January 2006 through October 2007), demand for the
default is higher but still well under 20%. Second, during Regime 1, the fraction of broker cli-
ents that remain invested in the default option is less than 3%. Third, approximately 65% of the
participants who choose to invest through NEW remain invested in the TDF. The strong demand

                                                  16
for TDFs in Regime 2 is consistent with our hypothesis that TDFs are de facto substitutes for
broker recommendations. Finally, demand for LOW’s default investment option approximately
doubles between Regime 1 and Regime 2. This difference raises the possibility that some of the
participants who previously would have chosen to invest through HIGH choose LOW but lack
the confidence to allocate their retirement contributions to non-default investment options. Or,
because Regime 2 includes the onset of the financial crisis, the increased demand for LOW’s
money market fund could reflect a conscious response to declining equity market values. In con-
trast to either possibility, however, we find that demand for the default option in LOW is almost
exactly the same during the end of Regime 1 as it is during Regime 2 (21.9% versus 21.7%).
                                                      Table 6 provides direct evidence on the extent to which default investments are substi-
tutes for broker recommendations. In the spirit of Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009), we use
the estimated coefficients in Column (2) of Table 3 to predict demand for brokers and then re-
gress demand for the default investment option on the predicted demand.22 We include a sepa-
rate fixed effect for the year and month of the choice, to control for average changes in the de-
mand for defaults based on changes in market conditions, and we cluster standard errors on this
date. We find that demand for the default during Regime 1 is unrelated to predicted demand for
brokers. This likely reflects the fact that investors who are the least confident picking their own
funds self-select into HIGH, where brokers then actively recommend other investments. On the
other hand, during Regime 2, when brokers are no longer available, we find that demand for de-
faults is strongly related to predicted demand for brokers.
                                                      Pooling participants who choose LOW or NEW, we find that investors whose predicted
values are in the top quartile are 19.2 percentage points more likely to demand the default in-
vestment option than investors whose predicted values are in the bottom quartile, a difference
that is statistically significant at the 1-percent level. However, because this specification treats
demand for LOW’s default money market fund the same as demand for NEW’s default TDF, it
masks significant differences across the two providers. When we limit our sample to participants
who choose to invest through NEW, we find an even stronger positive relation between demand
for the default and predicted demand for brokers. The coefficient on Pr(HIGH) increases from
0.536 to 0.764. Demand for TDFs by investors in the top quartile of predicted demand for bro-
kers is 27.5 percentage points higher than by investors in the bottom quartile, and the difference
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22
 Findings are similar when we use predicted values from Column (1), which allows us to include participants for
whom the date of the choice is not observed, but prevents us from include a fixed effect for the date of the choice.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
remains statistically significant at the 1-percent level. Mitchell and Utkus (2012) study fund se-
lection in a large number of 401(k) plans that do not offer access to brokers and conclude that
demand for TDFs reflects an underlying demand for investment advice. Our finding strengthens
their conclusion. More importantly, to the extent that potential broker clients invest 100% of
their retirement contributions in TDFs when brokers are not available, we are able to measure the
causal impact of broker recommendations by comparing broker clients’ portfolios to counterfac-
tual portfolios based on TDFs.
       When we limit the sample to participants who choose to invest through LOW, we do not
find that predicted demand for brokers predicts demand for the default money market fund. This
finding is also important, because it argues against the possibility that some participants respond-
ed to the lack of broker recommendations by investing in money market funds—the types of
counterfactual portfolios that Gennaioli et al. (2015) show can be dominated by broker recom-
mendations to invest in high-fee equity funds.


V. Causal Effect of Broker Recommendations on Broker Client Portfolios
A. Testing for Differences in Risk and Return
       To measure the causal impact of broker recommendations on their client portfolios we
require data on both the actual and counterfactual portfolios of ORP participants who choose to
invest through HIGH. To test the risk-taking hypothesis of Gennaioli et al. (2015), we require
data on the actual portfolios of ORP participants who choose to invest through LOW.
       We combine the participant-level administrative data from OUS with two types of partic-
ipant-level data from HIGH and LOW. First, we observe how each participant’s monthly ORP
contribution is allocated across the available investment options. The monthly contribution data
from HIGH begin in October 1996, when ORP is introduced, and ends in December 2009.
However, the monthly contribution data from LOW does not begin until December 1997. Since
we infer enrollment dates from the date of the first monthly retirement contribution, enrollment
dates for ORP participants investing through LOW are left censored at December 1997. There-
fore, we limit any test that depends on date on the choice, such as tests for return chasing in the
initial choice of investments, to the period January 1998 through December 2009. Second, we
observe how much each participant has invested in each investment option. The account balance
data from HIGH is monthly; it begins in October 1996 and ends in December 2009. However,
the account balance data from LOW is annual; it begins in December 1998 and ends in Decem-

                                                 18
ber 2009. The lack of monthly account balance data from LOW limits several of our tests. Most
notably, it leads us to focus on differences in annual after-fee returns. Note that NEW only pro-
vided us with data on quarterly portfolio holdings, beginning in December 2007 and ending in
December 2009.
                                                       To calculate the actual annual after-fee return of participant i in year t, we combine data
on participant i’s dollar holdings of each investment option at the beginning of year t with data
on the after-fee returns earned by each investment option during year t. Our sample of annual
returns begins with 1999 (because account balance data from LOW begin in December 1998)
and ends with 2009. To calculate participant i’s exposure to a risk factor in year t, we weight the
estimated factor loading of investment j at the beginning of year t by the fraction of her portfolio
allocated to investment j at the beginning of year t. For investment j in year t, we estimate factor
loadings using the prior 24 monthly returns. We consider a one-factor model based on CAPM
and a six-factor model that extends the Carhart (1997) model by adding the excess return on the
MSCI Barra EAFE index, to capture exposure to international equity, and the excess return on
the Barclay U.S. Aggregate Bond index, to capture exposure to fixed income. To calculate risk-
adjusted returns for participant i in year t, we subtract the expected return on each factor, ob-
tained by multiplying each portfolio’s estimated factor loading at the beginning of year t by the
return of the factor during year t. To calculate the volatility of monthly returns, we use account
balances at the beginning of year t and monthly investment returns to calculate changes in
monthly account balances during year t.
                                                       To determine participant i's counterfactual allocation to TDFs, we assume that her target
retirement date is the year in which she turns 65. Because Fidelity had the largest market share
among TDF providers at the beginning of our sample period (Balduzzi and Reuter (2015)), we
restrict the counterfactual investment options to Fidelity Freedom funds. When the target retire-
ment year is less than or equal to 2010, we allocate 100% of her portfolio to the Fidelity Free-
dom 2010 fund. When the target retirement year is greater than or equal to 2040, we allocate
100% of her portfolio to the Fidelity Freedom 2040 fund. For target retirement years between
2011 and 2039, we pick the single TDF with the closest target retirement date.23 We then use
monthly fund-level data from Fidelity to calculate annual risk-adjusted returns and the volatility
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
  In earlier drafts, we assigned portfolio assets to the Fidelity Freedom fund(s) with the target retirement date(s)
closest to the participant's target retirement date. For example, when the target retirement date was 2029, we allo-
cated 10% of the portfolio to the Fidelity Freedom 2020 fund and 90% to the Fidelity Freedom 2030 fund. Our find-
ings were quantitatively similar.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19
of monthly returns. Because allocations to TDFs are determined entirely by investor age, varia-
tion in counterfactual portfolios across HIGH (and LOW) investors is driven by variation in the
distribution of investor ages.
                                                       Table 7 compares actual investor portfolios to counterfactual portfolios based on TDFs.
Panel A reveals that broker clients earned annual after-fee returns during our sample period that
were 2.98% lower than they would have earned investing in TDFs (1.85% versus 4.83%). Ap-
proximately one-third of this difference can be explained by the fact that TDFs are less expen-
sive than brokers. Broker clients in ORP pay average annual broker fees of 0.90% on top of the
management and administrative fees and charged by the underlying investments.24 Broker cli-
ents’ portfolios also exhibit more risk taking than the counterfactual portfolios, with larger dif-
ferences when we focus on the volatility of monthly returns (3.81% versus 3.38%) than when we
focus on CAPM beta (0.852 versus 0.796). The size of these differences varies over time, help-
ing to explain the difference in returns. Specifically, the counterfactual portfolios benefit from
fact that TDFs offered investors lower exposure to market risk during the start of our sample pe-
riod and higher exposure to market risk during the end. As a result, the average annual after-fee
return earned by TDFs exceeded the average annual after-fee return earned by actual broker cli-
ent portfolios in nine of the eleven years. Expressed as a fraction of investor-year observations,
TDFs outperform actual broker client portfolios 71.0% of the time. These comparisons imply
that brokers significantly increased annual fees, significantly decreased annual after-fee returns,
and slightly increased portfolio risk taking relative to the counterfactual portfolios.
                                                       Panel B reveals that self-directed investor earn lower annual after-fee returns than TDFs,
but the level of underperformance is 1.65% per year instead of 2.98% per year. Expressed as a
fraction of investor-year observations, TDFs outperform self-directed investors 61.1% of the
time. However, self-directed investors also bear less risk. The average CAPM beta of their ac-
tual portfolios is 0.601 (versus 0.817 for TDFs) and the average volatility of monthly returns is
2.56% (versus 3.50%). Some of the lower average risk taking is due to the fact that approxi-
mately 10% of self-directed investors remain invested in the money market fund, which is the
default investment option.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24
  The fees that we label as broker fees are technically “mortality and risk expense charges.” According to the SEC
webpage describing variable annuities: “Profit from the mortality and expense risk charge is sometimes used to pay
the insurer's costs of selling the variable annuity, such as a commission paid to your financial professional for selling
the variable annuity to you” (http://www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/varannty.htm). To better isolate variation in com-
missions, our preferred specifications in section V.C. focus on variation in these fees across funds with the same
investment objective.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                      It follows from the comparisons above that broker clients underperform self-directed in-
vestors by 1.28% per year. This is partially due to the average annual fees of 0.90% that broker
clients pay to their brokers. However, the average difference masks significant time-series varia-
tion in relative performance. HIGH investors earn significantly higher average after-fee returns
when U.S. equity markets post strong positive returns (1999, 2003, and 2009) and significantly
lower annual after-fee returns when U.S. equity markets post strong negative returns (2000,
2001, 2002, and 2008). These patterns reinforce the conclusion that broker clients bear signifi-
cantly more risk than self-directed investors. One interpretation is that brokers recommend
greater-than-optimal levels of risk, perhaps because more volatile returns make it harder for their
clients to detect underperformance. In terms of the average level of systematic risk, however,
broker client portfolios resemble TDF portfolios.
                                                      Another interpretation, in the spirit of Gennaioli et al. (2015), is that self-directed inves-
tors hold lower-than-optimal levels of risk. We explore this possibility in Table 8. In Panel A,
we test for differences in the characteristics of actual and counterfactual portfolios. The set of
characteristics is expanded to include six-factor alphas and Sharpe ratios. The odd-numbered
columns are limited to the sample of broker clients and the even-numbered columns are limited
to the sample of self-directed investors. In each case, we regress the characteristic of participant
i’s actual portfolio minus the characteristic of his counterfactual portfolio on a constant, which
captures the average difference. To allow for correlations both in participant i’s annual portfolio
returns across years and in annual portfolio returns across participants in year t, we cluster stand-
ard errors on both participant i and calendar year t. The patterns are broadly consistent with the
patterns in Table 7. Namely, broker clients earn lower annual after-free returns (-3.21%; statisti-
cally significant at the 1-percent level), lower annual risk-adjusted, after-fee returns (-2.11%; 5-
percent level), and lower Sharpe ratios (-0.1433; 5-percent level).25 But, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the actual and counterfactual portfolios have the same levels of systematic and
total risk. This leads us to conclude that TDFs are just as effective as brokers in helping inves-
tors increase portfolio risk.
                                                      In Panel B, we use a different empirical strategy to estimate the causal impact of broker
recommendations. The odd-numbered columns test for differences between the actual portfolios
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25
   In Panel A, the Sharpe ratio is defined as the average difference in monthly returns of the actual and counterfactu-
al portfolios, scaled by the standard deviation of the difference in monthly returns. In Panel B, the Sharpe ratio is
defined as the average monthly return of the actual portfolio minus the risk-free rate of return, scaled by the standard
deviation of the excess monthly return.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21
of broker clients to the actual portfolios of self-directed investor, including a separate fixed effect
for each calendar year. While the point estimates suggest that broker clients underperform by
economically significant amounts, none of the performance differences is statistically significant.
In contrast, the estimated differences in risk taking are economically and statistically significant.
        The even-numbered columns are more interesting because they allow us to compare the
portfolios of broker clients and self-directed investors who are both predicted to invest through
HIGH. Each regression includes the same set of explanatory variables. To measure the average
difference in risk or return between HIGH and LOW, we include a dummy variable indicating
whether participant i invests through HIGH in year t. We also include the predicted value from
the probit predicting whether participant i invests through HIGH (from column (1) of Table 3)
interacted with dummy variables indicating whether participant i invests through HIGH or LOW.
Again, the use of the predicted value is motivated by Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009); the
interaction terms allow us to determine whether investors who are predicted to rely upon a bro-
ker and do so hold systematically different portfolios relative to investors who are predicted to
rely upon a broker but do not. To control for time-series variation in aggregate market returns,
we include a separate dummy variable for each calendar year. Because the predicted value of
choosing HIGH is constant for participant i, and because participant i’s portfolio choices are
likely to be highly correlated across years, and because portfolio returns will be highly correlated
across participants investing during the same year, we again cluster standard errors on both par-
ticipant i and calendar year t.
        We find that predicted demand for brokers has opposite effects on risk taking in the two
samples of investors. In column (6), a one standard deviation increase in the probability of
choosing HIGH is predicted to increase the CAPM beta of broker clients by 0.177 but decrease
the CAPM beta of self-directed investors by 0.112—a economically and statistically significant
difference of 0.289. When we shift our focus to the volatility of monthly returns, in column (4),
the findings are qualitatively similar. Higher predicted values are associated with greater volatil-
ity when the participant invests through HIGH and lower volatility when he does not. In Appen-
dix Table A3, we restrict the sample to investors who answer the survey question about the value
they place on face-to-face meetings, scale the answer to range between 0 (“unimportant”) and 1
(“very important”), and estimate a version of Table 8 with interaction terms based on this meas-
ure instead of Pr(HIGH). We find that plan participants who answer that face-to-face advice is
more important but invest through LOW have significantly less volatile portfolio returns and

                                                   22
significantly lower CAPM betas than similar plan participants who invest through HIGH. The
differences in Table 8 and Table A3 are consistent with brokers tilting their clients toward riskier
investments to more readily mask underperformance, but also with Gennaioli et al.’s (2015) as-
sumption that brokers reduce the disutility associated with bearing financial risk. Regardless,
our findings in Panel A suggest that TDFs are a more cost-effective way to increase risk-taking
by less experienced investors.


B. Comparing Portfolios of Participants Joining Before and After Regime Change
                                                      Our empirical strategy in the previous section allows us to measure the causal effect of
broker recommendations on client portfolios for those participants for whom TDFs and brokers
are substitutes. However, even among participants with high predicted demand for broker rec-
ommendations, some choose to invest through LOW or to invest in something other than a TDF
through NEW. Arguably, some of these participants may have benefitted from access to brokers.
Therefore, our final empirical strategy for measuring the causal effect of broker recommenda-
tions is to compare the portfolios of participants with high predicted demand for brokers who
joined before and after the regime change in November 2007.
                                                      In Table 9, we limit the sample to participants who joined ORP between January 2006
and December 2008, and for whom Pr(HIGH) is in the top quartile. Panel A focuses on partici-
pants who joined during the end of Regime 1 and Panel B focuses on those who joined during
the beginning of Regime 2. We report the fraction of participants that invest through each pro-
vider, the fraction who invest 100% in the default option (calculated the same way as in Table 5),
and several portfolio-level characteristics for calendar year 2009 calculated using portfolio hold-
ings on December 31, 2008.26 We focus on the CAPM beta and Sharpe ratio of each partici-
pant's portfolio. We calculate averages and standard deviations across participants who join dur-
ing the same regime or choose the same provider during the same regime. We also calculate the
correlation between the beta in each participant's portfolio and his or her age in December 2008.
To the extent that allocations to equity decline with age (as it does in a TDF), we expect the cor-
relation to be negative.
                                                      During Regime 1, 39.5% of the participants with high predicted demand for brokers
choose to invest through a broker, 17.5% (29.0% of 60.5%) choose to invest 100% in LOW’s
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26
  Our decision to compare portfolio characteristics in 2009 is driven by the very small number of new participants
through December 2007 (see Table 1) and the lack of comprehensive return data for HIGH’s menu in 2010.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23
money market fund, and the remaining 43.0% choose to allocate their contributions across other
funds on LOW’s investment menu. During Regime 2, 42.6% (57.4% of 74.3%) of the partici-
pants with high predicted demand for brokers choose to invest 100% in a TDF, 9.8% (23.1% of
42.6%) choose to invest 100% in LOW’s money market fund, and the remaining 52.5% choose
to allocate their contributions across other funds on NEW’s or LOW’s investment menus. The
first thing to notice about these patterns is that observed demand for brokers within this sample
of participants is similar to observed demand for TDFs (39.5% versus 42.6%). The second thing
to notice is that demand for the money market fund declines in Regime 2. Given that those join-
ing during Regime 2 lack of access to broker recommendations, we had expected to find higher
demand for the money market fund among investors with Pr(HIGH) in the top quartile of the
sample in Regime 2.
                                                      When we compare the characteristics of participant portfolios in 2009, we find no evi-
dence that investors with high predicted demand for broker recommendations are worse off in
Regime 2. For those joining during Regime 2, CAPM betas are significantly higher (0.76 versus
0.59; difference significant at the 1-percent level), Sharpe ratios are significantly higher (0.40
versus 0.30; difference significant at the 5-percent level), and the correlation between CAPM
betas and participant ages is more negative (-0.30 versus -0.09). Finally, while the across-
participant standard deviations of CAPM beta are similar, the standard deviations of Sharpe rati-
os are significantly lower in Regime 2 (0.06 versus 0.38).27 In our setting, where advice is lim-
ited to asset allocation and fund selection and participants have access to TDFs, we conclude that
conflicted advice is dominated by no advice.


C. Comparing the Investment Selection of HIGH and LOW Investors
                                                      To implement an asset allocation plan, an investor must allocate her monthly retirement
contributions across an appropriate set of funds. In Table 10, we explore the impact of brokers
on fund selection. We test two hypotheses. The first concerns the agency conflict that can arise
when financially unsophisticated (or trusting) investors seek investment recommendations from
financially sophisticated intermediaries. To test for conflicted advice, we exploit across-fund
variation in broker fees in the HIGH investment menu and test whether HIGH clients are more

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27
   When we re-calculate statistics for portfolios during Regime 2 excluding participants that invest in TDFs, we find
the mean CAPM beta is 0.61, the standard deviation of the CAPM beta is 0.36, the mean Sharpe ratio is 0.38, the
standard deviation of the Sharpe ratio is 0.07, and the correlation between CAPM betas and participant ages is -0.38.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   24
likely to allocate their retirement dollars to investments paying higher broker fees. Here, our re-
search question most closely matches that of Christoffersen et al. (2013), who find that cross-
sectional variation in the level of broker fees helps to explain cross-sectional variation in mutual
fund flows, and Hackethal, Inderst, and Meyer (2012), who find that broker recommendations
respond to sales incentives.
                                                       The second hypothesis concerns return chasing. Within the full universe of mutual funds,
there is strong evidence that the relation between flows and performance is convex, with the best
performing mutual funds receiving a disproportionate share of the dollars.28 At the same time,
because studies like Carhart (1997) find little evidence that abnormal returns persist, investors
should not make long-term asset allocation decisions on recent fund-level returns. Therefore, we
test whether return-chasing behavior differs between broker clients and self-directed investors.
To the extent that brokers discourage return chasing, we expect to find less evidence of return
chasing by broker clients. The implicit assumption underlying this comparison is that broker cli-
ents would have been at least as likely to engage in return chasing without a broker. An alterna-
tive test is whether broker clients’ exhibit any return chasing at all since there can be no return
chasing in a portfolio that allocates 100% to a single TDF.
                                                       The dependent variable in Table 10 is the fraction of participant i’s retirement contribu-
tion that is allocated to fund j in month t. Because this variable is nonnegative, estimation is via
Tobit.29 The sample consists of all ORP participants for whom the enrollment date is uncen-
sored, and all of the funds available to HIGH or LOW investors in month t. To focus attention
on active fund choices, we exclude those participants who invest solely in the default option.
There are three independent variables of interest. To test for conflicted advice, we include the fee
that fund j pays each year to the broker. For HIGH investments, the broker fee is a constant 55,
85 or 105 basis points; for LOW investments, it is zero. To test whether investors are sensitive
to the level of fund fees more broadly, we include the annual fees charged by the fund that are
not paid to the broker (i.e., the total annual fee minus the broker fee). Interacting the “Not Bro-
ker Fee” with dummy variables indicating whether the fund is available to HIGH or LOW inves-
tors allows us to test whether brokers steer investors away from fees from which the brokers do
not benefit. To test for return chasing, we include the net return on fund j over the prior twelve
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28
   See, for example, Ippolito (1992), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998), and Del Guercio and
Tkac (2002).
29
   As can be seen in the Appendix, our findings are similar when we predict which funds receive positive allocations
using probit regressions (Table A4) and linear probability models (Table A5).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
months interacted with dummy variables that indicate whether participant i invests through
HIGH or LOW.
         One set of specifications focus on initial fund choices (month 1) and another set focus on
choices two years later (month 24). All of our specifications control for the fund’s broad asset
category, turnover, and whether it is an index fund. Because we are testing for differential sensi-
tivities to lagged returns and fees across ORP providers, in columns (1) and (4), we include a
separate fixed effect for each provider each month, so that we are comparing fund returns and
fees within each menu relative to the other funds within the same menu. In the other columns,
we include a separate fixed effect for each provider-asset category-month combination, so that
we are comparing fund returns and fees within a given menu and category. When we focus on
narrow categories instead of broad categories (e.g., small-cap value funds instead of domestic
equity funds), we limit the sample to HIGH equity funds. Standard errors are clustered on date.
         We find strong evidence of conflicted investment recommendations. The coefficients on
the level of broker fees are positive and statistically significant in all six columns, and the magni-
tudes are economically significant. Increasing broker fees by 50 basis points (i.e., the difference
between the lowest and highest broker fee) is predicted to increase the allocation to investment j
by as much as 35.3 percentage points. The fact that broker fees continue to explain HIGH in-
vestment choices in month 24 reflects the fact that broker fees paid by investment j do not vary
in the time-series. Interestingly, we also find robust evidence that HIGH investors invest less in
funds that have high fees that are not retained by the broker. This suggests that brokers steer in-
vestors away from high-fee funds when those fees do not benefit the brokers.
         The evidence on return chasing is mixed. HIGH investors consider recent returns when
selecting funds in month 1, but not in month 24. Therefore, to the extent that brokers help inves-
tors chase past returns, they only do so when initially selecting funds. However, the effects in
month 1 are economically significant. A one-standard deviation increase in recent returns is pre-
dicted to increase the allocation to investment j by 10.6 percentage points. Whether we find that
LOW investors consider recent returns depends on the specification. The baseline specifications
suggest no return chasing in month 1 but modest return chasing in month 24. The specifications
that include provider-broad asset class-month fixed effects suggest strong return chasing in
months 1 and 24. The caveat is that because the LOW menu tends to offer a single fund within
each broad asset class, the estimated coefficient is driven by allocations among the three equity
funds.

                                                  26
IV. Conclusion
       While there is growing evidence that broker recommendations are conflicted, the net
benefit of broker recommendations depends on the quality of the recommendations and the
quality of the client’s counterfactual portfolio. We use unique investor-level data from the Ore-
gon University System to estimate the causal impact of brokers on their clients’ retirement port-
folios. We have four main findings.
       First, we document significant differences between those investors who choose to invest
through brokers and those who do not. Employees choosing to invest through a broker are
younger, less highly educated, and less highly paid. They are also more likely to state that they
chose HIGH to meet face-to-face with a broker, and that they relied upon their broker’s recom-
mendations when deciding how to invest. These differences beg the question of how broker cli-
ents would have invested in the absence of broker recommendations. For example, the fact that
many retirement plans historically tended not to offer one-on-one advice may help to explain
why Tang, Mitchell, Mottola and Utkus (2010) find that 401(k) plan participants presented with
well-designed investment menus still tend to hold inefficient retirement portfolios.
       Second, we use time-series variation in access to brokers to identify the counterfactual
portfolios of would-be broker clients. We show that demand for default investment options more
than quadruples after HIGH is dropped from the set of providers. More importantly, we show
that the model used to predict demand for brokers when HIGH is a choice successfully predicts
demand for Fidelity’s TDF default investment option when HIGH is not a choice. Mitchell and
Utkus (2012) find that TDFs are popular with younger, lower income investors, and argue that
this popularity follows from the fact that TDFs offer both portfolio management and asset alloca-
tion. In our setting, where investment recommendations are limited to asset allocation and fund
selection, we document that TDFs are de facto substitutes for broker recommendations.
       Third, when we benchmark broker client portfolios against counterfactual portfolios
based on TDFs, we find that broker recommendations lead to higher annual fees (due in part to
average annual broker fees of 0.90%), lower risk-adjusted returns, and lower Sharpe ratios, but
similar levels of exposure to market risk. In other words, within the context of a retirement plan
that offers a default investment option, choosing a reasonable TDFs as the default can decrease
annual fees without decreasing risk taking. Interestingly, when we compare participants with
high predicted demand for HIGH who join at the end of Regime 1 (39.5% of whom choose to

                                                 27
invest through HIGH) versus the beginning of Regime 2 (42.6% of whom choose to invest in
TDFs), we find additional evidence that participant portfolios constructed during Regime 2 earn
higher risk-adjusted returns. On the other hand, when we compare the outcomes of investors
with high predicted demand for broker recommendations during Regime 1 (before TDFs are
available), we find that broker clients have much higher levels of exposure to market risk. These
findings, which are consistent with Gennaioli et al. (2015), highlight the possibility that brokers
may add more value in settings that lack a sensible default option.
       Finally, our account-level finding that brokers are significantly more likely to place their
clients in funds that pays larger broker fees complements the fund-level evidence of conflicted
advice in Christoffersen, et al. (2013). The observed tilt toward funds paying higher broker fees
contributes to the underperformance of broker clients’ portfolios.
       Although our estimates come from a single DC retirement plan, in this study we are able
to uniquely identify the impact of brokers relative to an implementable counterfactual. This al-
lows us to directly address the self-selection by investors to be broker advised versus self-
directed. In other words, we are able to overcome a problem that has plagued inferences of cau-
sality in the literature that asks: what is the value of advice? This is a crucial economic issue be-
cause DC retirement plans place important investment decisions in the hands of individuals,
many of whom possess limited financial knowledge (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell (2006)). Choi,
Laibson and Madrian (2004) demonstrate that automatic enrollment had a huge impact on 401(k)
participation rates thus improving savings rates. We demonstrate that a well-chosen default in-
vestment option dominates access to broker recommendations and provides improved risk taking
in retirement portfolios. To the extent that investors derive utility from face-to-face meetings
with brokers that they do not derive from TDFs, this utility needs to be weighed against the high-
er fees and increased likelihood of conflicted advice. At the same time, our paper highlights the
challenges that researchers face when attempting to measure the value of financial advice in oth-
er settings, where we lack the exogenous variation needed to identify counterfactual behavior.




                                                  28
Appendix A. Financial Advice versus Financial Guidance
                                                      The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) prohibits defined contribution
pension plan providers from giving their own financial advice on the investment options within
their plans.30 To comply with ERISA, HIGH uses algorithms developed by Ibbotson Associates
to generate financial advice for investors with managed accounts. However, OUS prohibits
HIGH from directly managing the “participant-directed” accounts of ORP investors. Because of
this restriction, it is more accurate to say that HIGH provides ORP participants with face-to-face
access to financial guidance.
                                                      Within an investment menu of modest size (like that available through HIGH), the dis-
tinction between financial guidance and financial advice is small. ERISA defines financial ad-
vice narrowly, as a recommendation that is immediately actionable. Under this definition, the
recommendation to “invest 100% of your retirement assets in Vanguard’s S&P 500 index fund”
is financial advice. In contrast, the recommendation to “invest 100% of your retirement assets in
a low-cost S&P 500 index fund” is financial guidance because the recommendation is personal-
ized but not immediately actionable. This remains true even if the investment menu offers a sin-
gle S&P 500 index fund. Therefore, while brokers employed by HIGH are prohibited from of-
fering financial advice, they are allowed to offer financial guidance (and education)—a distinc-
tion that is likely lost on those seeking relationships with brokers.31




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30
   DOL Advisory Opinion 2001-09A, also known as the The SunAmerica Opinion Letter, permits defined contribu-
tion retirement plan providers to offer financial advice only when they outsource asset allocation and investment
selection decisions to independent, third party providers.
31
   A recommendations that is neither personalized nor actionable, such as “academics recommend investing in low-
cost, diversified mutual funds”, is classified as financial education.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   29
Appendix B. Overview of the HIGH and LOW Investment Menus
       ORP participants face different investment menus when they invest through HIGH,
LOW, and NEW. In Table A1, we report the number of investment options in each asset class at
the beginning and end of our sample period. We also report the number of investment options
that are actively managed versus passively managed, the number of investment options that are
advised by the provider versus outside asset management firms (e.g., HIGH provides access to
the HIGH Small-Cap Value Fund and the SIT Mid-Cap Growth Fund), and the default invest-
ment option, which varies in the cross section but not in the time series.
       During Regime 1, HIGH offers four-times as many investment options as LOW in Octo-
ber 1996 (40 versus 10). Even after LOW increases its investment menu in July 2007, HIGH
still offers more than three-times as many investment options (61 versus 19). While HIGH’s in-
vestment menu grows significantly over our sample period, access to investments advised by
other firms declines significantly. For example, HIGH introduces its own Mid-Cap Growth
Fund in September 1998 and drops the SIT Mid-Cap Growth Fund in May 2006. Perhaps more
significantly, HIGH’s investment menu is skewed toward domestic equity, offering investments
with narrow investment mandates (such as Small-Cap Value or Mid-Cap Growth). This may
explain why 15% of the survey respondents who choose to invest through HIGH report never
meeting with their broker—they choose HIGH for access to equity funds rather than for access to
broker recommendations. During Regime 2, NEW offers both a larger menu than LOW (38 op-
tions versus 19 options) and relatively more domestic equity funds (16 versus 9).




                                                  30
References

Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar, 2013, “Understanding the Incentives of
      Commissions Motivated Agents: Theory and Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance
      Market,” Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, and Jonathan Reuter, 2015, “Heterogeneity in Target-Date Funds: Optimal
      Risk Taking or Risk Matching?” NBER Working Paper 17886.

Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects of
       Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Business 78, 2095−2120.

Bernheim, Douglas, Daniel Garrett, and Dean Maki, 2001, “Education and saving: The long-
      term effects of high school financial curriculum mandates,” Journal of Public Economics
      80, 435−465.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Andreas Hackethal, Simon Kaesler, Benjamin Loos, and Steffen Meyer,
       2012, “Is Unbiased Financial Advice to Retail Investors Sufficient? Answers from a
       Large Field Study,” Review of Financial Studies 25, 975–1032.

Bergstresser, Daniel, Chalmers, John, Tufano, Peter, 2009, “Assessing the Costs and Benefits of
       Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 4129–4156.

Behrman, Jere, Olivia Mitchell, Cindy Soo, and David Bravo, 2010, “Financial Literacy, School-
      ing, and Wealth Accumulation,” Pension Research Council Working Paper 2010-24.

Brown, Jeffrey, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, “Who Chooses Defined Contribution Plans?”
      NBER Working Paper 12842.

Calcagno, Riccardo and Chiara Monticone, 2014, “Financial literacy and the demand for finan-
      cial advice,” forthcoming Journal of Banking and Finance.

Calvet, Laurent, John Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009, “Measuring the Financial Sophistica-
       tion of Households,” American Economic Review 99, 393–398.

Campbell, John, 2006, Household Finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553−1604.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52, 57–
       82.

Carlin, Bruce, 2009, “Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets,” Journal of Finan-
        cial Economics 91, 278–287.

Chalmers, John, Woodrow Johnson, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, “The Effect of Pension Design
      on Employer Costs and Employee Retirement Choices: Evidence from Oregon,” Journal
      of Public Economics 116, 17−34



                                                31
Chalmers, John, and Jonathan Reuter, 2012, “How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence
      from Public Employees,” Review of Financial Studies 25(8), 2601−2634

Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn Ellison, 1997, “Risk-Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
       Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, 2004, Plan design and 401(k) Savings Out-
       comes, National Tax Journal, 57, 2, 275-298.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, 2011, $100 Bills on the sidewalk: subopti-
       mal investment in 401(K) plans, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 3, 748-763.

Christoffersen, Susan, Richard Evans, and David Musto, 2013, “What Do Consumers’ Fund
       Flows Maximize? Evidence from Their Brokers’ Incentives,” Journal of Finance 68,
       201–235.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula Tkac, 2002, “The Determinants of the Flow of Funds of Managed
      Portfolios: Mutual Funds versus Pension Funds,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
      Analysis 37, 523-557.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, “Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to
      Generate Alpha,” Journal of Finance 69, 1673–1704.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey Busse, 2004, “Are Investors Rational? Choices
       Among Index Funds,” Journal of Finance 59, 261–288.

Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
      Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Finke, Michael, 2013, “Financial Advice: Does it make a difference?,” 229-248, in The Market
       of Retirement Advice, edited by, Olivia S. Mitchell and Kent Smetters, Oxford University
       Press, 2013.

Foerster, Stephen, Juhani Linnainmaa, Brian Melzer, Alessandro Previtero, 2014, “Retail Finan-
       cial Advice: Does One Size Fit All?”, NBER Working Paper 20712.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2006, “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Infor-
      mation Suppression in Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 505–
      540.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2015, “Money Doctors,” Journal of Fi-
      nance 70, 91–114.

Georgarakos, Dimitris, and Roman Inderst, 2011, “Financial Advice and Stock Market Participa-
      tion,” ECB Working Paper 1296.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, “Another Puzzle: The Growth in Actively Managed Mutual Funds,”
       Journal of Finance 51, 783–810.


                                               32
Hackethal, Andreas, Michael Haliassos, Tullio Jappelli, 2012, “Financial Advisors: A Case of
      Babysitters?,” Journal of Banking and Finance 36, 509-524.

Hackethal, Andreas, Roman Inderst, and Steffen Meyer, 2012, “Trading on Advice,” working
      paper.

Hoechle, Daniel, Stefan Ruenzi, Nic Schaub, Markus Schmid, 2015, “Financial Advice and Bank
      Profits,” working paper.

Hung, Angela A. and Joanne K. Yoong, 2013, “Asking for Help: Survey and Experimental Evi-
      dence on Financial Advice and Behavior Change,” 189-212, in The Market of Retirement
      Advice, edited by, Olivia S. Mitchell and Kent Smetters, Oxford University Press, 2013.

Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani, 2012, “Financial Advice,” Journal of Economic Literature,
        50, 2, 494-512.

Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, “Consumer Reaction to Measures of Poor Quality: Evidence from the
        Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45–70.

Karabulut, Yigitcan, 2013, “Financial Advice: An Improvement for Worse?” working paper.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2006, “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications
       for Retirement Wellbeing,” Working Paper.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2007a, “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Role of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
       nomics 54, 205−224.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell, 2007b, “Financial Literacy and Retirement Prepared-
       ness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education Programs,” Working Paper.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano, 2009, “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and Over-
       indebtedness,” NBER Working Paper 14808.

Madrian, Brigitte, and David Shea, 2001, The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participa-
      tion and Savings Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149−1187.

Mitchell, Olivia, and Stephen Utkus, 2012, “Target-Date Funds in 401(k) Retirement Plans,”
       NBER Working Paper 17911.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Nöth, and Antoinette Schoar, 2012, “The Market for Financial
       Advice: An Audit Study,” NBER Working Paper 17929.

Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006, “Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising and Bias in
       the Financial Media,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 197–227.

Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Finance
        53, 1589–1622.


                                               33
Tang, Ning, Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, 2010, “The efficiency of
      sponsor and participant portfolio choices in 401(k) plans,” Journal of Public Economics,
      94, 1073-1085.

Von Gaudecker, Hans-Martin, 2015, “How Does Household Portfolio Diversification Vary with
      Financial Literacy and Financial Advice?” Journal of Finance 70, 489–505.




                                               34
Table 1. Number of New ORP Participants by Provider, October 1996 - December 2009


                    Observe
                    Date of
Date Range          Choice?          HIGH           LOW           SMALL         SMALLER          NEW              ORP         PERS

Regime 1. HIGH is available to new ORP participants

 10/96 - 01/99         No               603             699            274            66                          1,642       2,996
 02/99 - 12/99         Yes              141             169             55            24                            389       1,864
 01/00 - 12/00         Yes              153             192             57            25                            427       2,004
 01/01 - 12/01         Yes              108             204             52            15                            379       1,869
 01/02 - 12/02         Yes               91             229             56            14                            390       1,915
 01/03 - 12/03         Yes              133             275             28            31                            467       1,663
 01/04 - 12/04         Yes              130             244             45            18                            437       1,517
 01/05 - 12/05         Yes              197             294             46            37                            574       1,557
 01/06 - 12/06         Yes              148             285             53            30                            516       1,476
 01/07 - 10/07         Yes              139             355             57            35                            586       1,222
 TOTAL                                1,843           2,946            723           295                          5,807      18,083

Regime 2. HIGH is not available to new ORP participants
 11/07 - 12/07         Yes                               11                                         15               26          189
 01/08 - 12/08         Yes                              182                                        169              351        1,304
 01/09 - 12/09         Yes                              209                                        148              357        1,261
 TOTAL                                                  402                                        332              734        2,754


Note:    We use Oregon University System payroll data to identify the investment provider for each new Optional Retirement Plan
         (ORP) participant. The unit of observation is participant i in the first month that she contributes to her ORP account. Between
         October 1996 and October 2007, participants have the choice of four providers: SMALL, SMALLER, LOW, and HIGH. Only
         HIGH markets itself as providing personal face-to-face recommendations. Because OUS payroll data begin in January 1999,
         initial contribution dates before February 1999 are left censored at January 1999. Between November 2007 and December 2009
         (the end of our sample period), new ORP participants are limited to investing through LOW or NEW. The last two columns of
         the table report the number of OUS employees who self-select into ORP versus PERS, the defined benefit retirement plan.
Table 2. Participant Summary Statistics


Date Range:                                                                   Regime 1                                          Regime 2
ORP Participants who choose:                   Any Provider           HIGH           Not HIGH               LOW                Any Provider
                                                   (1)                 (2)              (3)                  (4)                   (5)
Sample Size                                             4,680             1,544              3,136              2,314                    614

Monthly Salary (mean)                                 $4,291             $3,844             $4,511             $4,666                 $5,235
Monthly Salary (median)                               $3,729             $3,399             $3,883             $3,992                 $4,064

Female                                                 48.6%              50.1%              47.8%             45.9%                  56.4%
     Age < 30                                          17.5%              21.2%              15.6%             13.3%                  22.5%
30 <= Age < 40                                         38.9%              36.1%              40.3%             42.0%                  42.3%
40 <= Age < 50                                         28.2%              27.3%              28.7%             29.2%                  17.8%
50 <= Age                                              15.4%              15.4%              15.4%             15.6%                  17.4%
Faculty Member                                         53.3%              50.8%              54.5%             55.7%                  45.0%
Business or Economics Department                        3.5%               1.7%               4.4%              4.5%                   5.0%
Other Quantitative Department                          18.9%              19.0%              18.8%             17.8%                  13.0%
Asian                                                   7.6%               7.3%               7.8%              7.6%                   9.0%
Black                                                   2.6%               2.9%               2.4%              2.7%                   2.8%
Hispanic                                                3.4%               3.4%               3.4%              3.7%                   3.1%
White                                                  84.6%              83.9%              84.9%             84.4%                  83.6%
Other                                                   1.8%               2.5%               1.5%              1.6%                   1.6%

PhD                                                    48.5%              39.7%              52.8%             57.8%
Masters                                                29.5%              32.2%              28.2%             26.7%
Bachelors                                              21.7%              28.1%              19.0%             15.5%
                                                        2,697               892               1,805             1,286
% missing data                                         42.4%              42.2%              42.4%             44.4%                 100.0%


Note:         This table describes the sample of ORP participants for whom we observe salary, gender, age, job status, and self-reported
              ethnicity. We report statistics for: (1) the full sample of participants joining ORP during Regime 1; (2) the sample that chooses
              HIGH during Regime 1; (3) the sample that chooses LOW, SMALL, or SMALLER during Regime 1; (4) the sample that
              chooses LOW during Regime 1; and (5) the full sample of participants joining ORP during Regime 2. Regime 1 begins in
              October 1996 and ends in October 2007. Regime 2 begins in November 2007 and ends in December 2009. Administrative
              data on the date of the choice between plans is left censored at January 1999. Job status and educational attainment are
              measured in the month that the participant begins working for OUS. Age and salary are measured in the month that the plan is
              chosen or in January 1999 (whichever is later). Faculty Member indicates whether participant i's job classification includes the
              string "Teach/Res". Business or Economics Department indicates whether participant i works in a business school or
              economics department. Other Quantitative Department indicates whether participant i's organizational description includes a
              reference to computer science, engineering, life science, mathematic, medicine, physical science, or a social science other than
              economics. We are missing data on educational attainment for 41.9% of the participants joining during Regime 1 and 100% of
              the participants joining during Regime 2 because these data were only collected by a subset of campuses and only through
              December 2004.
Table 3. Demand for HIGH by new ORP participants, October 1996 - October 2007


Dependent:                                           1 if new ORP participant chooses HIGH; 0 otherwise
Date Range:                     10/96 - 10/07      2/99 - 10/07       2/99 - 10/07       2/99 - 12/04       2/99 - 12/04
                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)
Salary                            -0.0273    ***     -0.0286    ***     -0.0270    ***    -0.0213     ***     -0.0192    ***
                                  (0.0030)           (0.0044)           (0.0046)          (0.0066)            (0.0072)
Female                            -0.0178            -0.0165            -0.0169           -0.0466     *       -0.0485    *
                                  (0.0127)           (0.0179)           (0.0177)          (0.0242)            (0.0259)
Age [30, 40)                      -0.0573    ***     -0.0664    ***     -0.0778    ***    -0.0407             -0.0629    *
                                  (0.0194)           (0.0213)           (0.0217)          (0.0311)            (0.0331)
Age [40, 50)                      -0.0265            -0.0651    ***     -0.0852    ***    -0.0488             -0.0855    **
                                  (0.0292)           (0.0216)           (0.0216)          (0.0383)            (0.0381)
Age [50, 100]                     -0.0059            -0.0908    ***     -0.0984    ***    -0.0906     **      -0.1191    ***
                                  (0.0567)           (0.0236)           (0.0255)          (0.0399)            (0.0402)
Asian                              0.0105             0.0514    **       0.0513    *       0.0686     **       0.0732    *
                                  (0.0376)           (0.0265)           (0.0277)          (0.0356)            (0.0404)
Black                              0.0435             0.0600             0.0774            0.0731              0.0985
                                  (0.0457)           (0.0552)           (0.0591)          (0.0859)            (0.0914)
Hispanic                           0.0039             0.0190             0.0299            0.0420              0.0491
                                  (0.0344)           (0.0414)           (0.0429)          (0.0607)            (0.0640)
Other Ethnicity                    0.0908    **       0.0725             0.0876           -0.0012              0.0316
                                  (0.0479)           (0.0612)           (0.0632)          (0.0873)            (0.1025)
Faculty                           -0.0207            -0.0279    *       -0.0311           -0.0239             -0.0428
                                  (0.0131)           (0.0160)           (0.0198)          (0.0260)            (0.0285)
Business & Economics              -0.1386    ***     -0.0948    *       -0.0903    *      -0.1678     **      -0.1666    **
                                  (0.0403)           (0.0468)           (0.0493)          (0.0548)            (0.0539)
Other Quantitative                 0.0166             0.0022             0.0011           -0.0362             -0.0302
                                  (0.0169)           (0.0201)           (0.0215)          (0.0296)            (0.0302)
PhD                                                                                       -0.1060     ***     -0.1098    ***
                                                                                          (0.0310)            (0.0359)
Masters                                                                                   -0.0309             -0.0306
                                                                                          (0.0279)            (0.0298)
Campus: Oregon State              -0.1263 ***        -0.1306    ***     -0.1395    ***    -0.2064 ***         -0.2192 ***
                                  (0.0167)           (0.0230)           (0.0245)          (0.0290)            (0.0320)
Campus: Portland State             0.0147             0.0319             0.0242           -0.0016             -0.0055
                                  (0.0217)           (0.0255)           (0.0251)          (0.0347)            (0.0338)
Campus: Oregon Inst. of            0.0713            -0.0554            -0.0576            0.0313              0.0435
 Technology                       (0.0868)           (0.0454)           (0.0462)          (0.0536)            (0.0520)
Campus: Eastern Oregon            -0.0218            -0.0571            -0.0598
                                  (0.0490)           (0.0515)           (0.0502)
Campus: Southern Oregon           -0.1252 ***        -0.1445    ***     -0.1542    ***
                                  (0.0293)           (0.0323)           (0.0321)
Campus: Western Oregon            -0.0252            -0.0965    *       -0.1087    **
                                  (0.0568)           (0.0452)           (0.0438)
Office of the Chancellor          -0.1645 ***        -0.2021    ***     -0.2228    ***
                                  (0.0440)           (0.0431)           (0.0365)
Date of choice fixed effects?          ---                ---               Yes                 ---               Yes
N                                   4,680              3,302              3,302              1,554              1,554
Pseudo-R2                          0.0385             0.0482             0.0859             0.0729             0.1221
Note:   In this table, we predict demand for brokers by new ORP participants. The dependent variable equals one if participant i chooses
        HIGH and zero if she chooses SMALL, SMALLER, or LOW. The sample in column (1) includes all ORP participants joining
        between October 1996 (when ORP is created) and October 2007 (when HIGH is no longer available to new ORP participants).
        Because choices made between October 1996 and January 1999 are recorded as January 1999, the sample period in other columns
        begins in February 1999. Because data on participant i's educational attainment were only collected through December 2004 and
        only by Oregon Institute of Technology, Oregon State, Portland State, and University of Oregon, the sample period in columns (4)
        and (5) end in December 2004, and the sample is limited to participants hired by these campuses. Demographic controls include
        salary, gender, age, self-declared ethnicity (the omitted category is "White"), and educational attainment (the omitted category is
        "Bachelors"). We also control for whether the participant is faculty or staff, and for whether we classify the department as
        business and economics, quantitative but not business or economics, and all of the rest. To control for economic conditions in the
        month of the choice, columns (3) and (5) include a separate fixed effect for each year-month. To control for potential differences
        in preferences across employers, we include a separate fixed effect for each campus, and for the Office of the Chancellor. The
        table reports marginal effects estimated via probit. Standard errors are clustered on the date of the choice. Statistical significance
        at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table 4. Evidence on the demand for HIGH during Regime 1 from a survey of current ORP participants


Panel A. Testing for differences in reliance upon financial advisors when deciding on asset allocation

                                                               "I would feel comfortable
                                                              making changes to my equity
                Do you have an ongoing relationship            and bond balance without
                     with a financial advisor?                  consulting my advisor"                    How did you primarily decide on the fraction to invest in stocks?
                                                                                 Agree or                             My own research                            Recommendation
                                                                                 Strongly                             and knowledge       Recommendation of friends, family,
                       N                   Yes                   N                Agree                   N              of investing         of advisor           or co-workers
     HIGH             259                 58.7%                 146                 24.7%                 214                21.5%              74.3%                 4.2%
     Other            599                 36.6%                 211                 39.8%                 497                45.3%              45.1%                 9.7%
 Difference                               22.1%                                    -15.2%                                    -23.8%             29.2%                 -5.5%
    P-value                               0.000                                     0.003                                     0.000             0.000                 0.013

Panel B. Information on how often participants meet with HIGH, speed with which they implement advice, and how well they understand broker compensation

                   How Often Do You Meet With                         When you receive investment advice,                                     "I understand how much money
                       Your HIGH advisor?                             do you usually implement the advice:                                    my advisor earns on my account"
                                                                                      LOW                HIGH
               Never                      15.0%          "Within two weeks"         27.1%                43.4%                            Strongly Agree              8.0%
               Once a year                55.9%          "Within two months"        34.7%                30.9%                            Agree                      15.1%
               Twice a year               21.6%          "Within the year"          23.0%                17.6%                            Disagree                   50.9%
               More than twice             7.5%          "Never"                    15.2%                 8.2%                            Strongly Disagree          25.9%
               N                           213           N                           553                  233                             N                            212

Panel C. Information on the services that investors receive from meeting with HIGH brokers

               "My advisor's expertise in deciding             "The most important factor                 "Meeting face to face with
                how much of my investments to put               in choosing my advisor is                 my advisor gives me peace             "My advisor calms me down
                in the stock market is very valuable"             that I trust him or her"               of mind in my investments"              when the market is volatile"
               Strongly Agree             25.2%          Strongly Agree             29.3%          Strongly Agree            32.9%        Strongly Agree             14.0%
               Agree                      51.0%          Agree                      47.3%          Agree                     44.0%        Agree                      41.1%
               Disagree                   18.5%          Disagree                   17.1%          Disagree                  18.4%        Disagree                   37.2%
               Strongly Disagree           5.3%          Strongly Disagree           6.3%          Strongly Disagree          4.8%        Strongly Disagree           7.7%
               N                           206           N                           205           N                          207         N                            207
Panel D. Testing for differences in factors that influenced choice of ORP investment provider

                                                  When choosing between ORP investment providers assess the importance of the following factor:
                   Access to face to face meetings            The number of equity fund
                      with a financial advisor                     choices available                 The level of fund expenses             Historical investment performance
                                         Important                               Important                              Important                                  Important
                                          or Very                                 or Very                                 or Very                                   or Very
                      N                  Important              N                Important              N               Important                 N                Important

     HIGH             296                  69.9%                  291              57.4%                  295                 72.5%                 297                 80.8%
     Other            642                  38.2%                  641              60.4%                  644                 74.8%                 648                 87.2%

 Difference                                31.8%                                    -3.0%                                     -2.3%                                     -6.4%
    P-value                                0.000                                    0.390                                     0.456                                     0.011

Panel E. Testing for differences in risk aversion and financial literacy

                         Financial Literacy                                              Choice between jobs with certain versus uncertain income
                                       Fraction of                                Fraction                                 Fraction                                   Fraction
                                     Four Financial                              Who Prefer                               Who Prefer                                 Who Prefer
                                         Literacy                                  Job 2                                     Job 2                                     Job 2
                                        Questions                               50% up 20%                               50% up 20%                                 50% up 20%
                       N                 Correct                   N           50% down 15%              N              50% down 10%              N                50% down 5%

     HIGH             240                  90.0%                  164              17.7%                  162                 45.1%                 176                 77.3%
     Other            538                  92.8%                  384              20.3%                  367                 51.2%                 416                 82.9%

 Difference                                -2.8%                                    -2.6%                                     -6.1%                                     -5.7%
    P-value                                0.061                                    0.476                                     0.192                                     0.110


Notes          OUS sent a link to an online survey to all 3,588 current ORP participants in April 2012. In this table, we analyze the responses of the 980 participants who chose
               HIGH (313) or one of the other three providers (667) between October 1996 and October 2007. The survey response rates are similar for the two groups: 17.0%
               (313/1843) for HIGH and 16.8% (667/3964) for the other three providers. The fact that the survey did not require completion of all questions explains the variation
               in sample size from question to question. For each question, we analyze all non-missing answers. P-values are estimated using standard errors that are robust to
               heteroscedasticity.
Table 5. Demand for Default Investment Option, by Provider and Regime


Sample period:                                         Regime 1                         End of Regime 1                      Regime 2
                                                            Invest 100%                          Invest 100%                      Invest 100%
Provider           Default                           N       in Default?                N         in Default?              N       in Default?
Panel A. Sample of new participants for which we observe portfolio holdings in month 6

   HIGH            Fixed annuity                    1,492            2.9%                237            1.7%
   LOW             Money market fund                2,341            9.5%                554           17.7%                256            21.5%
   NEW             Target-date fund                                                                                         272            64.0%
                                                    3,833            6.9%                791           12.9%                528            43.4%

Panel B. Subsample of new participants for which we can also estimate Pr(HIGH)
   HIGH            Fixed annuity                      862            2.0%                172            1.2%
   LOW             Money market fund                1,465           12.6%                384           21.9%                240            21.7%
   NEW             Target-date fund                                                                                         256            65.2%
                                                    2,327            8.7%                556           15.5%                496            44.2%


Note:   In this table, we report the fraction of new ORP participants that invest 100% of their ORP contribution in the default investment option 5
        months after their first ORP contribution. Because we lack portfolio-level data from SMALL and SMALLER, Panel A is restricted to
        participants that originally chose to invest through HIGH, LOW, or NEW. Panel B is restricted to those new ORP participants for which
        the date of the choice is not censored at January 1999 and for whom we possess the demographic data required to estimate Pr(HIGH) in
        column (2) of Table 3. In each panel, we distinguish between Regime 1 (which includes all participants joining before November 2007),
        end of Regime 1 (which includes only those joining between January 2006 and October 2007), and Regime 2 (which includes all
        participants joining after October 2007).
Table 6. Using Predicted Demand for Brokers to Predict Demand for Default Investment Options


Dependent:                                                                    1 if new participant contributes 100% to default investment option in month 6
Sample Period:                                       Regime 1                                                                       Regime 2
ORP Providers:                                     HIGH or LOW                             LOW or NEW                              NEW only                                  LOW only
                                                 (1)          (2)                       (3)              (4)                   (5)             (6)                     (7)              (8)

Pr(HIGH)                                    -0.0140                                 0.5362 ***                              0.7644 ***                             0.0871
                                            (0.0516)                               (0.1537)                                (0.2314)                               (0.2687)
Pr(HIGH) in top quartile?                                     0.0182                                 0.1207 *                               0.1687 *                               -0.0532
                                                             (0.0142)                               (0.0598)                               (0.0869)                                (0.0966)
Pr(HIGH) in bottom quartile?                                  0.0085                                -0.0711                                -0.1065 *                               -0.0780
                                                             (0.0123)                               (0.0414)                               (0.0583)                                (0.0681)
Constant                                     0.0912 ***       0.0799 ***            0.2871 ***       0.4379 ***             0.4289 ***      0.6459 ***             0.1920 **        0.2466 ***
                                            (0.0162)         (0.0056)              (0.0443)         (0.0194)               (0.0676)        (0.0293)               (0.0762)         (0.0270)
P-value from test that coefficient
   on Pr(HIGH) equals one                    0.0000 ***                             0.0066 ***                             0.3201                                  0.0030 ***
P-value from test that coefficients are
   equal for top and bottom quartile                          0.5285                                 0.0048 ***                             0.0083 ***                              0.8161
Date of choice fixed effects?                    Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes                    Yes              Yes
N                                              2,327            2,327                   496              496                   256              256                   240              240
R2                                            0.0705           0.0712                0.0746           0.0773                0.1429           0.1501                0.0813           0.0876


Note:      In this table, we predict whether new ORP participant i is contributing 100% of her retirement contributions to the provider j's default investment option five months after her first
           contribution to provider j. Estimation is via OLS. We estimate separate specifications for participants who have access to HIGH (i.e., participants whose first contribution is
           before November 2007) and participants who do not have access to HIGH (i.e., participants whose first contribution is after October 2007). The independent variable of interest
           is the predicted probability that participant i chooses HIGH based on the estimated coefficients in Column (2) of Table 3. Because Column (2) of Table 3 is restricted to
           participants for whom we observe the date of the choice, we are able to include a separate fixed effect for the year-month of the choice. The last two columns are restricted to the
           subset of new participants who choose to invest through NEW, which offers target-date funds as its default investment option. Standard errors are clustered on the date of the
           choice. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table 7. Comparing Actual Portfolios to Counterfactual Portfolios Based on Target-Date Funds, 1999-2009


Panel A. HIGH
                                              Actual                                            Target-Date Fund Benchmark
                                   Volatility of                                                 Volatility of
                       Annual       Monthly                                           Annual       Monthly
                       Return        Return      CAPM Beta Broker Fee                 Return        Return     CAPM Beta Broker Fee

        1999            29.36%         3.94%           0.795        0.93%              24.53%         3.14%          0.695         0.00%
        2000           -13.60%         5.98%           0.854        0.93%              -2.87%         4.07%          0.758         0.00%
        2001           -18.76%         7.00%           1.118        0.93%              -9.32%         4.46%          0.723         0.00%
        2002           -18.11%         4.56%           1.035        0.93%             -14.17%         3.97%          0.690         0.00%
        2003            23.32%         2.69%           0.753        0.92%              25.51%         2.37%          0.673         0.00%
        2004             8.92%         2.18%           0.808        0.91%               9.80%         2.01%          0.837         0.00%
        2005             4.52%         2.06%           0.857        0.91%               8.09%         2.04%          0.788         0.00%
        2006            10.08%         1.61%           0.788        0.91%              12.23%         1.87%          0.942         0.00%
        2007             4.79%         2.30%           0.811        0.85%               8.87%         2.40%          0.834         0.00%
        2008           -31.98%         5.72%           0.792        0.85%             -34.86%         5.94%          0.904         0.00%
        2009            25.66%         5.14%           0.814        0.86%              29.78%         5.30%          0.819         0.00%

  1999-2009              1.85%         3.81%           0.852        0.90%               4.83%         3.38%          0.796         0.00%

Panel B. LOW
                                              Actual                                            Target-Date Fund Benchmark
                                   Volatility of                                                 Volatility of
                       Annual       Monthly                                           Annual       Monthly
                       Return        Return      CAPM Beta Broker Fee                 Return        Return     CAPM Beta Broker Fee

        1999            19.88%         2.88%           0.704        0.00%              25.17%         3.20%          0.709         0.00%
        2000            -7.81%         4.19%           0.683        0.00%              -3.15%         4.14%          0.772         0.00%
        2001           -10.68%         4.70%           0.728        0.00%              -9.46%         4.50%          0.730         0.00%
        2002           -14.39%         3.73%           0.731        0.00%             -14.49%         4.04%          0.702         0.00%
        2003            20.02%         1.97%           0.584        0.00%              25.88%         2.40%          0.685         0.00%
        2004             8.68%         1.52%           0.567        0.00%               9.83%         2.02%          0.843         0.00%
        2005             6.22%         1.50%           0.610        0.00%               8.14%         2.05%          0.793         0.00%
        2006            10.93%         1.26%           0.558        0.00%              12.20%         1.87%          0.940         0.00%
        2007             8.22%         1.60%           0.618        0.00%               8.86%         2.40%          0.831         0.00%
        2008           -22.13%         3.72%           0.539        0.00%             -34.90%         5.95%          0.905         0.00%
        2009            15.39%         3.21%           0.534        0.00%              29.80%         5.32%          0.822         0.00%

  1999-2009              3.21%         2.56%           0.600        0.00%               4.86%         3.50%          0.818         0.00%


Note:          In this table, we summarize the actual and counterfactual portfolios of participants who join during Regime 1 and choose to
               invest through HIGH or LOW. The sample includes all participants for whom we observe positive holdings of at least one
               fund at the beginning of year t, and for whom we observe a birth year and month. "Annual return" is the average annual
               buy-and-hold return that participant i would have earned in year t if she neither changed her holdings during year t nor
               made any additional retirement contributions to ORP. For the actual portfolios, this measure is equally highly correlated
               with realized portfolio returns of broker clients and self-directed investors. To determine a participant's counterfactual
               allocation, we assume that her target retirement date is the year in which she turns 65, and then pick the Fidelity TDF with
               the closest target retirement date (2010, 2020, 2030, or 2040). "CAPM Beta" is the weighted-average CAPM beta of the
               funds held at the beginning of year t. Fund-level betas are estimated using fund-level returns over the prior 12 months.
               "Volatility of Monthly Returns" is the standard deviation of realized monthly returns during calendar year t, calculated from
               monthly portfolio-level returns. "Broker fee" is the average broker fee paid by broker clients in year t. It is zero for LOW
               and for the counterfactual portfolios based on TDFs.
Table 8. Testing for Differences in Risk and Return, HIGH versus LOW versus Target-Date Funds, 1999-2009

Dependent:                       Annual Portfolio Return          Volatility of Monthly Returns                  CAPM Beta                   6-Factor Annual Alpha                    Sharpe Ratio
                                   (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)               (7)            (8)                  (9)           (10)

Panel A. Comparing Actual Portfolios to Counterfactual Portfolios Based on Target-Date Funds

HIGH                           -0.0321 ***                          0.0037                              0.0532                            -0.0211 **                          -0.1433 **
                               (0.0110)                            (0.0027)                            (0.0552)                           (0.0104)                            (0.0572)
LOW                                            -0.0165                             -0.0093 ***                         -0.2164 ***                        -0.0071                             -0.1138
                                               (0.0288)                            (0.0029)                            (0.0420)                           (0.0062)                            (0.0877)

Year fixed effects?                  ---             ---                 ---             ---                 ---              ---                ---            ---                 ---             ---

N                                5,846          15,203               5,846          15,203               5,001          15,202               4,212          15,144               5,846          15,203
R2                              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000

Panel B. Comparing Actual Portfolios of HIGH and LOW
HIGH?                          -0.0151         -0.0202              0.0114 ***      0.0003              0.2308 ***     -0.0577            -0.0132         -0.0132             -0.3140 *        0.0673
                               (0.0209)        (0.0137)            (0.0023)        (0.0033)            (0.0271)        (0.0669)           (0.0122)        (0.0098)            (0.1862)        (0.3543)
Pr(HIGH) * HIGH?                                0.0120                              0.0189 **                           0.4978 ***                        -0.0006                             -0.8502 *
                                               (0.0360)                            (0.0074)                            (0.1502)                           (0.0099)                            (0.5165)
Pr(HIGH) * LOW?                                -0.0026                             -0.0146 ***                         -0.3640 ***                        -0.0008                              0.2590
                                               (0.0339)                            (0.0035)                            (0.0610)                           (0.0056)                            (0.3008)

P-values from test that
  coefficients are equal
  on interaction terms                         0.8070                               0.0000 ***                         0.0000 ***                          0.9866                              0.0802 *

Year fixed effects?                 Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes

N                               21,049          21,049              21,049          21,049              20,203          20,203              19,437          19,437              21,049          21,049
R2                              0.7753          0.7753              0.4588          0.4640              0.1343          0.1465              0.1681          0.1681              0.0429          0.0430


Note:     The unit of observation is the portfolio of ORP participant i in calendar year t. The sample period is 1999-2009. Portfolio characteristics include the portfolio's annual after-fee return,
          volatility of monthly returns, lagged CAPM beta, six-factor alpha, and Sharpe ratio. Characteristics of actual portfolios are estimated from holdings on December 31 of the prior year,
          assuming no additional retirement contributions during year t. Characteristics of counterfactual portfolios are based on the Fidelity TDF to which participant i is assigned. The OLS
          regressions in Panel A separately test for differences between the actual and counterfactual portfolios of HIGH and LOW investors. The dependent variable in each regression is the
          difference between the characteristics of participant i's actual and counterfactual portfolios. The numerator of the Sharpe ratio is the difference in monthly returns and the denominator is the
          standard deviation of the difference in monthly returns. The OLS regressions in Panel B compare the portfolios of HIGH and LOW investors. The dependent variables are the characteristics
          of participant i's actual portfolio. The independent variables include a dummy variable indicating whether participant i invests through HIGH, the predicted probability that participant i
          invests through HIGH interacted with the dummy variable indicating whether participant i invests through HIGH, the predicted probability that participant i invests through HIGH interacted
          with the dummy variable indicating whether participant i invests through LOW, and a full set of calendar year fixed effects. The predicted probabilities are based on the specification in
          column (2) of Table 3. We report the p-value from the test that the coefficients on the two interaction terms are equal. To allow for correlations both in annual portfolio returns across
          participants in year t and in participant i’s annual portfolio returns across years, we cluster standard errors on calendar year t and participant i. Statistical significance at the 10-percent,
          5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table 9. Comparing Portfolios Characteristics of High-Broker-Demand Participants Joining ORP Around Regime Change


                                            Market       Invest 100%         CAPM Beta (2009)              Sharpe Ratio (2009)         Correlation
Provider       Default                      Share         in Default?        Mean      Std Dev             Mean        Std Dev         (Beta, Age)
Panel A. Participants Joining ORP Between January 2006 and October 2007

  HIGH         Fixed annuity                 39.5%            2.2%             0.83          0.36            0.17          0.63            -0.17
  LOW          Money market fund             60.5%           29.0%             0.48          0.33            0.36          0.13            -0.07
                                                             18.4%             0.59          0.37            0.30          0.38            -0.09
Panel B. Participants Joining ORP Between November 2007 and December 2008
  NEW          Target-date fund              57.4%           74.3%             0.95          0.14            0.43          0.04            -0.40
  LOW          Money market fund             42.6%           23.1%             0.52          0.36            0.36          0.06            -0.29
                                                             52.5%             0.76          0.34            0.40          0.06            -0.30
Change between NEW and HIGH                                72.1% ***         0.12 *                          0.26 **
Change between Regime 2 and Regime 1                       34.0% ***         0.18 ***                        0.09 **


Note:   The sample is restricted to participants who joined ORP between January 2006 and December 2008, and for whom the predicted probability
        of using HIGH is in the top quartile. Panel A focuses on participants who joined during the end of Regime 1 (between January 2006 and
        October 2007), whereas Panel B focuses on participants who joined during the beginning of Regime 2 (November 2007 through December
        2008). We calculate the market share of HIGH versus LOW or NEW versus LOW, the fraction of participants that invest 100% in the
        default investment option (following the same approach as Table 5), the average CAPM beta based on portfolio holdings at the end of 2008,
        the standard deviation of CAPM betas across participants, the average Sharpe ratio earned by participants during 2009, the standard
        deviation of Sharpe ratios across participants, and the correlation between CAPM beta and participant age. The sample used to calculate
        the average Sharpe ratio excludes five portfolios that allocate more than 50% to fixed annuities (which have positive excess returns and
        standard deviations very close to zero). This includes one participant who invests through HIGH and four participants who invest through
        LOW. In each panel, we report changes in fractions and means. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in
        two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table 10. Allocation of Retirement Contributions Across Available Funds

Dependent:                                                                      Fraction of Retirement Contributions Allocated to Fund j
Sample Period:                                                Month 1 (1st ORP Contribution)                                          Month 24
Sample of Funds:                                          All               All          HIGH Equity                  All                All                    HIGH Equity
                                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                     (4)                (5)                       (6)

Lagged Return * HIGH                                   0.461 ***           0.530 ***            0.463 ***                -0.057              -0.053 ***           -0.062 ***
                                                      (0.042)             (0.053)              (0.000)                   (0.071)             (0.000)              (0.000)
Not Broker Fee * HIGH                                -23.985 ***         -24.584 ***          -31.426 ***               -19.865 ***         -22.993 ***          -26.462 ***
                                                      (1.087)             (1.316)              (0.064)                   (1.648)             (0.063)              (0.057)
Broker Fee                                            41.645 ***          46.152 ***           70.595 ***                39.173 ***          44.572 ***           65.175 ***
                                                      (3.105)             (3.141)              (0.043)                   (4.396)             (0.048)              (0.048)
Lagged Return * LOW                                    0.112               1.139 ***                                      0.320 ***           1.270 ***
                                                      (0.069)             (0.348)                                        (0.114)             (0.000)
Not Broker Fee * LOW                                 -38.388 **          152.369 **                                     -45.005 ***         -21.857 ***
                                                     (15.491)            (61.608)                                       (10.046)             (0.047)
Ho: Same Sensitivity to Lagged Return?                  0.000 ***           0.060 *                                        0.002 ***           0.000 ***
Ho: Same Sensitivity to Not Broker Fee?                 0.348               0.004 ***                                      0.011 **            0.000 ***

Fund-level controls?                                      Yes                 Yes                  Yes                       Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Provider-date fixed effects?                              Yes                  ---                  ---                      Yes                   ---                 ---
Provider-broad category-date fixed effects?                ---                Yes                   ---                       ---                 Yes                  ---
Provider-narrow category-date fixed effects?               ---                 ---                 Yes                        ---                  ---                Yes
N                                                      74,547              74,547              34,672                     61,574              61,574               26,704
Adj. R2                                                0.2197              0.2656              0.4075                     0.2008              0.2527               0.4046

Note:        In this table, we test whether the fraction of participant i's retirement contribution to fund j responds to the level of fund j's return over the prior 12 months,
             the level of fund j's fees that are paid to a broker, and the level of fund j's fees that are not paid to a broker. The sample is restricted to ORP participants who
             joined during Regime 1 and chose to invest through HIGH or LOW. It includes one observation for each investment option available to a HIGH or LOW
             participant in month t. We estimate one set of Tobit regressions in the first month that participant i contributes to HIGH or LOW and a comparable set of
             Tobit regressions in month 24. The independent variables of interest are the lagged after-fee return of fund j interacted with dummy variables indicating
             whether fund j is available through HIGH or LOW, the broker fee associated with fund j (which is zero for LOW), and the fund's annual fee minus the broker
             fee. (No fund is simultaneously available through both providers.) In specifications (1) and (3), we include provider-by-date fixed effects, and dummy
             variables for the broad investment category of each fund: annuity, bond, domestic equity, international equity, etc. In the other specifications, we include
             provider-by-category-by-date fixed effects. In columns (2) and (4), we consider the full set of investment options and interact the provider-by-date fixed
             effects with dummy variables for the full set of broad investment categories. In columns (3) and (6), we restrict the sample to domestic equity funds
             available through HIGH and interact the provider-by-date fixed effects with narrow (Lipper) investment category fixed effects (e.g., large-cap growth). In
             addition to controlling for fund investment objectives, returns, and fees, we control for fund j's lagged turnover and whether it is passively managed. We
             exclude participants who allocate 100% of their retirement contribution to the default investment option. All variables are scaled so that 1.000 equals
             1.000%. Standard errors are clustered on the date of participant i's contribution. We report the p-value of the hypotheses tests that the sensitivity to lagged
             return and non-broker fee are equal for HIGH and LOW. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is
             denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table A1. Overview of Actual Investment Menus

                                             HIGH                                       LOW                         NEW
                               Beginning      End           End          Beginning       End          End            All
Asset Class                    Regime 1     Regime 1      Regime 2       Regime 1      Regime 1     Regime 2       Regime 2
Money Market                        1           2            2                1           1            1               1
Fixed Annuity                       2           2            2                1           1            1               1
Fixed Income                        6           9            9                2           2            2               5
Balanced                            5          11           10                1           1            1               0
Target Date                         0           0            0                0           0            0              12
U.S. Equity                        21          31           31                2           9            9              16
Global                              5           7            7                2           3            3               3
Real Estate                         0           0            0                1           2            2               0
Passively Managed                   3           4            4                1           2            2               4
Actively Managed                   37          58           57                9          17           17              34
Managed by Provider                16          52           51              10           19           19              16
Not Managed by Provider            24          10           10               0            0            0              22
Default option                             Fixed Annuty                              Money Market                     TDF
Total Number of Options            40          62           61              10           19           19              38

Note:     This table summarizes the investment menus available through HIGH, LOW, and NEW at the beginning and end of
          Regime 1 and throughout Regime 2. HIGH makes numerous changes to its investment menu during Regime 1,
          increasing the total number of investment options, but decreasing the number of investment options managed by
          firms other than HIGH. LOW offers the same ten investment options between October 1996 and June 2007, adding
          nine new investment options in July 2007 (shortly before the end of Regime 1 in October 2007). NEW offers the
          same menu throughout Regime 2. Defaults options vary in the cross section but not the time series. The default is a
          fixed annuity for HIGH, money market fund for LOW, and a target-date fund for NEW.
Table A2. Demand for ORP versus PERS


Dependent:                                                             1 if OUS employee chooses PERS
Date Range:                            10/96 - 10/07         2/99 - 10/07        2/99 - 10/07      2/99 - 12/04               2/99 - 12/04
                                            (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)                        (5)
Salary

Female                                   0.0173                0.0009               0.0024               -0.0072              -0.0049
                                        (0.0141)              (0.0068)             (0.0068)              (0.0105)             (0.0110)
Age [30, 40)                            -0.1635     ***       -0.1250     ***      -0.1094    ***        -0.0596     ***      -0.0512    ***
                                        (0.0338)              (0.0145)             (0.0113)              (0.0186)             (0.0163)
Age [40, 50)                            -0.1505     ***       -0.0776     ***      -0.0727    ***         0.0000              -0.0013
                                        (0.0577)              (0.0137)             (0.0122)              (0.0181)             (0.0178)
Age [50, 100]                           -0.0378                0.0247     **        0.0158                0.0998     ***       0.0824    ***
                                        (0.0544)              (0.0108)             (0.0120)              (0.0172)             (0.0171)
Asian                                    0.0032               -0.0169              -0.0123                0.0155               0.0132
                                        (0.0182)              (0.0119)             (0.0108)              (0.0172)             (0.0162)
Black                                   -0.0545     **        -0.0674     ***      -0.0690    ***        -0.1020     ***      -0.1057    ***
                                        (0.0221)              (0.0220)             (0.0248)              (0.0399)             (0.0447)
Hispanic                                 0.0338     ***        0.0297     **        0.0338    **          0.0346               0.0238
                                        (0.0124)              (0.0140)             (0.0127)              (0.0229)             (0.0225)
Other Ethnicity                          0.0225                0.0124               0.0187                0.0196               0.0020
                                        (0.0185)              (0.0197)             (0.0184)              (0.0310)             (0.0318)
Faculty                                 -0.0473     **        -0.0316              -0.0323    *           0.0445     *         0.0323
                                        (0.0246)              (0.0247)             (0.0190)              (0.0243)             (0.0222)
Business & Economics                    -0.0999     ***       -0.0738     ***      -0.0630    **         -0.0633     *        -0.0522
                                        (0.0282)              (0.0304)             (0.0275)              (0.0410)             (0.0374)
Other Quantitative                      -0.0707     ***       -0.0668     ***      -0.0470    ***        -0.0243     *        -0.0186
                                        (0.0081)              (0.0101)             (0.0092)              (0.0140)             (0.0146)
PhD                                                                                                      -0.2506     ***      -0.2069    ***
                                                                                                         (0.0322)             (0.0226)
Masters                                                                                                  -0.0390     **       -0.0390    **
                                                                                                         (0.0191)             (0.0164)
Campus: Oregon State                     0.0130                0.0125               0.0246    *           0.0493 ***           0.0600 ***
                                        (0.0121)              (0.0145)             (0.0124)              (0.0193)             (0.0138)
Campus: Portland State                   0.1387     ***        0.1184     ***       0.1147    ***         0.1288 ***           0.1275 ***
                                        (0.0177)              (0.0116)             (0.0094)              (0.0168)             (0.0152)
Campus: Oregon Inst. of                 -0.0154                0.0095               0.0238                0.0401               0.0613 **
 Technology                             (0.0292)              (0.0248)             (0.0186)              (0.0338)             (0.0228)
Campus: Eastern Oregon                   0.0750     ***        0.0609     ***       0.0772    ***
                                        (0.0175)              (0.0171)             (0.0136)
Campus: Southern Oregon                  0.1573     ***        0.1280     ***       0.1318    ***
                                        (0.0247)              (0.0139)             (0.0091)
Campus: Western Oregon                   0.0691     ***        0.0669     ***       0.0806    ***
                                        (0.0140)              (0.0166)             (0.0126)
Office of the Chancellor                -0.0628     *         -0.0755     *        -0.0526
                                        (0.0370)              (0.0465)             (0.0460)
Date of choice fixed effects?                 ---                   ---                 Yes                    ---                 Yes
N                                         20,398               16,395                16,395                6,898                 6,898
Pseudo-R2                                 0.0705               0.0608                0.1762               0.0897                0.2257


Note:     The probit specifications in Table A2 mirror those in Table 3. Dependent variable equals one if OUS employee i chooses PERS
          as his retirement plan and zero if he chooses ORP. Independent variables are the same as in Table 3, except that we cannot
          include monthly salary because we only observe monthly salary for the subset of employees who choose ORP. The table reports
          marginal effects estimated via probit. Standard errors are clustered on the date of the choice. Statistical significance at the 10-
          percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table A3. Testing for Differences in Risk and Return, HIGH versus LOW versus Target-Date Funds, 1999-2009

Dependent:                       Annual Portfolio Return           Volatility of Monthly Returns                   CAPM Beta                   6-Factor Annual Alpha                    Sharpe Ratio
                                   (1)             (2)                  (3)             (4)                  (5)               (6)               (7)            (8)                  (9)           (10)

Panel A. Comparing Actual Portfolios to Counterfactual Portfolios Based on Target-Date Funds

HIGH                           -0.0294 ***                          0.0029                               0.0358                             -0.0215 **                          -0.1461 **
                               (0.0102)                            (0.0021)                             (0.0502)                            (0.0100)                            (0.0621)
LOW                                            -0.0170                              -0.0078 ***                         -0.1783 ***                         -0.0083                             -0.1265
                                               (0.0250)                             (0.0026)                            (0.0399)                            (0.0059)                            (0.0882)

Year fixed effects?                  ---             ---                  ---             ---                 ---               ---               ---             ---                 ---              ---

N                                 1,738           2,981               1,738           2,981               1,478            2,981               1,215           2,974               1,738           2,981
R2                               0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000           0.0000              0.0000          0.0000              0.0000          0.0000

Panel B. Comparing Actual Portfolios of HIGH and LOW

HIGH?                          -0.0124         -0.0123              0.0099 ***       0.0070 ***          0.1850 ***      0.1030 **          -0.0117         -0.0098             -0.2170 *       -0.3212 **
                               (0.0198)        (0.0148)            (0.0023)         (0.0026)            (0.0293)        (0.0455)            (0.0125)        (0.0119)            (0.1166)        (0.1537)
ORP_FACE * HIGH?                                0.0010                               0.0018                              0.0627                             -0.0022                              0.0724
                                               (0.0032)                             (0.0020)                            (0.0453)                            (0.0024)                            (0.2166)
ORP_FACE * LOW?                                 0.0020                              -0.0044 ***                         -0.1024 ***                          0.0013                             -0.1417
                                               (0.0079)                             (0.0016)                            (0.0357)                            (0.0014)                            (0.1473)

P-values from test that
  coefficients are equal
  on interaction terms                          0.9325                              0.0193 **                            0.0047 ***                          0.2717                              0.2570
Year fixed effects?                 Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes

N                                 4,719           4,719               4,719           4,719               4,459            4,459               4,196           4,196               4,719           4,719
R2                               0.8259          0.8259              0.5131          0.5169              0.1233           0.1331              0.2103          0.2105              0.0418          0.0421


Note:     Table A4 differs in two ways from Table 8. First, the sample is limited to participants who answered the following survey question: "When choosing between ORP investment providers assess
          the importance of the following factors: Access to face to face meetings with a financial adviser". This explains why the sample sizes are between 20% to 30% of those in Table 8. Second,
          we interact their answers to this question with dummy variables indicating whether the participant invests through HIGH or LOW. ORP_FACE takes on four possible values: 0
          ("unimportant"), 0.33 ("somewhat important"), 0.67 ("important"), and 1 ("very important"). We report the p-value from the test that the coefficients on the two interaction terms are equal. To
          allow for correlations both in annual portfolio returns across participants in year t and in participant i’s annual portfolio returns across years, we cluster standard errors on calendar year t and
          participant i. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table A4. Allocation of Retirement Contributions Across Available Funds

Dependent:                                                                                 Positive Allocation to Fund j?
Sample Period:                                              Month 1 (1st ORP Contribution)                                                Month 24
Sample of Funds:                                        All               All          HIGH Equity                   All                    All             HIGH Equity
                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)                      (4)                    (5)                (6)

Lagged Return * HIGH                                  0.229 ***           0.271 ***          0.245 ***                -0.032             -0.027              -0.054
                                                     (0.020)             (0.028)            (0.054)                   (0.039)            (0.052)             (0.085)
Not Broker Fee * HIGH                               -11.067 ***         -11.417 ***        -16.203 ***               -10.724 ***        -12.851 ***         -18.299 ***
                                                     (0.516)             (0.625)            (2.167)                   (0.923)            (0.829)             (2.848)
Broker Fee                                           20.187 ***          22.582 ***         40.699 ***                23.381 ***         27.456 ***          48.690 ***
                                                     (1.442)             (1.527)            (2.466)                   (2.313)            (2.546)             (3.005)

Lagged Return * LOW                                   0.030              0.487 ***                                     0.234 ***          0.862 ***
                                                     (0.037)            (0.174)                                       (0.076)            (0.106)
Not Broker Fee * LOW                                 -9.094             82.574 **                                    -20.406 ***         -6.630
                                                     (9.015)           (35.164)                                       (6.185)           (10.852)

Ho: Same Sensitivity to Lagged Return?                 0.000 ***          0.188                                         0.001 ***          0.000 ***
Ho: Same Sensitivity to Not Broker Fee?                0.827              0.007 ***                                     0.112              0.547
Fund-level controls?                                     Yes                Yes                 Yes                       Yes                Yes                 Yes
Provider-date fixed effects?                             Yes                 ---                 ---                      Yes                 ---                 ---
Provider-broad category-date fixed effects?               ---               Yes                  ---                       ---               Yes                  ---
Provider-narrow category-date fixed effects?              ---                ---                Yes                        ---                ---                Yes

N                                                    74,547              72,392              25,051                   61,574              58,840              19,231
Adj. R2                                              0.1820              0.2050              0.2279                   0.1548              0.1775              0.2078

Note:        Alternative version of Table 10 that uses probit regressions to predict whether fund j receives a positive allocation. All variables are scaled so that 1.000
             equals 1.000%. Standard errors are clustered on the date of participant i's contribution. We report the p-value of the hypotheses tests that the sensitivity to
             lagged return and non-broker fee are equal for HIGH and LOW. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests)
             is denoted by *, **, and ***.
Table A5. Allocation of Retirement Contributions Across Available Funds

Dependent:                                                                                  Positive Allocation to Fund j?
Sample Period:                                               Month 1 (1st ORP Contribution)                                                 Month 24
Sample of Funds:                                         All               All          HIGH Equity                   All                     All             HIGH Equity
                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)                      (4)                     (5)                (6)

Lagged Return * HIGH                                  0.216 ***           0.269 ***            0.199 ***               -0.023              -0.022               -0.029
                                                     (0.019)             (0.027)              (0.049)                  (0.026)             (0.042)              (0.046)
Not Broker Fee * HIGH                               -10.219 ***          -8.870 ***          -10.963 ***              -10.321 ***          -9.742 ***          -13.239 ***
                                                     (0.620)             (0.677)              (1.676)                  (0.959)             (0.870)              (2.014)
Broker Fee                                           13.969 ***          14.898 ***           27.838 ***               15.557 ***          16.924 ***           31.479 ***
                                                     (0.942)             (0.923)              (2.466)                  (1.317)             (1.321)              (2.483)

Lagged Return * LOW                                   0.093               1.036 ***                                     0.392 ***           1.250 ***
                                                     (0.121)             (0.377)                                       (0.149)             (0.097)
Not Broker Fee * LOW                                 28.243             145.524 **                                    -20.476 *            -6.700
                                                    (21.625)            (61.063)                                      (10.727)            (15.793)

Ho: Same Sensitivity to Lagged Return?                 0.289               0.038 **                                      0.005 ***           0.000 ***
Ho: Same Sensitivity to Not Broker Fee?                0.079 *             0.013 **                                      0.344               0.847
Fund-level controls?                                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes                      Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Provider-date fixed effects?                             Yes                  ---                  ---                     Yes                  ---                  ---
Provider-broad category-date fixed effects?               ---                Yes                   ---                      ---                Yes                   ---
Provider-narrow category-date fixed effects?              ---                 ---                 Yes                       ---                 ---                 Yes

N                                                     74,547              74,547              34,672                    61,574              61,574              26,704
Adj. R2                                               0.1599              0.1945              0.2093                    0.1361              0.1752              0.2239

Note:        Alternative version of Table A4 that is estimated using linear probability models instead of probit regressions. All variables are scaled so that 1.000 equals
             1.000%. Standard errors are clustered on the date of participant i's contribution. We report the p-value of the hypotheses tests that the sensitivity to lagged
             return and non-broker fee are equal for HIGH and LOW. Statistical significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent, and 1-percent level (in two-sided tests) is
             denoted by *, **, and ***.
