NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORRUPTING LEARNING:
EVIDENCE FROM MISSING FEDERAL EDUCATION FUNDS IN BRAZIL
Claudio Ferraz
Frederico Finan
Diana B. Moreira
Working Paper 18150
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18150
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We are grateful to Brian Knight and two anonymous referees for several insightful comments that
significantly improved the paper. We are also thankful to the staff at the CGU for support and clarifications
of the auditing process, and to Elaine Pazzelo and Roberta Biondi for help with the education data.
We thank David Card, Miguel Foguel, Seema Jayanchandran, Enrico Moretti, Ted Miguel, Sergei
Soares, Fernando Veloso and seminar participants at BREAD, GRADE, Ibmec-Rio, IPEA-Rio, Notre
Dame, PUC-Rio, RAND, USP for comments and suggestions. Tassia Cruz, Carolina Grottera, Susana
Cordeiro Guerra, Marcio Nery, and Sinaia Urrusti-Frenk provided excellent research assistance. Financial
support from CCPR and CNPq is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Diana B. Moreira. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Corrupting Learning: Evidence from Missing Federal Education Funds in Brazil
Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Diana B. Moreira
NBER Working Paper No. 18150
June 2012
JEL No. D73,H72,I21
ABSTRACT
This paper examines if money matters in education by looking at whether missing resources due to
corruption affect student outcomes. We use data from the auditing of Brazil’s local governments to
construct objective measures of corruption involving educational block grants transferred from the
central government to municipalities. Using variation in the incidence of corruption across municipalities
and controlling for student, school, and municipal characteristics, we find a significant negative association
between corruption and the school performance of primary school students. Students residing in municipalities
where corruption in education was detected score 0.35 standard deviations less on standardized tests,
and have significantly higher dropout and failure rates. Using a rich dataset of school infrastructure
and teacher and principal questionnaires, we also find that school inputs such as computer labs, teaching
supplies, and teacher training are reduced in the presence of corruption. Overall, our findings suggest
that in environments where basic schooling resources are lacking, money does matter for student achievement.
Claudio Ferraz
Department of Economics
PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22453-900
Brazil
cferraz@econ.puc-rio.br
Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
University of California
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu

Diana B. Moreira
Department of Economics and
Harvard Business School
Harvard University
Cambridge , MA 02138
dmoreira@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

The focus of most education reforms around the world has been to provide more resources
to public schools. But whether more resources lead to improvements in student outcomes
is highly disputed, due in large part to the difficulties in evaluating these types of policies.1
The evaluation of policies aimed at providing more resources to schools is complicated for at
least two reasons. First, those involved in the educational process may respond to the policy
in ways that might dampen its effects – local officials may cut back on educational funding
from local taxes or other revenue sources, teachers may feel less of a need to compensate for
the lack of resources and in so doing provide less effort in the classroom or, similarly, parents
might decide to provide less inputs at home.2 Second, resources transferred from higher level
offices can be expropriated by the local government or school-level officials. In the presence
of leakages, reported transfers to schools do not translate into school inputs.3
Evidence from cross-country data supports the idea that leakages can reduce educational
quality. As seen in Figure 1, there is a strong negative association between a country’s
corruption level and its performance on international standardized exams.4 But there are
several reasons why one should be cautious about interpreting this relationship as causal.
First, there are many institutional and cultural differences across countries that determine
both its level of corruption and the quality of education. Moreover, as it has been well
documented, subjective cross-country measures of corruption are prone to important shortcomings (Svensson 2005). Thus, despite its importance, empirical evidence on the effects of
leakages from educational funds on student outcomes remains remarkably sparse.
This paper examines the extent to which money matters in education by looking at
whether missing resources due to corruption affect student outcomes. We use data from
public schools in Brazil where locally-provided primary education is mostly funded by block
grants from the central government. Brazil provides an ideal case to examine the effects of
corruption in education. Despite significant expenditures on primary schooling per pupil,
1

See for instance Hanushek (1996), Hedges, Laine, and Greenwald (1994), Glewwe and Kremer (2006).
See Todd and Wolpin (2003), Das et al. (2011), Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2011).
3
Although the divergence of public sector resources is more common in developing countries (Reinikka and
Svensson (2004)), there is also evidence that bureaucrats in developed countries also use creative accounting
to divert funds (Baicker and Staiger (2005)).
4
Figure 1 plots the relationship between the performance on the PISA international exams in 2006, after
accounting for expenditures on primary schooling per pupil, and a country’s corruption index. The PISA
examination is available in 2006 for 56 countries when we include only those countries for which we also have
information on spending in primary education per pupil. The corruption index is from Kaufmann, Kraay,
and Mastruzzi (2009); we invert the sign of the corruption control index.
2

1

students’ performances on the PISA examination ranks among the worst in the world (see
panels A and B of Figure 2). Even within Brazil, the association between spending per pupil
and academic performance among primary school children in public schools is weak (see
panels A and B of Figure 3). Finally, based on both official government audits and media
reports, corruption involving education grants has become an overarching concern in Brazil.
To overcome the data constraints that have limited cross-country analysis, we build a
novel dataset based on audit reports to quantify local-level corruption and mismanagement
associated with grants earmarked for education.5 This data set, which represents one of the
first large-scale attempts to measure corruption in education at a local level, has several
advantages over the existing literature.6 First, we have corruption information about not
only educational grants, but also transfers made in other sectors such as health and urban
infrastructure. Because we can distinguish between corruption in education and corruption
in other sectors, we can test whether our estimates reflect leakages from educational funds
or simply capture the effects of overall corruption in the municipality. Second, the effects of
corruption are identified separately from the effects of mismanagement practices in education.
Corrupt politicians may have low management skills or hire poor managers, both of which
may negatively affect educational outcomes. Our data allow us to distinguish between these
different types of irregularities.7
We link municipal-level corruption measures to data on the educational achievement of
primary school students across 1488 public schools located in 365 municipalities throughout Brazil. We use the variation in corrupt practices across municipalities to estimate the
effects of “missing resources” on dropout rates, failure rates, and student achievement in
a national standardized exam. We find that the educational outcomes of students residing
in municipalities where corruption was uncovered are significantly lower than those of students residing in municipalities where no corruption was detected. For instance, test scores
on a standardized Language and Math exam among 4th graders are 0.30 standard deviations lower in corrupt municipalities. Corruption is also associated with higher dropout and
failure rates among primary school children. We use complementary data sources to show
that educational inputs are indeed lower in municipalities with more corruption. Based on
Brazil’s school census, we find that the percentage of teachers who had received pedagogical
5

The data were constructed based on the audit reports used in Ferraz and Finan (2011), but exploiting
the detailed reports from the educational grants.
6
See Reinikka and Svensson (2004) for estimates of local capture of educational grants using expenditure
tracking surveys.
7
This is related to the distinction made by Bandiera, Prat, and Valletti (2009) on active and passive
waste.

2

training is 10.7 percentage points lower compared with non-corrupt municipalities. Schools
in corrupt municipalities are also less likely to have a computer lab. From independent
principals’ and teachers’ surveys, we also find that both teachers and principals of schools
in municipalities where corruption was detected are much more likely to report the lack of
resources and teaching supplies as being serious problems.
We undertake a series of robustness tests to make sure our results are indeed driven by
“missing resources”. First, we account for a large number of factors that are correlated
with both corruption and test scores. These factors include not only the standard socioeconomic characteristics that have been showed to be associated with corruption (e.g. GDP
per capita, urbanization, population size, and income inequality), but also many of the local
institutional characteristics that allow the population to hold school managers accountable
(e.g. presence of parent-teacher associations, elections for school principals, and the degree
of community participation in school maintenance, etc). Second, we show that the results
are robust to the control corruption measures detected in other sectors (e.g. health and
infrastructure). Controlling for corruption in sectors other than education is likely to proxy
for many of the unobservable characteristics that are both correlated with corruption in
education and determine student achievement. It will also capture any indirect effects that
corruption in other sectors might have on student achievement.8 Third, using the audit
reports we also construct a measure of mismanagement of education resources. This allows
us to disentangle the effects of corruption from the effects of mismanagement. Finally, we
conduct a placebo test in which we examine whether corruption in education funds in the
municipality affects the schooling outcomes of children attending private school. We do not
find any evidence that public sector corruption is associated with the dropout and failure
rates of children attending private school, suggesting that children are neither sorting into
private schools nor that differences in education performance are driven by municipal-level
unobserved characteristics.
Our findings contribute to the literature that examines whether resources matter for
education. We show that a reduction in the availability of resources driven by corruption has
negative effects on student outcomes. This is consistent with recent experimental and quasiexperimental evidence showing that increases in school inputs affect student outcomes (e.g.
8

Given that we control for all these potential determinants of corruption, a subsequent question is what
variation is used to identify the effects of corrupt practices on schooling outcomes. We present evidence
showing that there is large variation in corrupt practices induced by how the Federal Government monitors
and audits intergovernmental transfers in education. In particular, municipalities that have a larger share of
educational funds from FUNDEF (Fundo de Manutenção e Desenvolvimento do Ensino Fundamental e de
Valorização do Magistério), which is a program with weak monitoring, have more corruption.

3

Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011), Clark (2009), Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2010)).
It is also consistent with Harbison and Hanushek (1992) who find that, when schools lack
even the most basic resources such as infrastructure, textbooks, and teachers with completed
secondary education, resources can have positive effects.
This study contributes, more broadly, to the literature on the consequences of corruption. While there is general consensus among academics and policy makers that corruption
harms economic development, with few exceptions, the evidence is based on cross-country
comparisons using subjective or self-reported measures of corruption (e.g. Mauro (1995)).
Our study complements a growing literature showing that leakages from public funds create
inefficiencies in the delivery of public goods and services.9
Our results are most closely related to Bjorkman (2007) and Reinikka and Svensson
(2011); both use variation from an information campaign to measure the effects of a reduction
in corruption on student outcomes. But our study differs in several respects. First, we
provide evidence on the mechanisms linking corruption to student outcomes. We use a
rich dataset of school infrastructure and teacher and principal questionnaires to show how
school inputs, such as teachers with a higher education degree, computer labs, resources and
teaching supplies, and teacher training are reduced in the presence of corruption. Second,
we exploit the richness of the audit reports to build different measures of corruption and
mismanagement.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of Brazil’s public education
system and the corruption program that conducted the audit reports. In Section 3, we
describe the data, including how our corruption measures were coded. Section 4 describes
our conceptual framework and outlines our empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our results,
and Section 6 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Decentralization and Block Grants for Education

Brazil transfers over US$2.2 billion in educational grants to municipal governments and
spends 4.1 percent of its GDP on public education per year. Unfortunately, these expenditures have not led to significant improvements in academic performance. For instance, on
9

See Chaudhury et al. (2006) who provide evidence on the widespread teacher and health worker absenteeism in developing countries; Olken (2006) who examines corruption in redistributive programs; Niehaus
and Sukhtankar (2011) who examine leakages from public employment programs.

4

the 2006 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) test among 15 year-old
students, Brazil ranked 54th among 57 countries in mathematics and ranked 49th among
56 countries in reading. Brazil also placed well below Mexico and Argentina, both of which
spend on average similar amounts on primary education.
Brazil’s local governments bare much of the blame for this poor performance. The constitution dictates that state and municipal governments share the responsibility for the provision of primary and secondary education. In practice, however, most state governments
manage secondary schools, while municipal governments manage primary schools (ensino
fundamental). By 2005, approximately 85 percent of all first to fourth grade primary schools
were managed by municipal governments.10 In order to guarantee adequate investments in
education, Brazil’s constitution mandates that at least 25 percent of all state and municipal
revenues are spent for educational purposes. Local governments are thus responsible for
building schools, providing adequate infrastructure, distributing school lunches and providing school transportation, training teachers, and paying salaries.
To cover these costs, the federal government transfers to states and municipalities large
sums of resources in the form of block grants.11 Also, a new financing scheme named FUNDEF was created in 1997 to equalize the amount of resources available for education across
regions.12 It consists of a state fund to which state and municipal governments contribute
15 percent of specific taxes and transfers. The fund, which totaled US$13.7 billion in 2005,
is then redistributed to state and municipal governments on the basis of student enrollment.
The federal government supplements local governments in states where per student allocations fall below an established spending floor. The FUNDEF constitutes a large share of
resources available to mayors, but the use of resources is not completely unrestricted. For
instance, the rule stipulates that at least 60 percent of FUNDEF revenues must be spent on
teachers’ salaries.
Despite being the largest block grant, FUNDEF is effectively left unmonitored.13 The
principal reason for this lack of oversight has to do with the fact that no government agency
10

See Madeira (2007) for details on the school decentralization process and its impact in the state of São
Paulo.
11
The largest block grant, called Fundo de Participação dos Municı́pios, was created in the 1960s and
distributes resources to municipalities based on their population and the state’s income per capita.
12
See Gordon and Vegas (2005) and Menezes-Filho and Pazello (2007) for a detailed description of FUNDEF.
13
In a report by Transparência Brasil, based on audits executed by the Controladoria Geral da União
(CGU), the federal government controller’s office, estimated that approximately 13% to 55% of FUNDEF’s
total budget between 2001 and 2003 was lost to fraud. Transparência Brasil (2005).

5

was ever assigned to monitor the resources.14 According to the laws that govern FUNDEF,
each municipality is required to transfer 15 percent of its revenue to a state fund that is
then redistributed to municipalities based on the share of primary school students enrolled
relative to total state enrollment. Since redistribution takes place within states, similar municipalities across different states receive different amounts of FUNDEF funds. If a minimum
spending per pupil is not met then the federal government complements the amount municipalities receive. Because all three spheres of government (municipal, state and federal
levels) contribute to this fund, the law does not specify which tier of government should be
responsible for monitoring it. As a result, prior to the introduction of the audit program
in 2003, the spending of these funds went largely unmonitored.15 Because of the lack of
oversight associated with FUNDEF funds, we would expect corruption in education to be
higher in places that receive a higher share of their educational resources from FUNDEF.
We test this prediction in the next section.

2.2

Embezzlement and Misuse of Educational Block Grants

Cases of mayors diverting resources from these educational block grants are numerous. During 2005 alone, there were at least 26 news stories about the misuse of FUNDEF resources
in the Brazilian press.16 Some examples are helpful to illustrate how ubiquitous the problem
has become. In the municipality of Placas, in the North of Brazil, the ex-mayor could not
account for US$1.25 million of FUNDEF funds between 2003 and 2004. Moreover, when
auditors asked the new mayor that took office in 2005 for documents and receipts, he said
that all documents disappeared from the archives during the government transition.17 The
new mayor of Camaragibe, state of Pernambuco, also had a surprise when he took office in
January 2005. He discovered that US$400,000 from the FUNDEF account was transferred
by the ex-mayor to a private bank account.18
14

Municipalities are required to establish local councils comprised of municipal government representatives,
teachers, and parents to monitor the funds. Unfortunately, these councils have been mostly ineffective. They
have either been captured by local mayors or do not meet regularly enough to effectively monitor the use
of these resources (Transparência Brasil 2005). Yet, it is not too surprising that these local councils are
unable to fulfill their role as an effective watchdog since local governments are under the control of elites
and powerful mayors that often divert resources for their own benefits.
15
In 2010, the Federal Auditors’ Court (TCU) ruled that the legislation creating FUNDEF did not assign
any entity to monitor the use of its resources and that it was not the responsibility of the National Fund
for Educational Development (FNDE), the branch responsible for making all educational transfers of federal
resources to municipalities.
16
See www.deunojornal.org.br/busca.php?assunto=463
17
“Dinheiro do FUNDEF é o maior alvo de desvios”, O Globo 06/25/2006.
18
“Desvio do FUNDEF atrasa salários de professores”, O Globo 03/27/2005.

6

It appears that embezzlement even extends to stealing teacher’s wages, sparking frequent
conflicts. In May 2009, approximately 90 percent of municipal school teachers in Itabuna,
Bahia received less than half of their monthly salaries, after approximately US$100,000
“disapeared” from the FUNDEF account.19 In the municipality of Senador Alexandre Costa,
Maranhão, teachers did not receive their 13th monthly salary and bonus payment because
the mayor had diverted all of the funds from FUNDEF. By April 2007, despite the school
year having started in early February, all municipal schools were still closed and without
electricity due to the lack of payments made.20 In Gonçalves Dias, Maranhão, 129 municipal
teachers did not receive their salaries during 9 months in 2004. They went on strike and
it was only in December that the municipal government paid part of their earnings. The
new mayor, who inherited the debt, negotiated to pay only 40 percent of the back pay in
exchange for having the new salaries paid on time.21
Mayors have engaged in other forms of coercion as well. For instance, in the municipality
of Traipu, a geography teacher and local representative of the teachers’ union, was transferred
from an urban school where she taught geography to high school students to a rural school
to teach small children after she denounced the mayor’s misuse of educational grants. In the
municipality of Viçosa, Alagoas students who participated in protests were forbidden to use
the municipal bus that transports students to the only secondary school, which was located
in the neighboring municipality.22 The small city of Satuba, Alagoas provides an extreme
case of coercion. In June 2003, a teacher started a campaign to denounce the mayor for
embezzling funds. Soon after, he was found tortured and killed.
While mayors have found ways of coercing teachers, this does not suggest that all cases
of corruption go unpunished. In 2005 the Federal Police arrested 8 mayors and 4 ex-mayors
in the state of Alagoas with charges of diverting US$1 million from the FUNDEF.23 The
ex-mayor of Cocal, in the state of Piauı́, was also arrested for diverting US$1.2 million from
the FUNDEF. He had already been impeached from public office in 2008 under corruption
allegations.24 In December 2008, after a long investigation, the Federal Police arrested 9
19

See “Professores de Itabuna recebem só metade do salario”, in the Blog Pimenta na Muqueca, accessed
in 05/04/2009.
20
Taken from a public complaint made by a citizen from Senador Alexandre Costa on a public email sent
to Arlindo Chinaglia, the President of the National Congress, in April 2007.
21
According to Francisco Carlos Custódio, the municipal Secretary of Education for Gonçalves Dias:
“Many teachers were angry with the situation, but accepted the offer because they were afraid of not
receiving their future salaries.” (Desvio do FUNDEF atrasa salários de professores, O Globo 03/27/2005).
22
See the report “Irregularidades na utilização de recursos públicos - Alagoas”, written by the NGO Ação
Educativa, available at http://www.acaoeducativa.org.br.
23
See O Globo, “Dinheiro do FUNDEF é o maior alvo de desvios”, 25/06/2006.
24
See O Globo “PI: ex-prefeito é preso por desvios de fundo do Fundeb e do FUNDEF”, Correio Braziliense,

7

mayors, 7 municipal secretaries and 64 public servants for diverting resources from education
and health funds in 16 municipalities in the state of Bahia. The police estimated that
approximately US$11.5 million was embezzled.25 In April 2009, the Federal Police arrested
four ex-mayors and 17 other persons in the municipalities of Montes Altos, São Pedro da
Água Branca, as well as Governor Edison Lobão, in the south of Maranhão. All of which
were accused of diverting R$6.5 million from educational grants in 2008.26
Given its prevalence in the education sector, corruption can severely impact a student’s
ability to learn in a variety of ways. First, when teacher salaries are delayed or not paid in full
due to corruption, this can affect teacher motivation or the functioning of the school. Second,
school quality is also compromised when funds intended for new classrooms or school supplies
are diverted. Insufficient school inputs may not only have a direct effect on a student’s ability
to learn but can also affect a teacher’s ability to teach. Third, corruption also occurs in the
provision of school lunches. For children of poor households, these meals can represent an
important source of daily calories. If corruption reduces the ability to retrieve these calories,
then enrollment or regular attendance may suffer.
In sum, Brazil’s local governments receive large sums of resources through educational
block grants.A significant share of these resources is misused and diverted, thus affecting
educational quality. Brazil’s local governments provide an ideal setting to examine whether
corruption at the local government level affects educational outcomes. Next, we describe
Brazil’s anti-corruption program and how we used its audit reports to build measures of
misuse and diversion of resources from educational block grants.

3

Data

Our empirical analysis combines three different data sources. First, we use information contained in the audit reports of Brazil’s anti-corruption program to construct our measures
of corruption and mismanagement in the education sector. Second, we collect information on various schooling outcomes and student characteristics, which we aggregate at the
school level. Third, we assemble a dataset containing information about the socio-economic
characteristics of the municipality. Because the identifying variation is at the level of the
municipality, accounting for differences across municipalities will be important for our analysis.
01/30/2009.
25
See A Tarde, “Prefeitos envolvidos na Operação Vassoura-de-Bruxa devem ser ouvidos até sexta”.
26
See Estado de S.Paulo, “PF prende quatro ex-prefeitos e mais 17 pessoas no MA”,04/28/2009.

8

3.1

Building Measures of Corruption and Mismanagement of Educational Funds

Widespread corruption scandals in municipalities have led to a growing concern over the
misuse of federal funds. In May 2003, the federal government started an unprecedented anticorruption program based on the random auditing of municipal government expenditures.
The program, which is implemented through the Controladoria Geral da União (CGU), aims
at discouraging the misuse of public funds among public administrators and fostering civil
society participation in the oversight of public expenditures. The program began by auditing
26 randomly selected municipalities, one in each state of Brazil. It has since expanded to
auditing 50 and later 60 municipalities per lottery, from a sample that includes all Brazilian
municipalities with less than 450,000 inhabitants. The lotteries, which are held on a monthly
basis at the Caixa Econômica Federal in Brasilia, are drawn in conjunction with the national
lotteries. To ensure a fair and transparent process, the CGU invites representatives of the
press, political parties, and civil society to witness the lottery.27
Once a municipality is chosen, the CGU gathers information on all federal funds transferred to the municipal government from 2001 onwards. Approximately 10 to 15 CGU
auditors are then sent to the municipality to examine accounts and documents, to inspect
for the existence and quality of public work construction, and delivery of public services.
Auditors also meet with members of the local community, as well as municipal councils in
order to collect direct complaints about any malfeasance.28 After approximately one week of
inspections, the auditors submit a report containing, for each inspected area (e.g. education,
health, urban infrastructure), a list of government programs audited, the total amount of
federal funds transferred, and a detailed list describing each irregularity found.29 At the
time of this study, audit reports were available for approximately 790 municipalities which
were randomly selected through the first 16 lotteries of the anti-corruption program. From
these 16 lotteries, we randomly selected the municipalities from 10 lotteries to measure corruption and mismanagement in education, health, and urban infrastructure, which are the
three largest sources of federal transfers for municipalities.30 Thus, in total, we construct
indicators of corruption and mismanagement for 366 municipalities.
27

See Ferraz and Finan (2008) for a more detailed description of these audits.
These auditors are hired based on a public examination, and prior to visiting the municipality receive
extensive training on the specificities of the sampled municipality. Also, there is a supervisor for each team
of auditors.
29
For some irregularities, the amount of resources diverted are estimated by the auditors.
30
As a result, we do not have data from lotteries 8, 11-13, and 15.
28

9

In order to build our measures of corruption and mismanagement, we read the report
for each municipality and classify the irregularities listed by the auditors into several preestablished categories. We define three types of corruption practices: diversion of public
funds, over-invoicing, and irregular public procurements. We classify diversion of resources
as any irregularity involving the embezzlement of public funds. This typically occurs in one
of two situations: 1) federally-transferred resources simply “disappear” from municipal bank
accounts; and 2) the municipality claimed to have purchased goods and services that were
never provided, which is determined when there is no proof of purchase and community
members confirm that the goods were in fact not delivered. We classify over-invoicing as
any irregularity in which auditors determined that the goods and services were purchased at
a value above market price. We classify the irregularity as an irregular public procurement
when there is an illegal call-for-bids and the contract is awarded to a “friendly firm”. These
firms are usually connected directly to the mayor and/or his family or some cases do not exist.
Most cases of corruption involving illegal public procurements include any combination of: i)
use of non-existing firms in the bidding process; ii) use of fake receipts to pay for goods and
services; iii) over-invoicing of prices to increase the amount paid for the goods and services.
Drawing on the classifications described above, we define three measures of corruption.
First, an indicator for whether auditors detected any corruption in education. Second, we
count the number of irregularities associated with corruption and divide by the number of
service items audited. Third, we estimate the value of resources diverted (when information
is available) and divide it by the amount of resources in education that were audited.31 While
the second and third measures capture the extent of corruption, corruption in education was
only detected in 35 percent of municipalities, suggesting that the extensive margin may
capture most of the relevant variation in the data. So while we present results using all three
measures of corruption, most of our analysis will focus on the corruption indicator.
In addition to documenting the cases of corruption, we also construct measures of mismanagement. These are irregularities that are uncovered by the auditors, but do not involve
any incidence of fraud. Administrative irregularities, however, may still affect the quality
of education if they create inefficiencies in the allocation of school inputs. Some examples
are useful to illustrate this measure. Municipalities that receive funds from the FUNDEF
program are required to establish an active and independent community council to monitor the use of these funds. Auditors uncovered several cases where the council simply did
31

Because some of the irregularities associated with corruption have missing values, the share of corruption
is underestimated.

10

not function. It either never met or was led by a mayor’s family member. Although this
irregularity is not an act of corruption, the lack of a well functioning council prevents the
effective use and monitoring of resources by civil society. Another common form of mismanagement is the use of resources that are mandated for other purposes. For instance, mayors
have to spend at least 60 percent of resources from FUNDEF on teacher salaries. In some
municipalities, auditors discovered that these resources were used to pay for the salaries of
other public servants or to purchase gasoline for municipal cars. Again, even though this
does not constitute the diversion of resources for private gains, it may affect the allocation
of resources intended for education. Finally, public procurements require at least three firms
to participate in the call-for-bids. Even in the case where the public good or service was provided (and is thus not considered corruption) the lack of competition in the bidding process
might have led the government to overspend, thus creating distortions in the allocation of
resources. For mismanagement, most irregularities are not associated with values (e.g. lack
of a council to monitor the use of funds) and virtually every municipality has some incident
of mismanagement. Thus, we can only build measures of mismanagement by counting the
total number of irregularities.
Table 1 presents summary statistics of the corruption measures. Corruption in the area
of education was discovered in 35 percent of municipalities. Among these municipalities, 35
percent of service items in education were found to be subject to corruption and 8 percent of
resources were diverted. Corruption in other sectors was also discovered in 50 percent of the
municipalities, and on average 2 irregularities per service item were found to be associated
with some type of mismanagement.

3.2

Data on Schooling Outcomes and Municipal Characteristics

We have two main sources of schooling data, both of which are aggregated at the school
level. The data on test scores and student characteristics come from a national standardized
examination of 4th and 8th graders called Prova Brasil. In 2005, the Federal government
conducted a standardized exam in the subjects of Mathematics and Portuguese given to all
4th graders enrolled in a public school with at least 20 students. In addition to the exam,
the program conducted a survey designed to measure the child’s socio-economic conditions.
The survey includes not only information about the child, such as gender, age, and race, but
also information about their parents and home environment: such as the education of the
parents, whether the child lives with both parents, size of the family, whether the household
owns a computer and other assets. The wealth of information contained in the survey allows
11

us to control for a host of characteristics that are likely to affect student achievement.
Our second principal data source comes from the 2005 and 2006 school census, referring
to information from the 2004 and 2005 school year respectively. The census measures the
basic conditions of schools in Brazil. It contains information about approval rates, dropout
rates, and failure rates by school. There is also information regarding school conditions such
as whether the school has sanitation, or computer and science labs, as well as information
about teachers, namely years of experience and what proportion have a degree or a credential.
Table 2 provides summary statistics based on information from these surveys, as well
as basic socio-economic information about the municipality. We see that the proportion of
children with parents with at least high school degree is on average 16 percent. On average
15 percent of children have a computer at home. The average dropout rate for schools in our
sample is 4 percent, while failure rates are at 10 percent. Only 19 percent of schools have a
computer lab and 4 percent of schools have a science lab.
From the 2007 Prova Brasil, we also have responses from a principal’s survey and a
teacher’s survey. These surveys, which were conducted separately, asked whether the following four items were a serious concern at school: 1) lack of financial resources 2) lack of school
supplies 3) lack of teachers to teach the courses 4) disciplinary problems among the student
body. In both the teacher’s and principal’s surveys, 55 percent of the schools cite lack of
resources and school supplies as serious concerns. Only 23 percent cite lack of teachers as
an important concern.
Combining the test score data with the information from the audit reports, Figure 4 plots
the distribution of test scores by whether or not corruption in education was detected in the
municipality. Consistent with the cross-country evidence, we find that the distributions of
scores for both math and language in corrupt municipalities is to the left of the distributions
of scores in municipalities where corruption was not found. On average, test scores are 15
points lower in municipalities where some corruption in education was detected. We later
investigate the robustness of this relationship.

4

Empirical Strategy

To estimate the effects of corruption on student achievement, let us assume that the academic
achievement Ai,s,m,t of an individual i attending school s in municipality m in grade g is

12

determined by the following reduced-form equation:
Ai,s,m,g = δAi,s,m,g−1 + γg (Ym,g − Cm,g )
where Ym,g is the amount of the education funds per school, and Cm,t is the amount per school
that is diverted.32 The parameter γg measures the effect of schooling resources on student
performance, which may vary by grade level, and δ captures how much learning decays from
one grade to the next. Under this value-added specification, a student’s achievement at the
end of the fourth grade is given by the following expression:
Ai,s,m,4 =

4
X

δ 4−g γg (Ym,g − Cm,g ) + δ 4 Ai,s,m,0 .

g=1

Given that our measure of corruption captures the average amount of diversion in education
over a three-year period, and we assume that corruption does not vary much across grades,
we can rewrite the equation above as:
4

Ai,s,m,4 = βCm + δ Ai,s,m,0 +

4
X

δ 4−g γg Ym,g

g=1

P
where β = − 4g=1 δ 4−g γg . After averaging across students within a school, we arrive at the
our estimation equation:
0
0
As,m,4 = α + βCm + Zm
θ1 + Xs,m
θ2 + s,m

(1)

where As,m,4 is the average student achievement of fourth graders in school s in municipality
m, Cm is the level of corruption in education that was detected in the municipality, and Xs,m
is a vector of predetermined student characteristics (e.g. gender, age, race, etc.) and family
characteristics (e.g. parent’s education, assets, etc.) that will account for differences in the
P
initial student achievement, As,m,0 , of the student body. To proxy for 4g=1 δ 4−g γg Ym,g , we
control for total expenditure in primary school which is included in the vector Zm along with
a set of other municipal characteristics. The variable s,m denotes a random error term that is
clustered at the school level. Given the value-added specification and under the assumption
32

We are assuming that the municipality’s education budget is distributed evenly across schools, which is
why we drop the schooling subscript, s. Thus, we do not consider the possibility that corruption affects one
school disproportionately more than another.

13

that E[Cm s,m |Xm Zs,m ] = 0, the coefficient β captures the discounted cumulative effects of
corruption on student performance since the first grade.
Given our identification assumption, there are three broad classes of factors that are
likely to affect our ability to interpret the causal effects of corruption on student achievement. First, as we know from the cross-country literature, corruption is not only negatively
correlated with economic development, but test scores are also on average lower among countries that are less economically developed. In wealthier places, households will invest more
in their children’s education both because they have more financial resources to do so, and
because the returns to education might be higher due to different types of economic activities. In our regressions, we account for a municipality’s level of economic development using
municipal GDP per capita. We also control for other socio-economic characteristics that
have been shown to be associated with corruption, such as urbanization, population size,
and income inequality.33 Second, local institutions that hold school managers accountable
to the population are likely to improve school performance and reduce corrupt practices in
education. We use detailed institutional data to control for the presence of parent-teacher associations, elections of school principals, and the degree of community participation in school
maintenance. Third, the education policies of a municipality also reflect the preferences of
the mayor. Mayors who care more about education will presumably be less willing to divert
money away from education. To account for the mayor’s preferences towards education, we
control for several characteristics of the municipality and the mayor: the amount of ostensible spending per pupil, whether the municipality has an intergovernmental consortium in
education, whether a school council exists, as well as the mayor’s gender and schooling level.
In Table 3, we examine how these various characteristics correlate with our measures
of corruption in education. Each column uses a different measure of corruption and for
each one we estimate both a basic OLS model and a non-linear model accounting for corner
solutions. Overall, the results suggest that municipalities with a larger urban population
and greater inequality are associated with more corrupt practices, while municipalities that
hold elections for school principals, that have a school council, and where the mayor holds a
college degree are associated with less corruption.34
Given that our most robust specification controls for all these potential determinants
of corruption, a natural question becomes: what is the variation that allows us to identify
the effects of corrupt practices on schooling outcomes? The identifying variation comes
33

See for instance Ades and Di Tella (1999), Glaeser and Saks (2006), Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer
(2003), La Porta et al. (1999), Reinikka and Svensson (2004), and Treisman (2000).
34
The results for the share of audited resources with corruption in education are less precisely estimated.

14

from how the Federal Government monitored and audited intergovernmental transfers in
education prior to the introduction of the CGU audit program. As we discussed in Section
2, municipalities fund their expenditures in education through a variety of sources. These
funding sources, however, are subjected to different degrees of monitoring under Federal
law. Consequently, municipalities receiving the same amount of educational resources can
experience, for arguably exogenous reasons, quite different degrees of monitoring.
To see how variation in the degree of monitoring might affect corruption, consider the case
of FUNDEF. As we mentioned previously, despite the fact that FUNDEF represents almost
80 percent of the intergovernmental transfers used for education, these funds are essentially
unmonitored. Thus, we would expect more corruption in education in places that receive a
higher share of their educational funding from FUNDEF. In the first row of Table 3 we find
that municipalities with a larger share of revenues from FUNDEF have, on average, more
corrupt practices: a one standard deviation increase in the share of educational funds from
FUNDEF increases the probability of corruption in education by 8 percentage points, or 23
percent. This result is consistent with the idea that the decentralization of responsibilities
financed by intergovernmental transfers, rather than local revenue collection, allow local
officials to ignore the consequences of mismanagement because they are less accountable to
local taxpayers.35
Even after controlling for the observable characteristics described above, we might still
be worried that municipalities with less corruption may offer more public goods and other
amenities that might affect student achievement. For instance, mayors who care about
education may also care about improvements in health, and may also refrain from corruption
in the health sector. Because the health of a child is also likely to affect his academic
achievement, our estimates may also be capturing the effects of less corruption in the health
sector. It may also be the case that families that value education may choose to live in
municipalities with less corruption. In these situations, we will over-estimate the negative
effects of corruption on education.36
To address these concerns, we present several robustness checks. First, we re-estimate
Equation (1) controlling for corruption detected in other sectors (e.g. health and infrastructure). Controlling for corruption in sectors other than education is likely to proxy for many
of the unobservable characteristics that are both correlated with corruption in education and
determine student achievement. It will also capture any indirect effects that corruption in
35

See Fan, Lin, and Treisman (2009); Fisman and Gatti (2002)
If parents in corrupt municipalities compensate for the lack of schooling inputs then we would underestimate the negative effects of corruption.
36

15

other sectors might have on student achievement. Second, using the audit reports we also
construct a measure of mismanagement of education resources. This allows us to disentangle
the effects of corruption from the effects of mismanagement.
Our third main robustness check uses private schools as a placebo test. Here, we reestimate Equation (1) using educational outcomes of children who attend private school as
the dependent variable. Under this specification, we would expect β̂ = 0, since corruption in
public expenditures should not affect private school outcomes. Similarly, we also test whether
the effects of corruption on educational outcomes differ in municipalities with private schools
by estimating the following equation:
0
0
γ + sm
δ + Xs,m
Asm = α + βCm + η1 Pm + θ(Pm × Cm ) + Zm

where Pm is an indicator for whether a private school exists in the municipality. If in corrupt
municipalities more able students are sorting into private schools, then we would expect the
interaction effect between corruption and the existence of a private school to be negative,
i.e. θ < 0.

5

Results

In this section we present the main empirical results of the paper. We begin by presenting
estimates of the relationship between schooling outcomes and corruption in education. We
then show that our estimates are robust across various specifications, including ones that
control for the effects of mismanagement and corruption in other sectors. In the final part of
the section, we explore the mechanisms that link corruption to poor schooling achievement.

5.1

The effects of corruption practices on educational outcomes

Table 4 reports estimates of the association between corruption and various schooling outcomes measured in 2005. The results are OLS estimates of a series of regression models
based on Equation (1). Our base specification, which is reported in the odd columns, adjusts
for several key school characteristics (e.g. gender, race, age, parent’s education, household
wealth, student-teacher ratio) which are likely to affect the education production function. In
the even columns, we augment this base specification to also include various characteristics

16

of the municipality (e.g. GDP per capita, population, Gini).37
Panel A presents estimates using as our measure of corruption the proportion of audited
education items found to involve corruption. Across the various schooling measures, the
negative effects of corruption are substantive. For instance, a 30 percentage point (or approximately one standard deviation) increase in corruption is associated with a 0.10 standard
deviation decrease in test scores (columns 2 and 4), and a 0.6 percentage point increase in
both dropout and failure rates (columns 6 and 8). These point estimates, while economically
meaningful, are also highly robust to the inclusion of important controls that account for
differences in labor market opportunities, such as GDP per capita and urbanization rates.
In Panel B, we present estimates using the share of resources in education found to be
corrupt as an alternative measure of corruption. In reading the audit reports, it is difficult
to calculate a dollar amount for every irregularity. Yet despite the imprecision associated
with this measure, the results in Panel B convey a similar story. In columns 2 and 4 of Panel
B, the estimates imply that a 5 percentage point increase in corruption is associated with
a 0.04 standard deviation decrease in test scores. The share of audited resources found to
be corrupt is also positively associated with both dropout and failure rates, but imprecisely
estimated.
In Panel C, we present a third alternative corruption measure: an indicator for whether
or not corruption in education was detected. The result suggests that children residing in
municipalities where corruption was detected fare much worse on the standardized exams
than those with similar observable characteristics but residing in municipalities where no
corruption was revealed. Based on the estimates presented in column 1, corruption in education is associated with a significant decrease of 0.35 standard deviations in test scores
(robust standard error = 0.076).
While columns 1-4 suggest that corruption may have affected learning, the results in
columns 5-8 indicate that corruption may also affect a child’s educational attainment. Dropout
rates are 2.9 percentage points higher in municipalities where corruption was detected, representing almost a 65 percent increase from the average. Failure rates are also higher in
corrupt municipalities (see column 7 and 8), thus consistent with the effects on test scores.
While all three alternative measures of corruption produce similar results, the measures
37

While a more robust specification would also include state-fixed effects, 9 out of the 25 states have 1 or
fewer municipalities with corruption in education, which constitutes close to 40 percent of observations in
our sample. Thus when we incorporate state fixed-effects, we are either losing the contribution of certain
states that do not have any variation or introducing a lot of measurement error given that our averages
for the “treatment group” are based on a single observation. Nevertheless, when relying on within state
variation, the point estimates, while less precise, are still negative.

17

presented in panels A and B have the potential advantage of capturing the effects of corruption along the intensive margin. However, given that only 35 percent of municipalities have
some practice of corruption in education, the relevant variation in the data may simply be
reflected in the extensive margin. In Figure 5, we plot the relationship between test scores
and the proportion of items audited associated with corruption. As we see from this figure,
the effects of corruption, while decreasing, are statistically similar once the proportion of
items is larger than 0.1. While this relationship might appear puzzling, it is likely to reflect
the fact that this measure does not capture the amount of resources diverted. Thus, committing one big act of corruption versus many small acts of corruption may affect education
similarly. This explanation is consistent with what we see in Panel B when we plot the relationship between test scores and the share of resources involving corruption. Here, we find a
much more consistently negative relationship between corruption and test scores, although
as we mentioned previously, this variable is measured with much more noise.38 For these
reasons, in the remainder of the analysis, we use the indicator for whether or not corruption
in education was detected as our main measure of corruption.
Overall, the results presented in Table 4 suggest that the effects of corruption on education
outcomes are quite severe. Our findings are however comparable to those presented by
Reinikka and Svensson (2011), who find that a 30 percentage point increase (or approximately
one standard deviation) in corruption is associated with a 0.10 standard deviation decrease in
test scores. Because their measure of leakage is continuous, we can compare this effect with
our point estimates in Panel B of Table 4. When based on the share of resources associated
with corruption, our estimates imply that an increase in corruption of 20 percentage points
(or approximately one standard deviation) is associated with a reduction in test scores of 0.14
(for Math) and 0.18 (for Portuguese) standard deviations. Although our estimates appear
slightly larger, recall that our measure of leakage represents an average over a 3 year period.
Thus, our effects are in fact slightly smaller than those reported by Reinikka and Svensson
(2011) whose measure of leakage is based on a single year.
38

Given these figures, it is perhaps not surprising that the correlation between the proportion of items
found to be corrupt and the share of resources found to be corrupt is only 0.29.

18

5.2

Robustness Checks

Controlling for Institutional Quality, School Institutions, and Educational Preferences
In Table 5 we re-estimate our main specification controlling for corruption in other sectors,
as well as other measures of institutional quality at the local level (e.g. whether members
of the community participates in the budgetary process or has a judiciary district). This
specification is useful for two reasons. First, it identifies the effects of corruption specifically
in education, rather than potentially estimating a proxy for more general corruption. Second,
by controlling for corruption in other sectors and other measures of institutional quality, we
are accounting for many of the unobserved differences between municipalities that do and
do not engage in corruption more generally. For instance, returns to education are often
lower in places that are more prone to corruption, since these areas tend to be economically
depressed and more reliant on local patronage practices. With this specification, we are, for
example, able to capture any potential differences in the returns to education that were not
necessarily accounted for by controlling for income levels.
Corruption in other sectors also has a strong negative correlation with educational outcomes. For instance, in column 1 of Table 5, corruption in other sectors is associated with a
0.2 standard deviation decline in test scores, which is comparable to our main effects. This
estimate reflects the fact that corruption in other sectors may not only be serving as an important proxy for other institutional characteristics of the municipality that adversely affect
test scores, but is also capturing the negative indirect effects that corruption in sectors, such
as health and sanitation, can have on test scores. We also see that even after controlling for
whether corruption in other sectors was detected, our estimates remain virtually unchanged.
Overall, these results suggest that our estimates are robust to unobservable factors that affect both schooling outcomes and a municipality’s propensity to engage in corruption more
broadly.39
In the even columns of Table 5, we re-estimate the main regression model controlling for
a series of variables intended to capture differences in either preferences or local institutions
specific to education. These variables either directly capture the efficacy of local schools and
parent organizations (active PTA, existence of a school council) or serve as proxies for the
general level of civic engagement in the municipality (e.g. principal is elected, municipality
39

Even after controlling for corruption in other sectors, we cannot of course rule out the possibility that
other forms of unobserved heterogeneity are biasing our results.

19

uses participatory budgeting).40 Our original results are again robust to controlling for these
additional local institutions.
Does the misuse of public funds affect educational performance in private schools?
In Table 6, we present alternative tests for whether unobserved differences between corrupt
and non-corrupt municipalities are affecting our results. In Columns 1 and 2, we estimate
the effects of corruption in education on the dropout and failure rates of children attending
private schools.41 Because our measure of corruption is based on the misuse of funds intended
for public schools, we should not expect the measure to predict educational outcomes of
private-school children. The results in columns 1 and 2 do in fact show that the effects of
corruption on private schooling outcomes are small and statistically insignificant.
Although we do not find that corruption affects the dropout and failure rates of private
school children, an alternative explanation for our results is that corruption influenced the
selection of students into public and private schools. We test this hypothesis in columns
3-7. In column 3, we estimate whether children are more likely to enroll in private schools in
municipalities with corruption. In columns 4-7, we estimate whether the effects of corruption
on educational outcomes are more pronounced in municipalities where a private school exists.
If in municipalities with corruption high ability students are more likely to attend private
schools, then we should expect the effects of corruption to be more pronounced among
municipalities with a private school. But as we see in columns 3-7, corruption does not
predict enrollment rates among private schools and its effects are not more pronounced in
municipalities with a private school. This suggests that differential sorting does not explain
our findings.
Corruption or mismanagement?
Another possible concern is that our estimates capture the effects of not only the diversion,
but also the mismanagement of educational resources. If corruption and mismanagement
of educational funds are positively correlated, then our estimates are overstated. Table
40

Intergovernmental consortiums are entities managed by civil society. They group municipalities to implement a certain action that individual municipalities are not capable of doing alone. They have autonomous
management and financing and are commonly used to provide public services, e.g. management of a public
hospital. Participatory budgeting is a type of participatory democracy, in which citizens are formally given
the opportunity to discuss and prioritize public spending projects, and in some cases even decide how to
allocate parts of the municipal budget.
41
Unfortunately, standardized Mathematics and Portuguese exams are only conducted on students attending public schools.

20

7 shows that this is not the case. In columns 1-4, we re-estimate the full specifications
presented in Table 3, controlling for the share of audited items in education associated with
mismanagement practices. Our findings in columns 1 and 2 suggest that test scores are in
fact negatively correlated with the incidence of mismanagement. A one standard deviation
increase in the incidence of mismanagement is associated with a 0.14 standard deviation
decrease in math scores. Yet despite this negative correlation, the magnitude of the effect
is small relative to the size of the effects of corruption. The incidence of mismanagement
in a municipality would have to increase from the 1st percentile to the 99th percentile of
the distribution in order to achieve the same effects as those of corruption. Overall, the
estimated coefficients across the various educational outcomes suggest substantive effects of
corruption, even after accounting for the negative effects of mismanagement.

5.3

Mechanisms linking corruption to educational outcomes

Thus far, we have presented estimates of a reduced-form relationship between corruption in
education and student achievement. As discussed in Section 4, corruption can affect student
performance through various channels. The direct channel we examine here is the reduction
of school inputs and/or infrastructure. In Table 8, we explore whether schooling inputs
are lower in municipalities where corruption was detected using data from the 2005 school
census.
Column 1 examines whether corrupt municipalities are less likely to have received pedagogical training. One common form of corruption uncovered in the audits was the diversion
of funds intended for teacher training. The results in column 1 confirm this hypothesis. In
municipalities where corruption was detected, the percentage of teachers who are trained
is 11.3 percentage points (standard error 0.061) lower compared to non-corrupt municipalities. Given that 44 percent of teachers receive training, this estimate represents a 25
percent decline. Schools in corrupt municipalities are also less likely to have a computer lab
(coefficient=-0.060; standard error =0.026), but we find no effects on the likelihood of having
a science lab (coefficient=-0.008; standard error =0.013). We do not find any evidence that
schools in corrupt municipalities have less access to sanitation, but this might be a margin
where corruption is harder to hide. Also, from the results presented in the even columns,
our estimates are robust to controlling for school inputs in 2001.
Table 9 provides further evidence that schools have fewer resources in municipalities
where corruption in education was detected. Table 9 presents estimates based on a series
of linear probability models, where the dependent variable is specified at the top of each
21

column. Each dependent variable is constructed based on a series of questions asking teachers and principals whether the school faced the following non-mutually exclusive problems:
1) insufficient resources; 2) insufficient teaching supplies; 3) lack of teachers; 4) disciplinary
problems among the students. In columns 1-4, we present estimates based on information
from a teacher’s survey, whereas the estimates presented in columns 5-8 are based on responses to the same question, but asked separately to the school principal.
Despite the fact that the two surveys were conducted separately, both teachers and
principals of schools in municipalities where corruption was detected are much more likely
to report a lack of resources as a serious problem. For instance, in corrupt municipalities,
teachers are 7.2 percentage points (standard error=0.034) more likely to indicate a lack
of teaching supplies (see column 2), whereas school directors are 10.6 percentage points
(standard error=0.035) more likely to complain about a lack of teaching supplies (see column
6). While corruption would be expected to lead to fewer resources, one would not necessarily
expect corruption to affect disciplinary problems among students or even a lack of teachers
(at least in the short run). The data do in fact bear this out. In columns 3-4 and 7-8, we
do not find any association between corruption in education and whether the school faces
disciplinary problems among its students or a lack of teachers. Using information from the
principal’s survey, we investigate whether schools in corrupt municipalities are less likely
to offer pedagogical training. As reported in column 9, we find that teachers of schools in
corrupt municipalities are 10.6 percentage points less likely to have gone through teacher
training. This result is consistent with the finding presented in Table 8.

6

Conclusions

Improving school quality remains a challenge faced by most developing countries. But how
to improve quality is still a highly debated question. In this paper, we present evidence that
leakages from educational resources can be an important constraint on school quality. Using
a novel dataset of corruption in education and schooling outcomes across public schools in
Brazil, we find that student test scores on a national standardized exam and pass rates
are significantly lower, and dropout rates are significantly higher in municipalities where
corruption is prevalent.
Consistent with the idea that corruption reduces schooling inputs, we find that schools
in municipalities found to be corrupt have less school infrastructure and teachers that have
received training. Moreover, both teachers and principals report the lack of resources as a

22

principal concern in corrupt municipalities. Thus, our results contradict a large literature
suggesting that additional resources do not affect schooling outcomes. We conclude that, in
environments where basic schooling resources are lacking, money does matter for educational
achievement. To the extent that the quality of education affects long-run economic growth,
our results suggest a direct channel through which corruption affects long-run economic
development (Hanushek and Woessmann 2009).
Our findings have important policy implications. First, they suggest that efforts to
increase school quality in developing countries need to incorporate policies that aim at reducing leakages. Introducing a system to monitor the use of educational funds, including
block grants, should be of central concern to governments. Moreover, it can be a costeffective way to improve schooling outcomes. Second, in addition to corruption, we find that
the mismanagement of resources have detrimental effects on students’ performance. These
findings complement the work of Bandiera, Prat, and Valletti (2009) who show that passive
waste in public service might be as important as active waste in generating public-sector
inefficiencies. Thus, reforms aimed at improving the capabilities of local bureaucracies may
help reduce inefficiencies in the use of public funds.
Although our results focus on the direct effects of corruption-induced leakages, the negative effects of corruption on schooling may not simply represent a shift in the school budget
constraint. If, for instance, corruption also affects the allocation of school inputs – perhaps to
avoid detection – then corruption can lead to important distortionary effects as well (Shleifer
and Vishny 1993). Future research should address these additional costs of corruption.

23

References
Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella. 1999. “Rents, Competition, and Corruption.” American
Economic Review 89 (4): 982–993 (September).
Baicker, Katherine, and Douglas Staiger. 2005. “Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal
Health Care Funds, and Patient Mortality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1):
345–386.
Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, and Tommaso Valletti. 2009. “Active and Passive Waste
in Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment.” American Economic
Review 99 (4): 1278–1308.
Bjorkman, Martina. 2007. “Does Money Matter for Student Performance? Evidence from
a Grant Program in Uganda.” IGIER Working Paper n. 326, August.
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and
F. Halsey Rogers. 2006. “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence
in Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 91–116 (Winter).
Clark, Damon. 2009. “The Performance and Competitive Effects of School Autonomy.”
Journal of Political Economy 117 (4): 745–783.
Das, Jishnu, Stefan Dercon, James Habyarimana, Pramila Krishnan, Karthik Muralidharan,
and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “School Inputs, Household Substitution, and Test
Scores.” Mimeo, UCSD.
Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan. 2010. “Incentives Work: Getting
Teachers to Come to School.” American Economic Review, vol. Forthcoming.
Fan, C. Simon, Chen Lin, and Daniel Treisman. 2009. “Political decentralization and
corruption: Evidence from around the world.” Journal of Public Economics 93 (1-2):
14–34 (February).
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2008. “Exposing Corrupt Policiticans: The Effects
of Brazil’s Publicily Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123 (2): 703745.
. 2011. “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of
Local Governments.” American Economic Review 101 (June): 1274–1311.
Fisman, Raymond, and Roberta Gatti. 2002. “Decentralization and corruption: evidence
across countries.” Journal of Public Economics, no. 83:325345.
24

Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The injustice of inequality.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1): 199–222 (January).
Glaeser, Edward L., and Raven E. Saks. 2006. “Corruption in America.” Journal of Public
Economics 90:1053–1072.
Glewwe, Paul, and Michael Kremer. 2006. “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes
in developing Countries.” In Handbook on the Economics of Education, edited by Erik
Hanushek and Finis Welchh. Oxford: Elsievier.
Gordon, Nora, and Emiliana Vegas. 2005. “Educational Finance, Equalization, Spending,
Teacher Quality, and Student Outcomes: the Case of Brazil’s FUNDEF.” In Incentives
to Improve Teaching: Lessons from Latin America, edited by Emiliana Vegas. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1996. “School Resources and Student Performance.” In Does Money
Matter? The Effect of School Resource on Student Achievement and Adult Success,
edited by Gary Burtless. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2009. “Do Better Schools Lead to More
Growth? Cognitive Skills, Economic Outcomes, and Causation.” NBER working papers
14633, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Harbison, Ralph, and Eric Hanushek. 1992. Educational performance of the poor: Lessons
from rural northeast Brazil. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hedges, Lany V., Richard Laine, and Rob Greenwald. 1994. “Does Money Matter? A MetaAnalysis of Studies of the Effects of Differential School Inputs on Student Outcomes.”
Education Researcher 23 (3): 5–14 (April).
Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi. 2009. “Governance Matters VIII: Aggregate
and Individual Governance Indicators, 1996-2008.” World bank policy research working
paper 4978, World Bank.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999.
“The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15 (1):
222–79 (April).
Madeira, Ricardo. 2007. “The Effects of Decentralization on Schooling: Evidence From the
Sao Paulo State Education Reform.” Mimeo.
Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, no.
110:681–712.
25

Menezes-Filho, Naercio A., and Elaine Pazello. 2007. “Do Teachers Wages Matter for
Proficiency? Evidence from a Funding Reform in Brazil.” Economics and Education
Review 26 (6): 660–672.
Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay:
Experimental Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 39–77.
Niehaus, Paul, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2011. “The Marginal Rate of Corruption in Public
Programs.” UCSD, Mimeo.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2006. “Corruption and the costs of redistribution: Micro evidence
from Indonesia.” Journal of Public Economics 90 (4-5): 853–870 (May).
Pop-Eleches, Cristian, and Miguel Urquiola. 2011. “Going to a Better School: Effects and
Behavioral Responses.” Mimeo, Columbia University.
Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
Government Transfer Program in Uganda.” Quaterly Journal of Economics 119 (2):
679–705 (May).
. 2011. “The power of information in public services: Evidence from education in
Uganda.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (7-8): 956–966 (August).
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1993. “Corruption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 599–617 (August).
Svensson, Jakob. 2005. “Eight Questions about Corruption.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (3): 1942 (Summer).
Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2003. “On The Specification and Estimation of
The Production Function for Cognitive Achievement.” Economic Journal 113 (485):
F3–F33 (February).
Transparência Brasil. 2005. “Brazil: The Hidden Cost of Decentralized Education.” In
Stealing the Future: Corruption in Classroom, edited by Bettina Meier and Michael
Griffin. Berlin: Transparency International.
Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The causes of corruption.” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 76.

26

100

100

HKG

ISL

CZE
SVK
LTU

FRA
ESP

SVN

USA
URY
PRT
CHL

FIN

LVAPOL
GRC
HUN
HRV
ITA
TURROM
THA

ISR

MEX

-100

JOR BGR

-2

-1
0
Country corruption measure

PANEL A: MATH

MAC

NZL

AUS
NLD
GER
GBR
SWE
NOR
CHE
DNK AUT
LUX

ISL

CZE

EST
BEL
FRA
JPN

POL
SVKLTU
HRV
LVA
GRC

SVN
CHL
ESPPRT

HUN

ITA

TUR

URY
ISR

THA
MEX
ROM

ARG

JOR
BRA
ARG
BGR COL
TUN

-100

BRA
COL
TUN

-3

HKG
IRL

PISA 2006 reading residual
-50
0
50

PISA 2006 math residual
-50
0
50

NLD
AUS
NZL
BELJPN EST
CHE GER IRL
GBR
DNK AUT
NOR
LUX
SWE

KOR

MAC
KOR

FIN

1

-3

-2

-1
0
Country corruption measure

1

PANEL B: READING

FIGURE 1: TEST SCORES AND CORRUPTION
Notes: The scatter plots in panels A and B depict the relationship between the residuals from a regression of performance on the PISA exams in 2006 on expenditure on primary
education per capita as a share of 2005 GDP per capita, and the World Bank corruption index (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2005)). The data used for these graphs can be
found: http://www.pisa.oecd.org.

600
GER
LTU

FRA

GRC

GBR
NOR LUX
LVA
ESP
USA
HRV

CHE

JPN

AUT
POL

DNK
ISL
SVN
SWE
HUN

PRT
ITA

ISR
URY
ROM CHL

TUR
THA

BGR

MEX
JOR
BRA

350

ARG

IRL

AUS
NLD
GER

MAC

CZE

CHL

SVK LTU
GRC
TUR
THA

URY
ROM

MEX
JOR
BRA

ARG
COL

TUN

10
15
20
Spending on primary education per child/GDP per capita

PANEL A: MATH

FIN

KOR

HKG

FRA

NZL
ESTBEL
GBR
NOR LUX
HRV LVA
ESP

JPN

POL
SWE
CHE
DNK
SVN
ISL
HUN
PRT
ITA
AUT

ISR
BGR
COL

TUN

350

PISA 2006 math
400
450
500

IRL
SVK

NZLBEL
EST

PISA 2006 reading
400
450
500

NLD
AUS

MAC
CZE

550

600
550

FIN KOR

HKG

25

10
15
20
Spending on primary education per child/GDP per capita

25

PANEL B

FIGURE 2: TEST SCORES AND SPENDING IN PRIMARY SCHOOL PER PUPIL IN 2005
Notes: The scatter plots in panels A and B depict the relationship between a country’s performance on the PISA exams in 2006 and its expenditure on primary education per child
as a share of GDP per capita in 2005. The data used for these graphs can be found: http://www.pisa.oecd.org.

250

300

Test scores
200

250

150

Test scores
200

100

150
100
0

500

1000
Expenditure per pupil

bandwidth = .8

1500

2000

0

500

1000
Expenditure per pupil

1500

2000

bandwidth = .8

Panel A: Mathematics

Panel B: Portuguese

FIGURE 3: TEST SCORES AND SPENDING IN PRIMARY SCHOOL PER PUPIL WITHIN BRAZIL
Notes: : The scatter plots in panels A and B depict the relationship between 2005 test scores on a national standardized exam for 4th graders in Brazil and municipal expenditure on
primary education per pupil in 2005. The line represents a nonparametric estimate of the relationship, with a bandwidth of 0.8. The data on test scores come from Prova Brasil and
the data on expenditures come from Brazil’s national treasury. See the data appendix for more details.

.03
.02

.03

.01

.02

0

.01
0
100

150

250

200
No corruption

Corruption

Panel A: Mathematics

300

100

150

200

No corruption

250

Corruption

Panel B: Portuguese

FIGURE 4: DISTRIBUTION OF TEST SCORES FOR MATHEMATICS AND PORTUGUESE BY CORRUPTION
Notes: Panels A and B display kernel densities of 2005 test scores aggregated at the school-level by subject matter. The densities were estimated separately depending on whether
the school resided in a municipality where corruption was detected in education. The densities were estimated using the Epanechnikov kernel, with an optimally computed
bandwidth.

Math
Standardized test scores
-1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5

Standardized test scores
-1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5

Portuguese

Portuguese

Math

0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Share of audited resources with corruption

Standardized test scores
-1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5

0
.2
.4
.6
Proportion of items with corruption

Standardized test scores
-1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5

0
.2
.4
.6
Proportion of items with corruption

0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Share of audited resources with corruption

FIGURE 5: ASSOCIATION BETWEEN TEST SCORES FOR MATHEMATICS AND PORTUGUESE AND CORRUPTION IN EDUCATION
Notes: Each graph shows the results of a locally weighted regression with a quartic Kernel (Fan, 1992). The dependent variable is the 4th grade standardized test score for either
Portuguese or Math and the independent variable is the respective measure of corruption (proportion of items found with corruption or share of audited resources found with
corruption). The bandwidth is equal to one-third of the range of the independent variable. The lines in dashes show the 95 percent confidence intervals calculated with 100
bootstrapped replications where the standard error is clustered by municipality. The estimation dropped 5 outliers with extremely high corruption.

TABLE 1: CORRUPTION IN THE EDUCATION SECTOR

Proportion of municipalities with corruption in education
Proportion of items in education found to be corrupt
Proportion of items in education found to be corrupt conditional on some corruption
Share of resources audited in education that were found to be corrupt
Share of resources audited in education found to be corrupt conditional on some corruption
Proportion of municipalities with corruption in some area other than education
Proportion of items audited found to be associated with mismanagement
Proportion of municipalities with corruption involving a school feeding program
Proportion of municipalities with corruption involving teachers and school supplies
Proportion of municipalities with corruption involving other aspects of education

N
365
365
128
365
128
365
365
343
305
364

mean
0.35
0.12
0.35
0.03
0.08
0.50
2.00
0.15
0.28
0.03

sd
0.48
0.25
0.32
0.12
0.19
0.50
1.83
0.36
0.45
0.18

p25
0.00
0.00
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.00

p50
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.00
0.03
1.00
1.46
0.00
0.00
0.00

p75
1.00
0.15
0.50
0.01
0.07
1.00
2.71
0.00
1.00
0.00

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics on the various measures of corruption. Column 1 reports the sample size. Column 2 reports the mean and column 3 reports the
standard deviation. Columns 4-6 report the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the distribution. The data used to compute these statistics come from the audit reports.

TABLE 2: SUMMARY STATISTICS

Panel A: Student characteristics
Standardized exam in Mathematics - 4th grade
Standardized exam in Portuguese - 4th grade
% males
% white
% of mothers with a high school degree
% of fathers with a high school degree
% children that live with both parents
% families with 6 or more inhabitants
% families with a home computer
% families with electricity at home
% families with running water at home
% of children who are 8 years old or younger
% of children who are 9 years old
% of children who are 10 years old
% of children who are 11 years old
% of children who are 12 years old
Panel B: School Characteristics
Dropout rates
Failure rates
% of teachers with a teaching credential
School has a computer lab
School has a science lab
School has sanitation
Director's survey
Lack of financial resources is a serious concern
Lack of schooling supplies is a serious concern
Lack of teachers is a serious concern
Disciplinary problems is a serious concern
Training courses are provided to teachers
Teacher's survey
Lack of financial resources is a serious concern
Lack of schooling supplies is a serious concern
Lack of teachers is a serious concern
Disciplinary problems is a serious concern

N

mean

sd

p25

p50

p75

1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488

175.80
168.09
0.50
0.31
0.17
0.15
0.61
0.26
0.15
0.92
0.84
0.01
0.05
0.36
0.25
0.12

18.25
18.07
0.09
0.15
0.09
0.08
0.12
0.13
0.10
0.09
0.14
0.02
0.05
0.18
0.10
0.07

162.23
155.41
0.45
0.21
0.10
0.09
0.54
0.17
0.08
0.89
0.79
0.00
0.01
0.22
0.18
0.07

174.01
167.10
0.50
0.29
0.15
0.14
0.62
0.24
0.13
0.94
0.88
0.00
0.04
0.35
0.24
0.11

188.22
180.15
0.56
0.39
0.21
0.19
0.70
0.34
0.20
0.97
0.93
0.02
0.07
0.49
0.31
0.16

1488
1488
1488
1488
1488
1488

0.04
0.10
0.43
0.19
0.04
0.03

0.07
0.09
0.36
0.39
0.19
0.17

0.00
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.02
0.09
0.42
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.06
0.16
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.00

1488
1488
1488
1488
1488

0.55
0.40
0.23
0.63
0.49

0.50
0.49
0.42
0.48
0.50

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

1488
1488
1488
1488

0.56
0.51
0.26
0.63

0.50
0.50
0.44
0.48

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis. Column 1 reports the sample size. Column 2
reports the mean and column 3 reports the standard deviation. Columns 4-6 report the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the
distribution. The variables presented in Panels A and B are computed for the 1488 schools that reside in the 365 municipalities
for which information on corruption exists.

TABLE 2: SUMMARY STATISTICS (CONTINUED…)
N
Panel C: Municipal Characteristics
% population urban
Gini
GDP per capita
Expenditure in primary school per child
Dropout rates among private schools
Failure rates among private schools
Election is held for principal
Average number of state schools that elect its principal
Average number of state schools in the municipality
PTA is active in the municipality
Municipality has a intergovernmental consortium
Municipality has an education council
Schools receive support from private sector
Municipality uses participatory budgeting
The community helps in the maintenance of the school
The school participated in an awareness campaign for the community

365
365
365
365
188
188
365
365
365
365
365
365
365
365
365
365

mean

sd

p25

p50

p75

0.61
0.23
0.44
0.62
0.80
0.57
0.06
0.54
0.57
0.61
8707.74 22821.08 2545.43 4678.03 8544.47
942.20 487.67 656.48 856.68 1106.40
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.10
0.30
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.43
1.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.68
3.31
0.00
1.00
2.00
0.48
0.50
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.26
0.44
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.69
0.46
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.07
0.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.71
0.45
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.15
0.36
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.41
0.49
0.00
0.00
1.00

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis. Column 1 reports the sample size. Column 2
reports the mean and column 3 reports the standard deviation. Columns 4-6 report the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the
distribution. The variables presented in Panels A and B are computed for the 1488 schools that reside in the 365 municipalities
for which information on corruption exists.

TABLE 3: DETERMINANTS OF CORRUPTION IN EDUCATION

Corruption in

education
Dependent variable:
OLS
(1)
School finance:
% education revenue from FUNDEF transfers
Socio-economic characteristics
Share of urban population
Gini coefficient
Log GDP per capita
Log population

Probit
(2)

Proportion of items
with corruption in
education
OLS
Tobit
(3)
(4)

0.501
0.574
0.195
0.209
0.036
0.044
[0.200]** [0.277]** [0.096]** [0.103]** [0.024] [0.022]**
-0.413
-0.417
-0.224
-0.178
-0.006 -0.017
[0.135]***[0.145]***[0.075]*** [0.055]*** [0.010] [0.011]
0.745
0.883
0.286
0.326
0.055
0.061
[0.417]* [0.456]* [0.255] [0.178]* [0.044] [0.037]
0.026
0.003
-0.041
-0.034
-0.011 -0.006
[0.037]
[0.040]
[0.033]
[0.013] [0.004]** [0.003]**
0.043
0.050
0.015
0.016
0.001
0.002
[0.033]
[0.039]
[0.020]
[0.015] [0.003] [0.003]

School institutions
Share of schools with elections

-0.017
-0.089
-0.006
[0.010]* [0.037]** [0.005]
0.000
0.009
0.002
Share of schools with a PTA
[0.011]
[0.014]
[0.006]
% schools community helps in maintenance
-0.011
-0.033
-0.021
[0.021]
[0.030]
[0.016]
0.014
0.018
% schools participate in an awareness community 0.014
[0.019]
[0.023]
[0.017]
Preferences towards education
Log spending primary education per kid (×100)
-7.632
-9.502
-0.318
[5.004] [5.291]* [2.680]
0.052
0.065
0.014
Intergovernmental consortium in education
[0.057]
[0.063]
[0.032]
Education council exists
-0.093
-0.103
-0.073
[0.056]* [0.058]* [0.031]**
Mayor is a male
-0.142
-0.161
-0.122
[0.095]
[0.107]
[0.080]
Mayor has a college degree
-0.136
-0.148
-0.036
[0.051]***[0.053]*** [0.030]
Number of observations
R-squared
Pseudo R-squared

Share of audited
resources with
corruption in
education
OLS
Tobit
(5)
(6)

366
0.18

366
0.17

366
0.11

-0.033
[0.015]**
0.006
[0.006]
-0.025
[0.012]**
0.012
[0.010]

-0.001 -0.007
[0.001] [0.003]**
0.000
-0.001
[0.002] [0.001]
-0.001 -0.002
[0.003] [0.002]
0.003
0.002
[0.003] [0.002]

-2.125
[1.961]
0.018
[0.024]
-0.055
[0.024]**
-0.094
[0.056]*
-0.050
[0.021]**

0.004
-0.331
[0.561] [0.401]
0.007
0.006
[0.007] [0.005]
-0.004 -0.009
[0.007] [0.005]*
-0.002 -0.008
[0.010] [0.009]
-0.004 -0.007
[0.006] [0.004]*

366
0.15

361
0.06

361
0.69

Notes: This table reports the association between municipal characteristics and different measures of corruption in education.
Column (1), (3) and (5) present OLS results, while columns (2), (4) and (6) present the marginal effects of non-linear models that
account for the discrete or censured dependent variable. The dependent variable used in each regression is listed at the top of each
column. All regressions exclude municipalities that report zero revenues from the FUNDEF program. The regressions shown in
columns (5) and (6) exclude municipalities where the estimated share of corruption is above 1. Robust standard errors are
displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

TABLE 4: THE EFFECTS OF CORRUPTION ON SCHOOLING OUTCOMES
Dependent variable:
Panel A:
Proportion of items with corruption in education

R-squared
Panel B:
Share of audited resources with corruption in education

R-squared
Panel C:
Corruption in education

R-squared
Student characteristics
Municipal characteristics

Mathematics
(1)
(2)

Portuguese
(3)
(4)

Dropout rates
(5)
(6)

-0.323
-0.315
-0.356
-0.34
0.021
[0.069]*** [0.078]*** [0.068]*** [0.069]*** [0.010]**

Failure rates
(7)
(8)

0.019
0.019
0.018
[0.008]** [0.006]*** [0.006]***

0.49

0.52

0.55

0.59

0.26

0.29

0.15

0.16

-0.722
[0.372]*

-0.447
[0.320]

-0.9
[0.413]**

-0.583
[0.365]

0.048
[0.016]***

0.028
[0.019]

0.029
[0.023]

0.022
[0.023]

0.49

0.52

0.54

0.58

0.26

0.28

0.15

0.15

-0.356
-0.29
-0.357
-0.277
0.029
0.024
0.019
[0.076]*** [0.076]*** [0.070]*** [0.073]*** [0.005]*** [0.005]*** [0.008]**

0.018
[0.008]**

0.51

0.53

0.56

0.59

0.29

0.31

0.16

0.16

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of corruption on various education outcomes. Each column presents the results of an OLS regression where the dependent variable is listed at
the top of each column. For the results reported in Panels A, C, and D, the number of observations is 1488 schools. Whereas, for Panel B, the number of observations is 1479, due
to missing values in the amount of resources audited. Student characteristics included proportion of male children, proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother,
schooling of the father, the proportion of kids with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of households with a computer, proportion of families with running water,
proportion of families with electricity, and age dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of population that resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, Log GDP per capita in
2004, and log population. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent
confidence.

TABLE 5: THE EFFECTS OF CORRUPTION ON SCHOOLING OUTCOMES - ROBUSTNESS
Dependent variable:

Corruption in education
Local institutional quality
Corruption in other sectors
Judiciary district
Share of council that supports the mayor
Practices participatory budgeting

Mathematics
(1)

Portuguese
(3)

(4)

Dropout rates
(5)

(6)

Failure rates
(7)
(8)

-0.286
[0.076]***

-0.283
[0.080]***

-0.264
[0.071]***

-0.277
[0.070]***

0.027
[0.005]***

0.027
[0.005]***

0.018
[0.009]**

0.022
[0.009]**

-0.199
[0.068]***
0.133
[0.093]
-0.178
[0.190]
0.024
[0.079]

-0.185
[0.068]***
0.146
[0.092]
-0.145
[0.187]
-0.005
[0.076]

-0.162
[0.064]**
0.179
[0.083]**
-0.133
[0.168]
0.074
[0.071]

-0.141
[0.063]**
0.202
[0.084]**
-0.107
[0.162]
0.044
[0.067]

0.007
[0.004]*
-0.004
[0.005]
-0.015
[0.012]
0.009
[0.005]*

0.006
[0.004]
-0.007
[0.005]
-0.014
[0.012]
0.009
[0.005]*

0.001
[0.007]
-0.006
[0.007]
-0.022
[0.020]
-0.001
[0.010]

0.001
[0.007]
-0.003
[0.008]
-0.028
[0.019]
0.001
[0.010]

School institutions
School elects the principal
School has active PTA
School receives help from community
School participates in community awareness campaigns
Preferences towards education
Municipality has an intergovernment consortium in education
Education council exists
Mayor is a male
Mayor has a college degree

Student and municipal characteristics
Number of schools
R-squared

(2)

Yes
1488
0.54

0.136
[0.079]*
0.014
[0.045]
0.056
[0.050]
0.012
[0.035]

0.081
[0.062]
0.057
[0.036]
0.035
[0.041]
0.005
[0.035]

0.004
[0.004]
-0.003
[0.003]
-0.003
[0.003]
-0.001
[0.003]

0.005
[0.008]
-0.001
[0.005]
-0.002
[0.006]
0.006
[0.004]

0.136
[0.078]*
-0.031
[0.077]
0.082
[0.124]
0.07
[0.072]

0.161
[0.067]**
-0.002
[0.064]
0.02
[0.125]
0.062
[0.066]

-0.004
[0.005]
0.003
[0.005]
0.011
[0.008]
-0.008
[0.005]

0.001
[0.008]
0.002
[0.007]
-0.01
[0.014]
0.015
[0.008]*

Yes
1468
0.55

Yes
1488
0.6

Yes
1468
0.61

Yes
1488
0.31

Yes
1468
0.32

Yes
1488
0.16

Yes
1468
0.17

Notes: This table reports the effects of corruption on various education outcomes. Each column presents the results of an OLS regression where the dependent variable is listed at
the top of each column. Our measure of corruption is an indicator for whether corruption was detected in education. Our measure of other corruption is an indicator for whether
corruption was detected in sectors other than education. Student characteristics included proportion of male children, proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother,
schooling of the father, the proportion of kids with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of households with a computer, proportion of families with running water,
proportion of families with electricity, and age dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of population that resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, GDP per capita in
2004, and expenditure per child in primary school. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95
(**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

TABLE 6: PRIVATE SCHOOLS
Dependent variable: Dropout rates for Failure rates for
private schools private schools
(1)
(2)
Corruption in education

Share of students
enrolled in a
private school Mathematics Portuguese Dropout rates Failure rates
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

-0.005
[0.003]

-0.008
[0.006]

0.004
[0.009]

-0.28
[0.101]***
0.003
[0.100]

-0.249
[0.098]**
-0.017
[0.097]

0.023
[0.006]***
0.002
[0.008]

0.019
[0.013]
-0.003
[0.012]

Yes
Yes
1185
0.07

Yes
Yes
1185
0.14

No
Yes
331
0.04

Yes
Yes
1488
0.53

Yes
Yes
1488
0.59

Yes
Yes
1488
0.31

Yes
Yes
1488
0.19

Corruption in education × Municipality has a private school

Student characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Number of schools
R-squared

Notes: This table reports whether there is a differential effects of corruption in municipalities with a private school. Each column presents the results of an OLS regression where
the dependent variable is listed at the top of each column. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variables are dropout and failure rates of children in private schools. In columns 3-6,
the dependent variables are the education outcomes for children attending municipal schools (as in the previous tables). Our measure of corruption is an indicator for whether
corruption was detected in education. Student characteristics included proportion of male children, proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother, schooling of the
father, the proportion of kids with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of households with a computer, proportion of families with running water, proportion of
families with electricity, and age dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of population that resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, GDP per capita in 2004, and
expenditure per child in primary school. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*)
percent confidence.

TABLE 7: EFFECTS OF CORRUPTION ON SCHOOLING OUTCOMES ACCOUNTING FOR MISMANAGEMENT

Dependent variable: Mathematics
(1)
Corruption in education
Mismanagement

Student characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Number of schools
R-squared

Portuguese
(2)

Dropout rates
(3)

Failure rates
(4)

-0.265
[0.081]***
-0.041
[0.018]**

-0.251
[0.077]***
-0.046
[0.017]***

0.024
[0.005]***
0.001
[0.001]

0.02
[0.009]**
-0.004
[0.004]

Yes
Yes
1486
0.53

Yes
Yes
1486
0.59

Yes
Yes
1486
0.31

Yes
Yes
1486
0.17

Notes: This table reports the effects of corruption on various education outcomes, controlling for mismanagement and corruption in other sectors. Each column presents the results
of an OLS regression where the dependent variable is listed at the top of each column. Our measure of corruption is an indicator for whether corruption was detected in education.
Our measure of mismanagement is the share of audited service items that found to be associated with poor management practices. Student characteristics included proportion of
male children, proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother, schooling of the father, the proportion of kids with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of
households with a computer, proportion of families with running water, proportion of families with electricity, and age dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of
population that resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, GDP per capita in 2004, and expenditure per child in primary school. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality
are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

TABLE 8: THE EFFECTS OF CORRUPTION ON SCHOOLING INPUTS

Percentage of teachers with
Dependent variable: a higher education degree
(1)
(2)
Corruption in education

Initial input in 2001
Student characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Number of schools
R-squared

Proportion of schools
with a computer lab
(3)
(4)

Proportion of schools
with a science lab
(5)
(6)

Proportion of
schools with
sanitation
(7)

-0.113
[0.053]**

-0.114
[0.053]**

-0.06
[0.026]**

-0.059
[0.029]**

-0.008
[0.013]

-0.005
[0.014]

-0.008
[0.016]

N
Yes
Yes
1488
0.26

Y
Yes
Yes
1488
0.26

N
Yes
Yes
1488
0.13

Y
Yes
Yes
1150
0.13

N
Yes
Yes
1488
0.08

Y
Yes
Yes
1150
0.08

N
Yes
Yes
1488
0.02

Notes: This table reports the effects of corruption on various schooling inputs. Each column presents the results of an OLS regression where the dependent variable is listed at the
top of each column. Our measure of corruption is an indicator for whether corruption was detected in education. Student characteristics included proportion of male children,
proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother, schooling of the father, the proportion of kids with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of households
with a computer, proportion of families with running water, proportion of families with electricity, and age dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of population that
resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, GDP per capita in 2004, and expenditure per child in primary school. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality are displayed in
brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

TABLE 9: PROBLEMS THAT SCHOOLS FACE BASED ON TEACHER AND PRINCIPAL SURVEYS
Survey repondent:

Teacher

Dependent variable: Insufficient
Insufficient
resources teaching supplies
(1)
(2)

Principal

Lack of
teachers
(3)

Disciplinary
problems among
students
(4)

Insufficient
Insufficient
resources teaching supplies
(5)
(6)

Lack of
teachers
(7)

Disciplinary
problems among Provided
teacher training
students
(8)
(9)

Corruption in education

0.072
[0.034]**

0.066
[0.032]**

-0.004
[0.031]

0.007
[0.029]

0.045
[0.034]

0.106
[0.035]***

-0.014
[0.030]

-0.032
[0.031]

-0.106
[0.047]**

Student characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Number of schools
R-squared

Yes
Yes
1488
0.02

Yes
Yes
1488
0.05

Yes
Yes
1488
0.04

Yes
Yes
1488
0.01

Yes
Yes
1488
0.05

Yes
Yes
1488
0.08

Yes
Yes
1488
0.02

Yes
Yes
1488
0.02

Yes
Yes
1488
0.04

Notes: Each column presents the results of an OLS regression where the dependent variable is listed at the top of each column. Our measure of corruption is an indicator for
whether corruption was detected in education. In columns 1-4, the data come from a survey conducted with a teacher. In columns 5-9, the data come from a survey conducted with
the principal. Student characteristics included proportion of male children, proportion of white children, the schooling of the mother, schooling of the father, the proportion of kids
with both parents living at home, family size, proportion of households with a computer, proportion of families with running water, proportion of families with electricity, and age
dummies. Municipal characteristics included share of population that resides in urban areas, Gini coefficient, GDP per capita in 2004, and expenditure per child in primary school.
Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

