                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        USING AUDIT STUDIES TO TEST FOR PHYSICIAN INDUCED DEMAND:
                  THE CASE OF ANTIBIOTIC ABUSE IN CHINA

                                            Janet Currie
                                           Wanchuan Lin
                                           Juanjuan Meng

                                        Working Paper 18153
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18153


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We thank Ge Zhang, Hao Zhao and Xu Zhang for their research assistance. All errors are ours. Lin
acknowledges research support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 70903003 and
No. 71073002). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Janet Currie, Wanchuan Lin, and Juanjuan Meng. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Audit Studies to Test for Physician Induced Demand: The Case of Antibiotic Abuse
in China
Janet Currie, Wanchuan Lin, and Juanjuan Meng
NBER Working Paper No. 18153
June 2012
JEL No. I11

                                                 ABSTRACT

The overuse of medical services including antibiotics is often blamed on Physician Induced Demand.
 But since this theory is about physician motivations, it is difficult to test. We conduct an audit study
in which physician financial incentives, beliefs about what patients want, and desires to reciprocate
for a small gift are systematically varied. We find that all of these treatments reduce antibiotics prescriptions,
suggesting that antibiotics abuse in China is not driven by patients actively demanding antibiotics,
by physicians believing that patients want antibiotics, or by physicians believing that antibiotics are
in the best interests of their patients, but is largely driven by financial incentives. Our results also
show that physician behavior can be significantly influenced by the receipt of a token gift, such as
a pen.


Janet Currie                                            Juanjuan Meng
Princeton University                                    Department of Applied Economics
316 Wallace Hall                                        Guanghua School of Management
Princeton, NJ 08544                                     Rm. 323, Hall 2
and NBER                                                Peking University
jcurrie@princeton.edu                                   Beijing 100871, China
                                                        jumeng@gsm.pku.edu.cn
Wanchuan Lin
Department of Applied Economics
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Rm. 325, Hall 2
Beijing 100871, China
wanchuan@gmail.com
I. INTRODUCTION
     A large literature recognizes the fact that physicians often have strong incentives

to sell unnecessary services to patients. Antibiotics may be particularly ripe for

demand inducement because it is difficult for the patients to know for certain whether

they are needed or not, and they are unlikely to inflict harm on most patients (Dranove,

1988).

     Yet, it has proven remarkably difficult to test models of “physician induced

demand” empirically. For example, one strand of the literature focuses on the fact that

areas with, for example, many heart surgeons, often have high rates of heart surgery.

However Dranove and Wehner (1994) show that areas with more obstetricians have

more child births even though this is unlikely to represent a causal relationship.

     More generally, it is difficult to separate the demand and the supply side.

Overuse of medical procedures or drugs could reflect consumer demand, doctor

beliefs about what consumers want, or erroneous beliefs about what is best for

patients.   Similarly, changes in physician fees can affect demand as well as supply,

given that most patients face copayments (Heaton and Helland, 2009).

    This paper uses an audit study to try to identify the reasons for high rates of

antibiotic prescription in China.     According to some estimates, 90% of inpatients and

80% of outpatients are prescribed antibiotics compared to rates of 30% of inpatients

and 20% of outpatients in the West. 1 A recent study of 230,800 outpatient

prescriptions in twenty eight Chinese cities found that nearly half the prescriptions



1
 Du Wenmin, Vice Director of the Shanghai Clinical Center for Drug Adverse Reaction Monitoring,
quoted in the Shanghai Daily, Dec. 17, 2010.
                                                3
written between 2007 and 2009 were for antibiotics and that 10 percent were for two

or more antibiotics.        Antibiotics were prescribed twice as frequently as

recommended by the World Health Organization.         The authors note however, that

their “study provided little insight into the cause or possible solutions,” (Li et al.,

2012 pg. 1079).

    One of the most dangerous potential consequences of rampant antibiotic abuse is

that it will encourage the rise of antibiotic-resistant “superbugs” and threaten global

health.   Antibiotic resistance already appears to be higher in China than in Western

countries, and there has been an alarming growth in the prevalence of resistant

bacteria (Zhang et al., 2006). Resistant bacteria create increase medical expenditures

and can lead to death from uncontrolled infections (Phelps, 1989; Yao and Yang,

2008).    Antibiotic abuse also increases the risk of adverse drug reactions (Shehab et

al. 2008; James et al. 2011).

     The debate about the causes of antibiotic abuse in China mirrors the

Physician-Induced Demand literature more generally.      Doctors have strong financial

incentives to prescribe antibiotics, which are described further below.    At the same

time commentators argue that patients view antibiotics as a panacea, and demand

them even when they are unlikely to be effective (Cars and Hakansson, 1995; Sun et

al., 2009).   Patients may also demand newer, stronger, antibiotics, perceiving them to

be more efficacious, or they may fail to follow dosage instructions (Bi et al., 2000).

If patients expect antibiotics, and doctors are pressed for time, then doctors may find

it easier to write a prescription than to explain to the patient why it is not necessary

                                           4
(Schwartz et al, 1998).    Moreover, if doctors believe that patients want antibiotics,

then they may prescribe them in order to satisfy their patients (Bennett, 2010).

Finally, some physicians may overprescribe antibiotics because they lack professional

knowledge about proper antibiotic usage (Yao and Yang, 2008; Sun et al., 2009;

Dar-Odeh et al., 2010).

     Our audit study was designed to distinguish between these competing

explanations. We trained students to act as simulated patients with identical mild

flu-like complaints which did not warrant antibiotics prescription and sent teams of

five well-matched simulated patients to each audited hospital.       We considered one

student to be the “control” and the remaining four “treatment” students all deviated

from the baseline script in a specific way.

     We had three types of treatments: In the first, the patient offered the doctor a

small gift at the beginning of the visit.         Theories of gift exchange suggest that

recipients will seek to reciprocate.   Hence, we expect that doctors in this treatment

will be more likely to prescribe antibiotics if they believe that is what patients seek.

Otherwise, and assuming that they are aware of proper antibiotics use, they should be

less likely to prescribe antibiotics since unnecessary prescriptions impose significant

financial costs on patients and are inappropriate.        The second treatment involved

signaling that the patient had knowledge of appropriate antibiotic use and did not wish

to take them unnecessarily, while the third eliminated the financial incentive to

prescribe by indicating that the patient would purchase any drugs elsewhere.          A

fourth treatment combined the second and third treatments.

                                              5
     All of these treatments reduce antibiotics prescription.   Gift giving reduced the

antibiotic prescription rate by 13.3 percentage points from a baseline of 63.3%, and

reduced expenditures by 21.8 RMB from an average of 104.7 RMB (One RMB was

equal to approximately 0.16 $U.S. in January 2012). It also improved service quality.

The elimination of the financial incentive to prescribe had by far the largest effect:

Informing the doctor that the patient will buy elsewhere reduces the antibiotic

prescription rate by 51.6 percentage points from the baseline, a reduction of 82%.

Moreover, doctors are much less likely to prescribe powerful Grade 2 antibiotics

rather than cheaper Grade 1 antibiotics in this treatment.       However, service was

significantly worse.

     The patient’s display of knowledge reduced the antibiotic prescription rate by 20

percentage points, and reduced expenditures by 33.6 RMB.          It also eliminated the

unnecessary prescription of Grade 2 antibiotics.    Finally, the treatment combining a

display of knowledge with the removal of financial incentives to prescribe had an

effect that was only slightly greater than the removal of the financial incentive alone:

the antibiotic prescription rate fell by 55.0 percentage points, and expenditures fell by

74.1 RMB.

    Our paper suggests that antibiotic abuse in China is not driven by patients

actively demanding antibiotics, by doctors believing that patients want antibiotics, or

by doctors mistakenly believing that antibiotic prescription is in the best interests of

their patients, but is largely driven by financial incentives.     More generally, our

results demonstrate the power of the experimental audit study to test complex theories

                                           6
such as the “physician induced demand” hypothesis. Finally, our results suggest that

physician behavior can be significantly affected by the offer of a token gift, a finding

relevant to the controversy over the appropriateness of gifts to physicians.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides some

background information, Section III describes the study design, Section IV explains

the empirical model, Section V presents the results of the study, and Section VI marks

the conclusion.




II. BACKGROUND

     In this section, we provide background on medical care in China and the

physician induced demand literature, and offer a brief survey of the literature on gifts

that inspired one of our experimental treatments.         We also provide some discussion

of the advantages and disadvantages of our audit study methodology.

Outpatient Medical Care in China
    Chinese hospitals and physicians have substantial monetary incentives to

prescribe medications.     The equivalent of a U.S. primary care physician does not

really exist, so a visit to a hospital or clinic is often the counterpart to a visit to a

physician’s office in the U.S. (Hsiao and Liu, 1996; Yip et al. 1998; Hew, 2006;

Eggleston et al. 2008b).     Patients generally purchase drugs at hospitals as well.        The

central government sets hospital fees at a low level, and historically provided direct

transfers to hospitals to cover operating expenses (Hsiao, 1996; Eggleston et al.,

2008a).    Starting in the early 1980s, the government began decreasing financial

support to hospitals but did not allow them to increase fees (Yip and Hsiao, 2008).


                                               7
Hence, revenues from drug sales have become more important to hospitals over time.

Hospitals are allowed to add a 15% markup to drug sales (Liu et al., 2000; Eggleston

and Yip, 2004; Yip and Hsiao, 2008) and drug sales now account for over 50% of all

hospital revenues, with antibiotics accounting for 47% of all drug sales (Chen, 2005;

Gong, 2009). While doctors are generally salaried employees, their performance

bonuses often depend on the volume of revenues generated (Tang et al., 2007).2


     Kickbacks from pharmaceutical companies can provide further economic

incentives for physicians to prescribe medication, with physicians receiving payments

of up to 20% of the value of the prescription in some cases (Yip and Hsiao, 2008).3

These incentives mean that doctors not only have an incentive to prescribe, they have

an incentive to prescribe more expensive drugs, which are often the newer and more

powerful antibiotics that should be reserved for more dangerous infections.

Physician Induced Demand and Alternative Supply-Side Hypotheses

     In models of physician induced demand (PID), physicians trade off the income

gained by inducing patients to consume unnecessary services against the cost of

engaging in inducement.       The possible costs include a reduction in the doctor’s

utility from harming patients, or negative effects on the physician’s reputation (and

his/her ability to induce demand in future). One reason the model is difficult to test



2
  There has been some attempt to separate prescribing and dispensing in “grassroots” providers
such as community centers after 2009, but this has not affected hospitals.
3
  One source states, “For the pharmaceutical ‘Aztreonam’, from an unknown manufacturer and
priced at 32.3 RMB per box, doctors’ commissions are 20%, or approximately 6.5 RMB per
box. The First Hospital of Ningbo City sold 4,079 boxes, for sales of 131,751.7 RMB. 3,255
boxes were for inpatient use, and 824 boxes for outpatient use. 3,600 of those boxes were sold
with kickbacks, for an approximate 23,755 RMB paid out”.
(http://news.ifeng.com/society/1/detail_2010_05/27/1557378_0.shtml)
                                              8
is that it involves physician motivations.       That is, it is not sufficient to observe that

the doctor is over-prescribing.      One must also show that they know that this is

contrary to the patient’s best interests.

     McGuire (2000) offers an overview of attempts to test the PID model.              Many

follow Fuchs (1978) and examine the effect of physician density on the consumption

of procedures, or they examine the effect of physician fee changes on the volume of

services rendered (e.g. Rice, 1983; McGuire and Pauly, 1991; Yip, 1998).              Gruber

and Owings (1996) take a somewhat different tack and examine the effect of patient

availability on the use of Cesarean section for delivery.            Another strand of the

literature examines “small area variations” in the utilization of medical procedures.

Skinner (2011) provides an excellent review.         Geographical variations in the use of

procedures are often unrelated to average patient health outcomes and these variations

have been widely interpreted as evidence of excessive provision of medical care (e.g.

Fuchs, 2004).    Iizuka (2007) provides a recent test of the PID model.         He examines

the prescription drug market in Japan and finds that doctors’ prescribing patterns are

influenced by the size of the markup that they are allowed to charge on drugs.

     While the findings in empirical studies of PID are consistent with the PID

hypothesis, they are also generally consistent with other models.              For instance,

Chandra and Staiger (2007) offer a model of small area variations in which doctors in

high utilization areas are more skilled in the use of intensive procedures but less

skilled in the use of other procedures. Even given proof that doctors overprescribe,

or that they respond to economic incentives, it is difficult to observe their motives or

                                             9
to prove that they are trading off patient benefits against profits as the PID proposes.

Doctors may simply be incompetent, or may have mistaken beliefs about what

patients want.    Our “gift,” “display of knowledge” and “removal of financial

incentive” treatments are designed to directly evaluate these possibilities.

Gift Giving in Medical Care

   There is a large literature on gift giving in medical care.    Most of this literature

focuses on gifts from pharmaceutical companies to doctors.          These gifts run the

gambit from trips and sponsored dinners to notepads and pens with company logos.

It is estimated that pharmaceutical companies spend $19 billion per year marketing to

650,000 prescribing doctors in the U.S. (Brennan et al., 2006).

   Several studies have established that large gifts can have an influence on

prescribing patterns.   For example, Orlowski and Wateska (1992) compare the usage

of two drugs before and after an all-expense-paid trip and symposium sponsored by

one drug maker and found a significant increase in prescriptions of that company’s

drug.   Similarly, Dieperink and Drogemuller (2001) find a three-fold increase in the

use of a particular drug after the drug’s maker sponsored grand rounds (even though

when asked, physicians could not recall who had sponsored the grand rounds).

   Controversy still rages about whether a small gift, such as a pen, influences

prescribing behavior.   For example, Steinman et al. (2001) and Halperin et al. (2004)

argue that such small gifts are inconsequential.     In contrast, Wazana (2000) argues

that even a small gift may have an influence on behavior, while Dana and

Loewenstein (2003, pg. 252) state that “by subtly affecting the way the receiver

                                           10
evaluates claims made by the gift giver, small gifts may be surprisingly influential.”

     The economics literature suggests that gifts can be viewed as a signal of the

giver’s intentions with regard to the relationship (Camerer, 1988) and as such, they

call for reciprocity (Carmichael and MacLeod, 1997).                   These considerations suggest

that a small gift from the patient to the physician at the start of the visit could lead to

more cooperative behavior on the part of the physician.

     If the patient was viewed as demanding antibiotics, then a more cooperative

physician would be more likely to prescribe them. If on the other hand, the

physician knows that the antibiotics are not appropriate and that they represent a

financial burden to the patient, and if the physician does not believe the patient is

demanding them, then a cooperative physician will be less likely to prescribe them

when he/she receives a gift.

Audit studies of Medical Care

     Audit studies are used in many settings but are relatively uncommon in health

care.4 They can be used to isolate mechanisms through the use of matched pairs of

testers and random assignment.               In-person audits can provide not only quantitative

data on the outcomes of the audit, but also qualitative information on the process of

the audit (Pager 2007).             We collect quantitative data about whether or not an


     4
         There is a literature on “medical audit studies” but this usually refers to an analysis of a sample
of patient records. There are few audit studies with simulated patients. Tamblyn et al. (1997) study
Canadian physicians treating gastrointestinal problems and found that unnecessary prescriptions were
made in about 40% of cases.        Schulman et al. (1999) use an audit with actors to examine differences
in the care received by race and gender.       Feldman et al. (2006) conduct an interesting audit asking
whether a patient’s request for medication prevented physicians from properly diagnosing depression.

                                                      11
antibiotic is prescribed, the type of antibiotic, and the price, as well as qualitative

information about the patient’s experience of the visit.             This additional information is

helpful in assessing the doctor’s motivations.

      Currie, Lin, and Zhang (2011) conducted two previous pilot audit studies in 2008

and 2009 which demonstrated the feasibility of the current research.                   In the first, they

found that 65% of simulated patients with mild cold/flu symptoms in two large

Chinese urban areas and 55% of simulated patients in a rural area received

prescriptions for antibiotics.        Thus, the study confirmed that there is a high rate of

antibiotic abuse in China.          In the second, matched pairs of patients in one of the

cities went to the same hospital doctor presenting with mild cold/flu symptoms. The

patients followed the same script except that one patient said to the doctor “I learned

from the internet that simple flu/cold patients should not take antibiotics.”                        This

intervention reduced antibiotic prescription rates, but did not prove that the overuse of

antibiotics was due to PID.            For instance, a non-PID explanation is that doctors

assume that patients want antibiotics unless the patients tell them otherwise.

      Lu (2011) has recently conducted a small similar study by posing as the “family

member” of an imaginary elderly patient with diabetes or hypertension in Beijing.

She finds that doctors prescribe more expensive drugs for insured patients than for

uninsured patients when the doctors are told that the drugs will be purchased in the

doctor’s own hospital.5

5
  There are some potential issues with the Lu study. Only two testers were used (one was the author,
and in some cases they visited the same doctor within a week. If these visits are excluded then the
results are no longer statistically significant. Also, in several cases doctors refused to prescribe
without seeing the patient, and in others, doctors presented multiple treatment options at different price
points and the author selected the first plan presented to be considered in the analysis. In the current
                                                     12
     None of these studies can disentangle the primary reason for antibiotic abuse in

China because they do not combine demand and supply side explanations in one study.

The current study represents the first attempt to do so as well as the first experimental

audit study of gift giving to physicians.

     The leading concern about audit studies is that the auditors may not be effectively

matched (Heckman and Siegelman, 1993). In our study, effective matching means that

the groups of simulated patients are identical from the point of view of the physicians

except for specific departures from the baseline script.                 We provided extensive

training (described further in the Appendix) to ensure that simulated patients behaved

in a similar manner and gave the same chief symptoms.                We also randomly assigned

the patients roles so that it is possible to control for hospital and simulated patient

fixed effects in all our estimations.

     Another concern in an audit study is that the testers’ awareness of the experiment

may affect their expectations and/or behaviors and thus influence the results.                    For

example, in a study on racial discrimination in hiring, a black experimenter may be

more nervous or less confident than a white experimenter due to the expectation of

racial discrimination and their demeanor could affect the study’s results.

     Our simulated patients were informed about the design and purpose of the study.

We felt that since some of them would have been able to infer information about the

study from their roles, that it was better to give them all the same information.                 We

tried to minimize the potential impact of this knowledge through training.                         As



study hospitals were informed that the patients had no insurance at the time the appointment was made.
                                                   13
discussed further below, simulated patients were trained to dress properly, to strictly

follow the standard protocol, and to behave in an even-mannered way during the

outpatient visit so that, to the physicians, they differed only in the way indicated by

the experimental treatment.   In all but the gift treatment, the intervention occurs after

the initial examination so that it is also possible to check that there is no difference

(relative to the baseline) in the way the physician treats the patient prior to the

intervention.




III. STUDY DESIGN

    Our study was conducted in Beijing’s secondary and tertiary hospitals from

 October 2011 to January 2012, during flu season.     We restricted our sample to large

 general public hospitals as they are more likely to have more than two physicians in

 the respiratory department, and our auditors were less likely to be conspicuous in a

 hospital with a large volume of patients. We randomly choose 40 large tertiary

 hospitals out of the 48 tertiary hospitals in Beijing and 20 hospitals from the 26

 secondary hospitals.

    We trained 15 auditors (as described below and in the Appendix) who were

divided into three groups. Each group was assigned 20 hospitals and each auditor in

each group visited each of the 20 hospitals for a total of 300 visits.      Within each

hospital, each group saw two different doctors so that 120 doctors were seen in all.

     We designed a standard protocol which appears in Figure 1.      In the protocol, the

chief complaint for all simulated patients is, “For the last two days, I’ve been feeling

                                          14
fatigued. I have been having a low-grade fever, slight dizziness, a sore throat, and a

poor appetite. This morning, the symptoms worsened so I took my body temperature.

It was 37°C.”      In the baseline, the physician examines the patient and then gives a

prescription.     After leaving, the patient completes the evaluation form.            The

evaluation questions covered information about the physician and the complete

check-up process, including inquiries the physician made, the physical examination,

the diagnosis, and the type and price of the drugs prescribed (if applicable).

         We purposely chose very minor symptoms so that it would be difficult for

physicians to determine if the infections were viral or bacterial without further tests.

Since antibiotics are only effective in treating bacterial infections, it is important for a

physician to know the kind of infection a patient acquires before prescribing

antibiotics.    According to official guidelines (Ministry of Health of the People's

Republic of China, 2004), antibiotics should only be prescribed when bacterial

infections are confirmed by a patient’s symptoms and the results of blood or urine

tests.     Hence, doctors faced with these vague symptoms should not have prescribed

antibiotics and any antibiotic prescription represents antibiotic abuse. Any

prescription of powerful second line antibiotics for these mild symptoms is even more

concerning.

         Simulated patients underwent nine hours of group instruction and individual

practice, during which they received instructions on the transcript and how to behave,

dress, etc.     Students were instructed to take about 15 seconds to give the chief

complaint, to ensure that they did not speak too fast or too slow. The main goal was to

                                            15
standardize the simulated patients’ performance and appearance.                        To ensure that

simulated patients were well trained, after the group instruction and individual

practice, simulated patients tested the protocol twice in primary hospitals before the

actual implementation of the first audit study.

      Table 1 provides a brief taxonomy of our treatments.                 In the gift treatment (A),

a pen worth 1.4RMB is offered at the beginning of the visit.                    If the doctor refuses,

the patient is instructed to make a second attempt saying “This is just a tiny thing to

express my gratitude to you.” If the physician still does not accept, then the patient

is instructed to say “That’s all right,” and take the pen back.                The rest of the visit is

the same as the baseline.

      As discussed above, theories of gift giving suggest that receiving a gift inspires a

desire to reciprocate (Carmichael and MacLeod, 1997).6                       If a doctor believed a

patient wanted antibiotics prescribed, then a gift should increase the probability that

antibiotics are prescribed, if it has any effect.            Conversely, if the doctor knows the

antibiotic is inappropriate, and does not believe the patient wants it, then he or she

should be less likely to prescribe antibiotics when offered a gift.                       We can also

examine other aspects of the visit, such as how long it takes, whether the physician

uses more care, or is more courteous, to draw inferences about whether the doctor is

reciprocating for the gift.

      In Treatment B, following the physical examination, the patient says “I learned


6
  Doctors should be more likely to reciprocate if the exchange is viewed as the beginning of an
ongoing relationship. Since patients can phone clinics and request appointments with specific
doctors, it is not unreasonable to suppose that a doctor might view the visitor as a possible regular
patient.
                                                    16
from the internet that simple flu/cold patients should not take antibiotics.   Is this true?

Can I not take antibiotics unless they are necessary?”   Thus, the patient signals to the

physician that they have some knowledge of inappropriate antibiotic use while the

baseline patient does not.

     In Treatment C, following the physical examination, the patient says “Doctor, my

sister-in-law works at a drug store.   She can offer me a discount if I buy drugs in her

store.   But I don’t know what medicine to take, so could you please write a

prescription for me?”

     In Treatment D, the patient makes both statements to the physician, indicating

that he or she is aware of appropriate antibiotic use, and will not purchase antibiotics

from the hospital in any case.

     Drug expenditures were normally either listed on the prescription, or easily

obtained by going to the pricing window in the hospital pharmacy (85% of our visits).

In 2% of the cases, students obtained the drug price simply by looking at the

physician’s computer screen while the physician filled out the prescription. In the

remaining 13% of all cases, we found the prices either on the website of the local

Price Bureau, or through online search engines.

    To analyze the effects of patient knowledge on service quality, we had simulated

patients complete an evaluation form in addition to the on-site summary form.       After

completing all the audits, simulated patients evaluated the service they received from

each physician. They rated on a 1 to 10 scale (low to high) the service and their

degree of satisfaction. The last question on the evaluation form asked simulated

                                           17
patients how willing they were to recommend the physician to their own parents in the

event that their parents had similar symptoms.         A one indicated that they were

against recommending the physician while a 10 indicated that they would definitely

recommend the physician.

     In order to match patients to doctors, we created a table with the following

information for each simulated patient:       Visit Order, Visit Date, Role Assigned,

Hospital ID and Physician ID.       In each visit, the patient’s role and his or her visit

order was randomly assigned.          Appointments were made before the visit, in

conformity with the patient’s visit order.       All patients except the one in role D

(display of knowledge and the indication that the patient will purchase the drugs

elsewhere) see the same doctor.       Patient D visits another physician in the same

hospital.   Appointments were made with doctors in the respiratory medicine group at

the hospitals.    This process is illustrated in Table 2, which shows the information for

fifteen visits.

    Table 3 provides a check on the randomization.         It shows that there were no

significant differences in the characteristics of the doctor (age and gender), in the

number of physicians in the office, in the number of patients in the office, or in the

number of patients waiting outside of the physician’s office.

    Overall, 60% of physicians accepted the small gift when it was offered.       Table 4

shows that whether or not the physician accepted was not significantly related to

doctor characteristics or to characteristics of their offices.   However, some patients

were significantly more likely to have their gifts accepted, so that adding patient fixed

                                            18
effects increases the R-squared in these regressions.                        This result provides an

additional motivation for controlling for patient fixed effects in our regression models.

When considering the gift treatment, we consider the physician to have been treated if

they were offered a gift, whether or not they accepted it.7                        Hence, we estimate

“intent-to-treat” effects.




IV. EMPIRICAL MODELS

       Our experimental audit data can be analyzed by comparing means across the

baseline and treatment groups.             However, as discussed above, one of the main

concerns about an audit study is that doctors might react differently to different

auditors. Therefore, we also estimate models controlling for observable

characteristics of auditors and of doctors, as well as for the order in which patients

were seen.         We first estimate models of the following form:

       (1) Yijk = α0 + α1Roleijk + α2Xi + α3Zj + α4Orderijk + εijk

where i indicates the simulated patient, j indicates the physician, k indicates the

hospital, Yijk is the outcome of interest for simulated patient i's visit with physician j

in hospital k; Roleijk is a vector of dummy variables indicating the treatment (if

different from the baseline), Xi is a vector of patient characteristics (patient’s gender;

all students were 21); Zj is a vector of physician j’s characteristics (gender and a

categorical variable for the physician’s age,                20-30, 31-40, 41-50 and 51+ years);8

and Orderijk is a vector of dummy variables indicating whether the patient was the

7
     One might also view the patient’s statement about his or her esteem for doctors as part of the gift.
8
    This age variable is based on the patient’s assessment of the physician’s age.
                                                     19
second, third, or fourth patient seen by the doctor.

    We next estimate models including hospital fixed effects since there might be

systematic differences between hospitals.       Our most restrictive models include

patient fixed effects as well and take the following form:

    (2) Yijk = β 0 + β1Roleijk + β2Zj + β3Orderijk + δk + ηi + εijk,

where most variables are defined as above,δk is a vector of hospital fixed effects, and

ηiis a vector of patient fixed effects.

    The parameters of interest in these models are the vector β1, which show the effect

of the four treatments relative to the baseline.      When Yijk is a health care utilization

measure, such as the prescription rate for antibiotics, we expect β1 to be significantly

negative if the treatments decrease utilization. When Yijk is a measure of good service

quality, such as whether the physician describes possible side effects, we expect β1 to

be significantly negative if the treatments degrade service quality and significantly

positive if the treatments improves service quality.




V. RESULTS

    Table 5 shows the mean outcomes for the baseline and the four treatments. The

first row shows that the patient almost always receives a prescription for some type of

medication. There are many Chinese medicines that the doctor could prescribe.

However, the second row indicates that there is an alarmingly high rate of antibiotics

prescription:   In the baseline, 63.3% of these simple cold/flu patients receive a

prescription for antibiotics which is consistent with Currie, Lin, and Zhang (2011).

                                              20
Columns 2 through 5 of Table 5 indicate that there is a great deal of variation in

antibiotics prescription rates across our experimental treatments.

    Column 2 shows results for the gift-giving treatment (A).        Remarkably, while

100% of physicians in this treatment made a prescription, only 50% of the physicians

who were offered a gift prescribed antibiotics.      This is lower than the baseline rate

of 63%.        The difference in raw means is not statistically significant, gift giving

results in significantly lower rates of antibiotic prescription in models with patient

fixed effects.     Column 3 focuses on Treatment B, the display of knowledge about

antibiotics.     Only 43.3% of these patients received prescriptions for antibiotics, a

statistically significant reduction of 20 percentage points from the baseline.

    Column 4 shows the results of Treatment C in which patients indicated that they

would purchase drugs elsewhere.             Only 11.7% of these patients received

prescriptions for antibiotics, which represents a statistically and behaviorally

significant a reduction of 51.6 percentage points from the baseline.             Similarly,

column 5 shows estimates from Treatment D in which patients both displayed

knowledge about antibiotics and indicated that they would purchase elsewhere.

These patients had the lowest antibiotics prescription rate of any group at only 8.3%.

    The rest of Table 5 provides more detail about types of drugs prescribed, drug

expenditures, and service quality.      Panel B shows results for the types of drugs

prescribed, conditional on prescription.     The gift giving treatment has no significant

effect.   Treatment B (the display of knowledge) reduces the prescription of Grade 2

antibiotics from 15.3% in the baseline to 3.4%.      This result suggests that physicians

                                             21
know that it is inappropriate to prescribe powerful Grade 2 antibiotics for simple

cold/flu symptoms, and that they are much less likely to do so if the patient might

know that this is particularly inappropriate.

     The “no purchase” treatments C and D have the largest effects, significantly

reducing the number of drugs prescribed, the probability that two or more drugs are

prescribed, and prescriptions for Grade 1 antibiotics.            Prescription rates for Grade 2

antibiotics fall to zero in this treatment, suggesting that the only motive for

prescribing these drugs for simple cold/flu symptoms is financial.

     Panel C of Table 5 shows that all of our treatments reduce drug expenditures

significantly relative to the baseline.       The “gift” treatment reduces them by a modest

21.8 RMB, while the “no purchase” treatment reduces them by much larger 66.4

RMB.      The “display” treatment is in between, reducing drug expenditures by

33.6RMB.

     Turning to service quality, Panel D shows that there were no significant

differences in the actual examination given to the patients after gift giving and prior to

any of the other treatment interventions.           However, Panel E shows that there were

differences in patient-doctor interactions.           In the gift treatment, physicians were

significantly more likely to give helpful advice such as suggesting that the patient

drink more water or get more rest 9 , and auditors indicated that they would be

significantly more likely to recommend the physician to their own parents, suggesting

that the overall interaction was more satisfactory.              In contrast, in the “display of

9
 Physicians also sometimes counseled patients to wear warm cloths, eat more fruit, or avoid strenuous
activity. We also coded this variable 1 if the physician offered this advice.
                                                     22
knowledge” treatment, physicians were significantly less likely to respond politely at

the end of the visit.      In the two “no purchase” treatments, physicians were also

significantly less likely to give helpful advice and patients were less likely to say that

they would recommend the doctor to their own parents.

    Finally, Panel F examines several aspects of service quality conditional on drug

prescription.    In the baseline, only 32.2% of physicians offer instructions about drug

usage, and only 5.1% inform patients about side effects without being asked.         Both

of these proportions fall to zero in the two “no purchase” treatments, a difference that

is statistically significant.

    Table 6 shows our results regarding prescription in a regression context.          As

discussed above, it is important to control for possible differences in doctor’s

reactions to our auditors as well as for any systematic differences across hospitals.

The first four columns focus on whether antibiotics are prescribed, and show that

adding control variables, hospital fixed effects, or patient fixed effects has little

impact on the point estimates.     There is some evidence that male patients are more

likely to be prescribed antibiotics, though this coefficient is no longer statistically

significant in models with hospital fixed effects.

    The main results regarding antibiotics prescription are in line with those in Table

5 and indicate that the “no purchase” treatment has by far the largest impact on

prescription rates, though gift giving and a display of knowledge also reduce

antibiotic prescriptions significantly once patient fixed effects are included in the




                                           23
model.10     The interaction between “display” and “no purchase” is not statistically

significant, but the coefficient estimate suggests that consistent with Table 5, a display

of knowledge has little additional effect on antibiotics prescriptions when the

financial incentive to prescribe has been eliminated.

     Columns 5 to 7 focus on additional aspects of antibiotics prescription in models

that include all of the control variables, hospital fixed effects, and patient fixed effects.

Column 5 indicates that doctors in the “display” and “no purchase” treatments are less

likely to prescribe two or more drugs, while column 6 indicates that grade 2

antibiotics are significantly less likely to be prescribed. Finally, column 7 shows that

drug expenditures are reduced by all of our treatments, with the largest reductions

associated with the “no purchase” treatments.

     Table 7 explores the effects of the treatment on service quality.               We do not show

the control variables in this table, since they were never statistically significant.               The

estimates in the top row of both panels indicate that gift giving resulted in

significantly better service.        Doctors were more likely to use a stethoscope, more

likely to offer helpful advice such as suggesting that the patient drink more water, and

more likely to inform the patient about drug side effects.                Patients perceived better

quality service and were 1.5 points (out of 10) more likely to say that they would

recommend the doctor to their own parents.

     The display of knowledge treatment had relatively little effect on service quality,

though physicians were less likely to respond politely after being thanked at the end
10
    The coefficient on the gift treatment becomes significant once patient fixed effects are added which
is perhaps consistent with the fact that some patients were more successful than others in having their
gifts accepted.
                                                    24
of the visit, and patients indicated that they would be half a point less likely to

recommend the doctor to their own parents.11

     The “no purchase” treatment had larger negative effects on service quality.

Physicians were less likely to instruct the patient on drug usage, less likely to offer

helpful advice such as drinking more water, and less likely to respond politely after

being thanked.       Patients were, in turn, 1.1 points less likely to say that they would

recommend the physicians to their own parents.                     Visits were also shorter in this

treatment, though that difference is significant only at the 90% level of confidence.



VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
      We use the audit study method to examine supply and demand factors related to

the overuse of antibiotics in China, and the hypothesis that overuse is caused by

physician-induced demand.            Our results provide evidence that antibiotics overuse is

related to physician financial incentives.             Eliminating these incentives dramatically

reduces inappropriate prescription of antibiotics for cold/flu symptoms, and

completely eliminates the prescription of expensive and powerful Grade 2 antibiotics

for these patients.

      Our study is the first to address all of the leading explanations for the overuse of

antibiotics in a single framework.             Our estimates suggest that at least in Beijing

hospitals, physicians do not prescribe antibiotics primarily because patients demand

them, because doctors believe that patients want antibiotics, or because physicians

11
   As shown in the Appendix, simulated patients were also asked a number of other questions about
service quality, such as whether they felt that the doctor treated them courteously and respect. We did
not find significant effects of the treatments on these other questions, with the exception that patients in
the “no-incentive” treatment C reported that doctors were less likely to treat them with consideration.
                                                     25
erroneously believe that such prescriptions are in the best interests of the patient.

Indeed, physicians who are offered a small gift improve service quality and reduce

prescriptions of antibiotics.   Hence, doctors who are making a greater effort to please

patients reduce rather than increase antibiotic prescriptions.

     These results can be contrasted with the treatment in which patients display

knowledge about the appropriate use of antibiotics.       This treatment also resulted in

reduced prescription rates, but degraded service quality.        The fact that we measure

the effects of our treatments on service quality as well as on antibiotic prescriptions

helps us to understand the potential costs and benefits of different interventions from

the point of view of the patient.     Only gift giving resulted in both lower rates of

unnecessary antibiotic prescription and improved patient service.

     The gift-giving treatment also provides the first experimental evidence that

doctors can be influenced by token gifts, such as pens.     Hence, this evidence may be

of interest in the wider debate about the role of gifts in medicine, and supports Dana

and Loewenstein’s (2003) contention that even small gifts can be influential.

    Our results are suggestive about the types of reforms that could lead to lower use

of antibiotics in China, and perhaps in other places where overuse is a significant

problem (e.g. India, see Das and Hammer, 2007).             They suggest that payment

reforms would likely have the largest impact on this problem, but that it might also be

possible to achieve some reduction in inappropriate antibiotic use by, for example, a

widespread public advertising campaign noting that antibiotics are not appropriate for

the treatment of simple colds and the flu, or by requiring hospitals to post notices with

                                            26
this information in examination rooms.      An important caveat is that any specific

reform to hospital payments systems in China could have unintended effects, and

would have to be specifically evaluated.




                                           27
REFERENCES

Bennett, Daniel,Che-Lun Huang and Tsai-Ling Lauderdale, “Health Care Competition
    and Antibiotic Use in Taiwan,” Harris School of Policy Studies, 8(2010)

Bi, Peng,Shilu Tong and Kevin A. Parton, “Family Self-medication and Antibiotics
     Abuse for Children and Juveniles in a Chinese City,” Social Science and
     Medicine 50 (2000), 1445-1450.

Brennan, TroyenA., David J. Rothman, Linda Blank, David Blumenthal, Susan C.
    Chimonas, Jordan J. Cohen, Janlori Goldman, Jerome P. Kassirer, Harry Kimball,
    James Naughton and Neil Smelser, “Health Industry Practices that Create
    Conflicts of Interest,” JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association
    295 (2006), 429-433.

Camerer, Colin, “Gifts as Economic Signals and Social Symbols,” American
   Sociological Review 94(1988), 180-214.

Carmichael, H. Lorne and W. Bentley MacLeod, “Gift Giving and the Evolution of
    Cooperation,” International Economic Review 38 (1997), 485-509.

Cars,Håkan and Anders Håkansson, “To Prescribe-or not to Prescribe-antibiotics:
     District Physicians’ Habits Vary Greatly, and are Difficult to Change,”
     Scandinavian Journal of Primary Health Care 13 (1995), 3-7.

Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas Staiger, “Productivity Spillovers in Healthcare:
    Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economics
    115(2007), 103-140.

Chen,Meiping, “Analysis on the Condition of, Reasons for and Control on Antibiotic
    Abuse,” Jiangsu Health Care Management 16 (2005), 49-50. (in Chinese)


Currie, Janet,Wanchuan Lin and Wei Zhang, “Patient Knowledge and Antibiotic
     Abuse: Evidence from an Audit Study in China,” Journal of Health Economics
    30(2011),933-949.

Dana, Jason and George Loewenstein, “A Social Science Perspective on Gifts to
    Physicians from Industry,” JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical
    Association290(2003), 252–255.

Dar-Odeh, NajlaSaeed, Osama Abdalla Abu-Hammad, Mahmoud Khaled
    Al-Omiri, AmeenSamehKhraisat and Asem Ata Shehabi, “Antibiotic
    Prescribing Practices by Dentists: A Review,” Therapeutics and Clinic Risk
                                        28
     Management 6(2010), 301-306.

Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer, “Location, Location, Location: Residence, Wealth,
     and the Quality of Medical Care in Delhi, India,” Journal of Telemedicine and
     Telecare 17(2011), 336-337.

Dieperink, Michael E., Drogemuller and Lisa Drogemuller, “Industry-Sponsored
    Grand Rounds and Prescribing Behavior,” JAMA: the Journal of the American
    Medical Association, 285(2001), 1443-1444.

Dong, Hengjin,LennartBogg, Keli Wang, ClasRehnberg and VinodDiwan, “A
    Description of Outpatient Drug Use in Rural China: Evidence of Differences
    Due to Insurance Coverage,” The International Journal of Health Planning and
    Management 14 (1999), 41-56.

Dranove, David, “Pricing by Non-profit Institutions: the Case of Hospital
    Cost-shifting,”Journal of Health Economics 7 (1988), 47-57.

Egglestion, Karen and Winnie Yip, “Hospital Competition Under Regulated Prices:
       Application to Urban Health Sector Reforms in China,” Tufts University
       Working Paper (2004).

Eggleston, Karen, Ling Li, QingyueMeng, Magnus Lindelow and Adam Wagstaff,
    “Health Service Delivery in China: A Literature Review,” Health Economics 17
    (2008a), 149-65.

Eggleston, Karen,Yu-Chu Shen, Joseph Lau, Christopher H. SchmidandJia Chan,
    “Hospital Ownership and Quality of Care: What Explains the Different Results
    in the Literature?” Health Economics 17 (2008b.): 1345-1362.

Feldman, Mitchell D., Peter Franks, Ronald M. Epstein, Carol E. Franz, and Richard L.
    Kravitz, “Do Patient Requests for Antidepressants Enhance or Hinder Physicians’
    Evaluation of Depression? A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Medical Care 44
    (2006), 1107-1113.

Fuchs, Victor R, “Reflections on the Socio-economic Correlates of Health,” Journal of
    Health Economics 23 (2004): 653-661.

Fuchs, Victor R, “The Supply of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations,” The
    Journal of Human Resources 13(1978), 35-56.

Gong, Aiqun, “The Reasons for and Consequences of Antibiotic Abuse,”
    Heilongjiang Medicine Journal 22 (2009), 368-369. (in Chinese)

Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings, “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean
                                          29
    Section Delivery,”RAND Journal of Economics 27 (1996), 99–123.

Guo, Dongmei, “Analysis of Current Situation of the Anti-infective Market in China,”
    China Pharmacy15 (2004): 528-531. (in Chinese)

Halperin, Edward C., Paul Hutchison and Robert C. Barrier, “A Population-Based
    Study of the Prevalence and Influence of Gifts to Radiation Oncologists from
    Pharmaceutical Companies and Medical Equipment Manufacturers,” Journal of
    Radiation Oncology 59 (2004), 1477-1483.

Heaton, Paul and Eric Helland, “Does Treatment Respond to Reimbursement Rates?
    Evidence from Trauma Care,” RAND Working Paper No.WR-648-ICJ, Published
    by the RAND Corporation, Santa Monica (2009).

Hew, Chee, “Healthcare in China: Towards Greater Access, Efficiency and Quality,”
    New York IBM Business Consulting Service working paper (2006).

Hsiao, William C.L. and Yuanli Liu, “Economic Reform and Health— Lessons from
    China,” The New England Journal of Medicine 335(1996), 430-432.

Hu, Suping,Xiuheng Liu and Yan Peng, “Assessment of Antibiotic Prescription in
     Hospitalized Patients at a Chinese University Hospital,” Journal of Infection 46
     (2003),161-163.(in Chinese)

Iizuka, Toshiaki, “Experts’ Agency Problems: Evidence from the Prescription Drug
     Market in Japan,” RAND Journal of Economics 38 (2007), 844-862.

James, William D., Timothy G. Berger,and Dirk M. Elston, “Contact dermatitis and
     drug eruptions” (pp. 88-137),in James, William D., Timothy G. Berger,and Dirk
     M. Elston (Eds.), Andrews’ diseases of the skin (China: Elsevier, 2011).
Liu, Xingzhu,Yuanli Liu and Ningshan Chen, “The Chinese Experience of Hospital
     Price Regulation,”Health Policy and Planning 15 (2000), 157–163.


Lu, Fangwen,“ Insurance Coverage and Agency Problems in Doctor Prescriptions:
     Evidence from a Field Experiment in China,”Working Paper,2011.


McGuire, Thomas G., “Physician Agency,” Handbook of Health Economics 1(2000),
   461-536.

McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly, “Physician Response to Fee Changes with
   Multiple Payers.”Journal of Health Economics 10 (1991), 385-410.

Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China, “Hospital Infection Control
                                          30
    Practices,” (2000),
    http://www.moh.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/mohyzs/s3593/200804/186
    26.htm. (in Chinese).

Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China, China Health Statistics
       Yearbook 2009 (Beijing: Peking Union Medical College Publishing
       House,2009 )(in Chinese),

Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China, State Administration of
       Traditional Chinese Medicine of the People’s Republic of China, Health
       Department of General Logistics, “Guiding Principles for Clinical Application
       of Antibacterial, ” Chinese Medicine Modern Distance Education of China 2
       (2006), 10–11 (in Chinese).


Orlowski, James P. and Leon Wateska, “The Effects of Pharmaceutical Firm
    Enticements on Physician Prescribing Patterns: There’s No Such Thing as a Free
    Lunch,” Chest, 102(1992), 270-273.


Pager, Devah, “The Use of Field Experiments for Studies of Employment
    Discrimination: Contributions, Critiques, and Directions for the Future,”The
    Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 609 (2007),
    104-133.

Phelps, Charles E.,“Bug/drug Resistance: Sometimes Less Is More,”Medical Care 27
    (1989),194-203.

Rice, Thomas H., “The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on
     Physician-induced Demand,” Medical Care 21 (1983), 803-815.

Roumie, ChristianneL.,Natasha B. Halasa, Carlos G. Grijalva, Kathryn M. Edwards,
   Yuwei Zhu, Robert S. Dittus and Marie R. Griffin, “Trends in Antibiotic
   Prescribing for Adults in the United States—1995 to 2002,”Journal of General
   Internal Medicine 20 (2005), 697-702.

Schulman, Kevin, Jesse A. Berlin, William Harless, Jon F. Kerner,
    ShyrlSistrunk,Bernard J. Gersh, Ross Dubé, Christopher K. Taleghani,Jennifer E.
    Burke,Sankey Williams, John M. Eisenberg, William Ayers and José J.
    Escarce,“The Effect of Race and Sex on Physicians’ Recommendations for
    Cardiac Catherterization,”New England Journal of Medicine 340(1999), 618-626.

Schwartz, Bryan, Ralph Gonzales, John F. Steiner and Merle A. Sande, “Why do
    Physicians Prescribe Antibiotics for Children with Upper Respiratory Tract
                                         31
    Infections?”JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association279 (1998),
    881-882.


Siegelman, Peter and James Heckman, "Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement
     of Discrimination in America" (Washington D.C., NY: Urban Institute, 1993).

Shehab, Nadine, Priti R. Patel, Arjun Srinivasan and Daniel S. Budnitz, “Emergency
    Department Visits for Antibiotic-Associated Adverse Events,” Clinical Infectious
    Diseases, 47(2008), 735-743.

Skinner, Jonathan, “Causes and Consequences of Regional Variations in Health Care,”
    (pp. 45-93), Handbook of Health Economics, Vol.2 (Elsevier, 2011).

Steinman, Michael A., Michael G. Shlipak and Stephen J. McPhee,“ Of Principles and
     Pens: Attitudes and Practices of Medicine Housestaff toward Pharmaceutical
     Industry Promotion,” American Journal of Medicine 110(2001), 551-557.

Sun, Xiaoyun,Sukhan Jackson, Gordon A. Carmichael and Adrian C. Sleigh,
     “Prescribing behavior of village doctors under China's New Cooperative Medical
     Scheme,” Social Science and Medicine 68 (2009), 1775-1779.

Tamblyn, Robyn, W. Dale Dauphinee, Rolan Grad, Peter McLeod, Linda Snell,
   “Unnecessary Prescribing of NSAIDs and the Management of NSAID-Related
   Gastropathy in Medical Practice,” Annals of Internal Medicine 15(1997),
   429-438.

Tang, Shenglan, Jing Sun, Gang Qu and Wen Chen ,“Pharmaceutical Policy in China:
    Issues and Problems,” (2007) ,
    http://archives.who.int/tbs/ChinesePharmaceuticalPolicy/English_Background_D
    ocuments/summarypapers/PPChinaIssuesProblemsShenglan.doc.

Wazana, Ashley, “MDs, Physicians and the Pharmaceutical Industry: Is a Gift Ever
    Just a Gift?” JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association 283
    (2000), 373-380.

Yao, Kai-hu and Yong-hong Yang, “Streptococcus Pneumoniae Diseases in Chinese:
     Past, Present and Future,” Vaccine 26 (2008), 4425-4433.

Yip, Winnie C., “Physician Response to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the
     Volume of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in the Medicare and
     Private Sectors,” Journal of Health Economics 17 (1998), 675-699.

Yip, Winnie C. andWilliam C. Hsiao, “The Chinese Health System at a Crossroads,”
     Health Affairs 27 (2008), 460-468.
                                         32
Zhang, Ruifang,Eggleston Karen, Rotimi Vincent andZeckhauser Richard, “Antibiotic
   Resistance as A Global Threat: Evidence from China, Kuwait and the United
   States,” Global Health 2 (2006), 1-14.




                                       33
               Figure 1: Physician-visiting Protocol

Step 1                      Gift giving occurs in the gift
                            treatment (A)




Step 2                      Simulated patients give chief
                            complaint



Step 3                     Physicians give a physical
                           examination



Step 4   Baseline and         Simulated patient B            Simulated patient C         Simulated
         Gift treatment       says:” I learned from          says:”Doctor, my sister‐    patient D
         patients
         p        do          the internet that              in‐law works in a drugg     says
                                                                                           y both
         nothing.             simple flu/cold                store. She could offer      what B and
                              patients should not            me a discount if I buy      C says.
                              take antibiotics. Is           drugs in her store. But I
                              that true? Can I not           don't know what
                              take antibiotics               medicine I should take,
                              unless you think it’s          so would you please
                              necessary?                     write a prescription for



Step 5                     Physician prescribes.


Step 6                     Simulated patients complete
                           an evaluation questionnaire.
                 Table 1：Taxonomy of Treatments
                             No-Display            Display
                             Baseline/Type
Incentive                                          Type B
                             Agift

No-incentive                 Type C                Type D




        Table 2: Determining the role and order of simulated patients
              (An example showing the first 15 observations)
                                             Visit
                       Student     Role               Hospital Physician
   Case    Visit Date                        Order
                         ID      Assigned                ID         ID
                                            Assigned
    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)
                        th
    1-1      Nov. 15            1       Baseline     Fourth          A           A1
                        th
    1-2      Nov. 14            2         Agift       Third          A           A1
                        th
    1-3      Nov. 12            3            C       Second          A           A1
                        th
    1-4      Nov. 17            4            D        Fifth          A           A2
                        th
    1-5      Nov. 11            5            B        First          A           A1
                       th
    2-1       Dec. 8            1       Baseline     Fourth          B           B1
                     nd
    2-2       Dec. 2            2            C        First          B           B1
                       th
    2-3       Dec. 4            3            D        Third          B           B2
                       rd
    2-4       Dec. 3            4         Agift      Second          B           B1
                       th
    2-5       Dec. 9            5            B        Fifth          B           B1
                       th
    3-1      Dec. 14            1            B        Third          C           C1
                       th
    3-2      Dec. 12            2            C       Second          C           C1
                       th
    3-3       Dec. 9            3         Agift       First          C           C1
                       th
    3-4      Dec. 16            4      Baseline       Fifth          C           C1
                       th
    3-5      Dec. 15            5            D       Fourth          C           C2
Notes: In Treatment D, the patient makes both statements to the physician, indicating
that he or she is aware of appropriate antibiotic use, and will not purchase antibiotics
from the hospital in any case. The order of the two lines is also randomly determined
before visiting the physician.
                                                 Table 3: Randomization Check
                                                                                                          D_Display+   Equal
                                                                                               C_No
                                                       Baseline      A_Gift      B_Display                    No     Means Test
                      Variable                                                                Purchase
                                                                                                           Purchase   p-value
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
Physician's age                                      1.68          1.68          1.68          1.68         1.67        1.00
                                                     [0.099]       [0.099]       [0.099]       [0.099]      [0.134]
Proportion of male physicians                        0.43          0.43          0.43          0.43         0.38        0.97
                                                     [0.064]       [0.064]       [0.064]       [0.064]      [0.063]
Proportion of office-sharing physicians              0.28          0.28          0.28          0.28         0.30        1.00
                                                     [0.064]       [0.059]       [0.064]       [0.064]      [0.065]
Number of (other) physicians in the office           1.71          1.59          1.64          1.64         1.73        0.98
 (conditional on office-sharing)                     [0.194]       [0.193]       [0.169]       [0.169]      [0.182]
Number of (other) patients in the office             0.56          0.58          0.48          0.58         0.56        0.98
 (unconditional on office-sharing)                   [0.143]       [0.124]       [0.132]       [0.154]      [0.128]
Number of (other) patients in the office             2.00          1.94          1.71          2.07         1.73        0.76
 (conditional on office-sharing)                     [0.234]       [0.181]       [0.266]       [0.286]      [0.182]
Number of patients in the waiting areas              2.72          2.53          2.98          3.00         3.04        0.71
                                                     [0.348]       [0.260]       [0.503]       [0.400]      [0.300]
Average Number of patients in the waiting areas      2.32          2.07          2.61          2.54         2.44        0.75
(per doctor)                                         [0.350]       [0.227]       [0.513]       [0.406]      [0.288]
Observations                                         60            60            60            60           60          1
Multivariate test of equal means based on Wilk's Lamda: P-value 1.00 (not including variables conditional on office-sharing)
Notes: Standard deviations are in brackets. The reported p-value is from a test statistic generated by Wilks’ lambda.
                             Table 4: Gift Acceptance Decision
                             Dependent Variable : Gift Acceptance
Independent Variable                                         (1)             (2)           (3)
Doctor's Age: 41-50                                         -0.12          -0.07         -0.11
                                                           [0.139]        [0.138]       [0.168]
Doctor's Age: >=51                                          0.16            0.21          0.07
                                                           [0.186]        [0.182]       [0.220]
Doctor is Male                                              0.09            0.04         -0.03
                                                           [0.121]        [0.121]       [0.134]
Patient is Male                                             0.18            0.17
                                                           [0.127]        [0.122]
Share an office                                                            -0.22         -0.26
                                                                          [0.343]       [0.389]
Share an office * Number of other physician in the office                  -0.08         -0.05
                                                                          [0.246]       [0.325]
Share an office * Number of other patients in the office                    0.06          0.05
                                                                          [0.261]       [0.347]
Other people paying attention to the gift giving                           -0.28          -0.1
                                                                          [0.201]       [0.248]
Constant                                                         0.67*     0.77*          0.54
                                                                [0.142]   [0.147]       [0.357]
Observations                                                       60        60            60
R-squared                                                        0.25      0.36          0.51
Patient fixed effects                                                                       √
Notes:Standard errors are in brackets. Only Treatment A (gift) simulated patients are included.
The ommited doctor's age dummy is "Doctor's Age: 31-40".
An asterisk indicates that the variable is significant at the 95% level of confidence.
                    Table 5: Mean Outcomes for Baseline and Four Treatments
                                                                                            D_Display+
                                                                                  C_No
Variable                                    Baseline      A_Gift    B_Display                   No
                                                                                 Purchase
                                                                                             Purchase
Dependent variable                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
Panel A. Prescription Rates
Prescription rate                               0.983         1         0.967      0.933      0.867*
                                               [0.017]    [0.000]      [0.023]    [0.032]     [0.044]
Prescription rate for antibiotics               0.633        0.5       0.433*     0.117*      0.083*
 (unconditional on prescription)              [0.063]     [0.065]      [0.064]    [0.042]     [0.036]
Prescription rate for antibiotics               0.644        0.5       0.448*     0.125*      0.096*
 (conditional on prescription)                [0.063]     [0.065]      [0.066]    [0.045]     [0.041]
Panel B. Types of Drugs (Conditional on Prescription)
Number of drugs prescribed                      2.492      2.333        2.207     1.875*      1.615*
                                               [0.109]    [0.105]      [0.106]    [0.081]     [0.092]
Two or more types of drugs prescribed           0.932      0.867        0.828     0.750*      0.519*
                                               [0.033]    [0.044]      [0.050]    [0.058]     [0.070]
Prescription for Grade 1 antibiotics            0.492      0.383        0.414     0.125*      0.096*
                                               [0.066]    [0.063]      [0.065]    [0.045]     [0.041]
Prescription for Grade 2 antibiotics            0.153      0.117       0.034*     0.000*      0.000*
                                               [0.047]    [0.042]      [0.024]    [0.000]     [0.000]
Panel C. Drug Expenditures
Total drug expenditure in RMB                 104.652     82.885*      71.076*   38.302*     30.553*
 (unconditional on prescription)              [7.141]     [6.094]      [5.715]   [2.984]     [3.930]
Total drug expenditure in RMB                 106.426     82.885*      73.526*   41.038*     35.253*
 (conditional on prescription)                [7.036]     [6.094]      [5.640]   [2.862]     [4.167]
Panel D. Service Quality Before Intervention
Physician/nurse takes patient’s                 0.083      0.083        0.133      0.083        0.1
 temperature                                   [0.036]    [0.036]      [0.044]    [0.036]     [0.039]
Physician asks patient about sputum              0.5        0.55        0.533      0.433       0.483
                                               [0.065]    [0.065]      [0.065]    [0.064]     [0.065]
Physician uses a stethoscope                    0.317      0.483         0.4       0.333       0.333
                                               [0.061]    [0.065]      [0.064]    [0.061]     [0.061]
Panel E. Service Quality After Intervention, Unconditional on Prescription
Physician voluntarily suggests drinking         0.633      0.817*       0.583     0.433*      0.400*
 more water etc.                               [0.063]    [0.050]      [0.064]    [0.064]     [0.064]
Physician responds politely after being          0.8       0.867       0.617*     0.450*      0.400*
 thanked                                       [0.052]    [0.044]      [0.063]    [0.065]     [0.064]
Treatment Duration (min)                         4.65      4.758        4.483      4.017       3.967
                                               [0.359]    [0.204]      [0.311]    [0.294]     [0.272]
Patient’s would recommend physician to           5.9       7.267*        5.25     4.750*      4.667*
own parents (1–10: lowest–highest)             [0.319]    [0.134]      [0.273]    [0.215]     [0.201]
Panel F. Service Quality After Intervention, Conditional on Prescription
Physician asks about allergies                  0.508      0.583        0.586       0.5        0.519
                                               [0.066]    [0.064]      [0.065]    [0.067]     [0.070]
Physician instructs on drug usage               0.322       0.45        0.414     0.000*      0.000*
                                               [0.061]    [0.065]      [0.065]    [0.000]     [0.000]
Physician voluntarily informs patient           0.051       0.15        0.121        0           0
 of drug side effects                          [0.029]    [0.047]      [0.043]    [0.000]     [0.000]
Notes: Standard deviations are in brackets. An asterisk indicates that the difference between the
baseline and the treatment is significant at the 95% level of confidence.
                                         Table 6: Antibiotics Prescription
                                                                              Two or
                                                                              More         Grade 2    Drug Exp.
               Dependent Variable:       Antibiotics Prescription
                                                                              Types of     Prescribed In RMB
                                                                              Drugs
Independent Variable              (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)
Gift Giving                      -0.13        -0.13        -0.14     -0.15*       -0.05         -0.04         -23.52*
                               [0.078]      [0.078]      [0.071]    [0.072]     [0.071]       [0.044]         [7.520]
Display                         -0.20*       -0.17*       -0.18*     -0.19*      -0.16*        -0.13*         -33.18*
                               [0.078]      [0.078]      [0.071]    [0.071]     [0.070]       [0.043]         [7.468]
No Purchase                     -0.52*       -0.50*       -0.50*     -0.52*      -0.25*        -0.16*         -65.53*
                               [0.078]      [0.078]      [0.071]    [0.071]     [0.070]       [0.043]         [7.446]
Display * No Purchase            0.17         0.13         0.12       0.13         -0.1         0.11           22.49*
                               [0.111]      [0.114]      [0.104]    [0.105]     [0.103]       [0.064]        [10.951]
Doctor's Age: 31-40                           0.08         -0.03      -0.05       0.08          0.01            -3.57
                                            [0.187]      [0.194]    [0.195]     [0.191]       [0.118]        [20.380]
Doctor's Age: 41-50                           0.14         0.02       -0.02       0.13          0.04            6.77
                                            [0.189]      [0.195]    [0.197]     [0.193]       [0.120]        [20.614]
Doctor's Age: >=51                            0.13         0.06       0.03        0.22          0.06            20.8
                                            [0.190]      [0.213]    [0.215]     [0.211]       [0.131]        [22.469]
Doctor is Male                                0.04         0.05       0.04          0.1         0.02            -0.18
                                            [0.050]      [0.076]    [0.076]     [0.075]       [0.046]         [7.993]
Patient is Male                              0.13*         0.06
                                            [0.051]      [0.049]
Constant                        0.63*        0.51*        0.63*      0.63*        0.93*        0.15          104.64*
                               [0.055]      [0.206]      [0.290]    [0.278]      [0.289]      [0.165]        [26.951]
Observations                     300           300          300       300          300          300             300
R-squared                       0.21          0.25         0.51      0.55         0.48         0.33            0.55
Control variables                               √            √         √            √            √               √

Hospital fixed effects                                      √          √            √            √              √

Patient fixed effects                                                   √           √            √              √
Notes: Standard errors are in brackets. An asterisk indicates significance at the 95% level of confidence.
                 Table 7: Service Quality Unconditional on Prescription
                                 Before Intervention                  After Intervention
                                                                                Physician
                     Physician or                              Physician
                                   Physician       Physician                    responds
Dependent Variable   nurse takes                               suggests
                                   asks about      uses a                       politely after
                     patient’s                                 drinking more
                                   sputum          stethoscope                  being
                     temperature                               water etc.
                                                                                thanked
Independent Variable       (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)
Gift Giving               0.01          0.07            0.20*       0.19*             0.06
                         [0.057]       [0.096]         [0.089]     [0.088]          [0.080]
Display                   0.06          0.04            0.11         -0.03           -0.18*
                         [0.057]       [0.095]         [0.088]     [0.088]          [0.080]
No Purchase               0.01          -0.05           0.04        -0.19*           -0.35*
                         [0.057]       [0.095]         [0.088]     [0.088]          [0.080]
Display*No Purchase       -0.05         -0.03           -0.15        0.02             0.15
                         [0.083]       [0.140]         [0.129]     [0.129]          [0.117]
Constant                  0.08           0.5            0.32         0.63            0.80*
                         [0.202]       [0.385]         [0.358]     [0.345]          [0.296]
R-squared                 0.25          0.26            0.33         0.36             0.45

                                                   After Intervention

                                      Patient would
                                                    Physician      Physician      Physician
                       Visit Duration recommend
Dependent Variable                                  asks about     instructs on   informs about
                       (min)          physician
                                                    drug allergies drug usage     side effects
                                      (1-10)

                               (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)         (10)
Gift Giving                   0.06          1.45*           0.04          0.11        0.11*
                             [0.408]       [0.347]        [0.097]       [0.075]      [0.047]
Display                       -0.26          -0.57          0.05          0.11        0.08
                             [0.406]       [0.344]        [0.097]       [0.075]      [0.047]
No Purchase                   -0.69         -1.13*         -0.04         -0.32*       -0.06
                             [0.404]       [0.343]        [0.099]       [0.076]      [0.047]
Display*No Purchase            0.1           0.52           0.05          -0.09       -0.04
                             [0.595]       [0.505]        [0.146]       [0.112]      [0.070]
Constant                      4.64*         5.90*           0.51          0.32        0.05
                             [1.589]       [1.403]        [0.383]       [0.318]      [0.208]
R-squared                     0.35           0.43          0.27           0.43        0.32
Control Variables               √              √              √             √            √
Hospital fixed effects          √              √              √             √            √
Patient fixed effects           √              √              √             √            √
Notes: There are 300 observations. Standard errors are in brackets.
Columns 8-10 show estimates conditional on a drug being prescribed.
An asterisk indicates significance at the 95% level of confidence.
               APPENDIX: FIELD EXPERIMENT PROTOCOL

                                  I. INTRODUCTION

   The audit studies described in this protocol were conducted between October

2011 and January 2012, during the flu season. The basic design of an audit study

involves sending testers who follow a prescribed script to the people who are being

audited. All of our testers presented with a set of vague cold/flu-like symptoms

which are described in the script appended to this protocol. They did not ask for

antibiotics or any other particular treatment.

   Sections II and III describe the way in which hospitals and students were selected.

Section IV describes how students were trained to play the role of a simulated

patient. Section V describes how students were assigned to hospitals and doctors.

Section VI provides transcripts of the physician visits. Section VII describes how

testers were asked to evaluate their visits. Lastly, Section VIII describes how we

collected further data about the medicines prescribed.



                              II. HOSPITAL SELECTION

   We restricted our sample to large general public hospitals as they are more likely

to have more than two physicians in the respiratory department, and our auditors

were less likely to be conspicuous in a hospital with a large volume of patients. We

randomly choose 40 large tertiary hospitals out of the 48 tertiary hospitals in Beijing

and 20 hospitals from the 52 secondary hospitals. In China, non-urgent care patients

typically present at the department that they expect to be seen in.         We made

appointments for our patients with doctors in the department of respiratory medicine
                                           1
 at these hospitals as described further below.



                                III. STUDENT SELECTION

    We recruited students by advertising in collegiate online forums (i.e. BBS),

offering monetary compensation of 50 RMB per doctor visit (about 7 U.S. Dollars).

To ensure that students had time to conduct the experiment, in the advertisement we

indicated that students interested in participating should have at least three-half days

available without any class or other obligations. A total of 42 students sent an email

indicating their interest in participating.

    We met with the 42 students as a group and explained that the experiment

involved students going to hospitals to see doctors for flu-like conditions. Four

students were uncomfortable going to hospitals, and left. Of the remaining 38 students,

we selected students with no history of rhinitis or any other upper respiratory tract

infection to ensure that the physical condition of the students would not affect the

results. After further matching students based on their physical appearance, we chose

15 students to participate in the study and grouped them into 3 groups of 5 students

each. All of our students were 21 years old in their junior year.



                               IV. STUDENT TRAINING

    At the beginning of the training process, all students were asked to sign a pledge

of confidentiality. They then underwent 9 hours of group instruction and individual

practice to standardize their performance and appearance. During the training, they

not only learnt the purpose and the design of the study, but also received instructions

                                              2
on the transcript and how to behave, dress, etc. We also instructed students that if they

exhibited any symptoms of sickness, they would be asked to stop the experiment until

they fully recovered and no longer showed signs of sickness.

    To ensure that they did not speak too fast or too slow all students were instructed

to take about 15 seconds to give the chief complaint (about 31 Chinese words).

Additionally, students were given a patient evaluation questionnaire which they were

required to complete after each visit. The questionnaire covers the questions

physicians asked (whether the physician asked about coughing, sputum, allergies),

examinations the physician performed (took temperature, checked tonsils, used a

stethoscope), and the level of care provided to patients (informed patient of drug side-

effects, instructed on drug usage, suggested drinking more water, responded politely

after being thanked) and finally the circumstances of visit (number of other

physicians/patients in the office, number of patients in the waiting areas). To ensure

they could fill out the after-experiment survey properly, students were required to

memorize all the questions in the survey.

    After the instructions, students were separated into pairs and they practiced their

memorized transcripts via role-play (i.e. one student played the role of the “physician”

while the other played the role of the “patient”). Finally, each student practiced with

one of the principal investigators (Dr. Lin) individually, as a check on whether the

student had memorized the transcript. If anything was wrong in the practice, the

student was requested to keep practicing until he or she performed adequately.

    To ensure that simulated patients were well trained, before the actual

                                            3
implementation of the audit study, simulated patients conducted the experiment twice

in a primary hospital. Upon completion of the two practice visits, students were

required to show that they could bring back prescriptions and fill out the evaluation

questionnaire. If the two practice visits were carried out successfully, then we

considered students ready to go.




                                V. ARRANGING VISITS

       We created a table with the following information for each simulated patient:

Visit Order, Visit Date, Role Played, Hospital ID and Physician ID (See Table 2). In

each visit, the patient’s role and his or her visit order was randomly assigned.

Appointments were made before the visit, in conformity with the patient’s visit order.

All patients except the one in role D (display of knowledge and the indication that the

patient will purchase the drugs elsewhere) see the same doctor. Patient D visits

another physician in the same hospital. Appointments were made with doctors in the

respiratory medicine group at the hospitals. While Chinese students have health care

available on campus, they are not insured if they go off campus. At the registration

window, the hospitals were told that the simulated patients did not have insurance.



                   VI. PHYSICIAN-VISITING PROCEDURES
Gift-giving Procedures

       If a gift is to be given, it is given immediately upon meeting the doctor (See

Appendix Figure 1 for the gift). Patient Agift says: “I have a pen here. It is useful and

pretty. Please feel free to take it.” If the physician does not accept, simulated patient
                                           4
Agift says: “This is just a tiny thing to express my gratitude to you.” If the physician

still insists on not accepting the gift, Patient Agift says: “That’s all right.”   And then

the simulated patient takes the gift back.




Statement of the Chief Complaint
1. Hello, doctor!
2. For the last two days, I’ve been feeling fatigued. I have been having a low grade
    fever, slight dizziness, a sore throat, and a poor appetite. This morning, the
    symptoms worsened so I took my body temperature. It was 37°C.
3. If simulated patients are asked questions about symptoms mentioned in the chief
    complaint, they are supposed to answer appropriately. If the doctor asks about
    other symptoms not in the chief complaint, then they should say that there are no
    such symptoms.
4. Answer NO if asked the following questions:
            Do you feel nauseous?

                                             5
            Do you have any phlegm?
            Do you have any muscle soreness?
            Have you eaten anything bad or unclean recently?
            Are you currently taking any medications?
            Do you have medicine at home?


Physical Examination
 Physician: I’ll give you a physical examination/I will now conduct a physical exam.
 After the physical examination, patient B says “I learned from the internet that simple
 flu/cold patients should not take antibiotics. Is this true? Can I not take antibiotics
 unless they are necessary?”
 Patient C says: “Doctor, my sister-in-law works at a drug store. She can offer me a
 discount if I buy drugs in her store. But I don’t know what medicine to take, so could
 you please write prescription for me?”
 Patient D says both what Patient B says and what Patient C says.

 The doctor might ask some additional questions as follows:

 Physician: What kind of drug store? /what kind of drugs are there in the store?

 Patient: A big store. I guess it has all drugs I need.

 (If the physician does not want to prescribe)

 Patient: I need the prescription to buy medicine in the drug store. Would you please

 give me some advice?

 (If that does not work)

 Patient: I don’t know the medicine at all. Please write me a prescription, thank you.

 Patient: I am not familiar with the drugs. Please help prescribe the medicine.



 Physician’s Diagnoses and Explanation of Findings

                                              6
Physician: I’ll prescribe […] for you.
Patient: Okay. (ask the physician for information regarding side effects of the
       medicine after 3-4 seconds if the physician does not voluntarily inform you of
       the side effects).


Departure
Patient: Thank you! (Make sure to bring prescriptions with you as you leave).
Physician: You are welcome.


                            VII. PATIENT EVALUATION
    On the same day as the hospital visits, simulated patients were asked to evaluate
their visit according to the following questionnaire and submit it to the principal
investigator (Dr. Lin).


Physician Information Collection
(Note that the only information retained about physicians was their gender, and their
      approximate age).
1: What was the gender of the physician?
     (1) Male    (2) Female
2: What was the approximate age of the physician?
     (1) 30 or below (2)31-40      (3) 41-50   (4) above 50
3A: Did the physician share the office with other physicians?
3B: If yes, how many physicians shared the office?
4: While you were waiting to see the doctor, how many other patients were waiting
  with you in the waiting areas?
5: On average, how much time did the patient(s) before you spend with the doctor
 (minutes per patient)?
6: When you entered the physician's office, were there other patients in the office as
  well? If yes, how many?

                                           7
7: Did the physician ask whether or not you have cough symptoms?
8: Did the physician ask whether or not you have sputum?


Physical Examination
9: Did the physician/nurse take your temperature?
10A: Did the physician examine your tonsils?
10B: If yes, did the physician give you some information about the examination
      results？
11A: Did the physician use a stethoscope?
11B: If yes, did the physician give you some information about the examination
      results？


Physicians Diagnose and Explain Findings
12: Did the physician ask you whether you have a history of allergies?
13: Did the physician ask you whether you have cold medicine at home?
14A: Did the physician prescribe medication(s)?
14B: If yes, did the physician take initiative in giving instructions on drug usage? (i.e.
     before meals, after meals, how many times a day, how many pills a time, etc.)
14C: If yes, did the physician take initiative in telling you the side effects of the
      medicine?
15: Did the physician take initiative in telling you to pay attention to certain things?
   (i.e. drink more, have more rest, wear warm cloths, eat more fruit, or avoid
   strenuous activity etc).


Departure
16: After you said “Thank you, doctor,” did the physician respond to you with polite
   words like “You are welcome”, etc?


Satisfaction Appraisement for Physician (scores)

                                            8
     Lastly, simulated patients evaluated the service they received from each
physician. Service and degree of satisfaction were rated on a scale of 1 to 10 (low to
high).
17: How considerate was your physician during your hospital visit?
18: How would you rate the medical professional ability of your doctor?
19: How respectful was the physician of your opinions during the diagnosing process?
20: Do you think the physician offered you enough information about your treatment
    and illness?
21: Overall, how was your experience?
22: Would you recommend this physician to your parents, given that they presented
    with the same symptoms?
23: What was the treatment duration of your visiting? (in minutes)


                          VIII. PRESCRIPTION ANALYSIS
     All the simulated patients were asked to turn their prescriptions over to two
research assistants from School of Medicine, Peking University. By analyzing these
prescriptions, the research assistants obtained the following information:


1: The total number of drugs prescribed.
2: Whether antibiotics were prescribed.
3: If yes, the level of antibiotic prescribed.
4: The cost of the drugs prescribed.



     Costs were determined as follows. If the physician did not prescribe, then the

drug expenditure was zero. If drugs were prescribed, expenditures were calculated in

one of three ways: In 78% of all cases, the cost of the drug(s) was already listed on the

prescription, so we could calculate the drug expenditure directly. In 7% of the cases,

patients obtained total drug costs from the hospital pharmacy. In 2% of the cases,
                                                 9
students obtained the drug price simply by looking at the physician’s computer

screen while the physician filled out the prescription. In the remaining 13%, we found

the prices either on the website of the local Price Bureau, or through online search

engines, Google and Baidu. After being analyzed, the prescriptions were destroyed

since they could be used to identify hospitals and physicians.




                                          10
