                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE RAMSEY DISCOUNTING FORMULA FOR A HIDDEN-STATE STOCHASTIC
                          GROWTH PROCESS

                                         Martin L. Weitzman

                                        Working Paper 18157
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18157


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




I acknowledge research support from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Ramsey Discounting Formula for a Hidden-State Stochastic Growth Process
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 18157
June 2012
JEL No. Q5,Q54

                                            ABSTRACT

The long term discount rate is critically dependent upon projections of future growth rates that are
fuzzier in proportion to the remoteness of the time horizon. This paper models such increasing fuzziness
as an evolving hidden-state stochastic process. The underlying trend growth rate is an unobservable
random walk hidden by noisy transitory shocks and recoverable only as a probability distribution via
Bayesian updating. A simple expression is derived for the time-declining Ramsey discount rate.
The components of this hidden-state Ramsey discounting formula are then analyzed, followed by a
few remarks about possible implications and applications.


Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu
 The Ramsey Discounting Formula for a Hidden-State
            Stochastic Growth Process
                                    Martin L. Weitzman

                                         June 6, 2012



                                            Abstract

         The long term discount rate is critically dependent upon projections of future
      growth rates that are fuzzier in proportion to the remoteness of the time horizon.
      This paper models such increasing fuzziness as an evolving hidden-state stochastic
      process. The underlying trend growth rate is an unobservable random walk hidden by
      noisy transitory shocks and recoverable only as a probability distribution via Bayesian
      updating. A simple expression is derived for the time-declining Ramsey discount rate.
      The components of this hidden-state Ramsey discounting formula are then analyzed,
      followed by a few remarks about possible implications and applications.



1     Introduction to Long Term Discounting
The concept of discounting is central to economics, since it allows e¤ects occurring at di¤erent
future times to be compared by converting each future dollar into the common currency of
equivalent present dollars. Because of this centrality, the choice of an appropriate discount
rate is one of the most critical issues in economics. It represents an especially acute dilemma
for projects involving long time horizons, because in such situations the results of cost-bene…t
analysis (CBA) can depend enormously on the choice of a discount rate.
    The problem of an unsure discount rate has long bedeviled CBA, but it has acquired
renewed relevance lately because economists are increasingly being asked to analyze en-
vironmental projects or activities whose e¤ects will be felt very far out into the future.
Examples include nuclear waste management, loss of biodiversity, groundwater alterations,
   Department of Economics, Harvard University (mweitzman@harvard.edu). Without necessarily tying
them to the contents of this paper, I am grateful for useful critical comments to ...



                                                1
minerals depletion, and many others. The most prominent example by far is the economics
of climate change, which will be used throughout this paper as the prototype application.
    The e¤ects of global warming and climate change will be spread out over what might be
called the “distant future”–centuries and even millennia from now. The logic of compound
interest forces us to say that what one might conceptualize as monumental events do not
much matter when they occur in the distant future. Perhaps yet more disconcerting, when
exponential discounting is extended over very long time periods there is a truly extraordinary
dependence of CBA on the choice of a discount rate. Seemingly insigni…cant di¤erences in
discount rates can make an enormous di¤erence in the present discounted value of distant-
future payo¤s. In many long-run situations, including climate change, it may not be too
much of an exaggeration to say that almost any answer to a CBA question can be defended
by one particular choice or another of a discount rate.
    Answers to questions thrown up by climate-change CBA therefore hinge critically on the
core issue of how to discount the distant future.      There is a high degree of uncertainty
about what should be taken as the appropriate real rate of return on investments for the
long run, accompanied by much controversy about the implications for long-run discount-
ing. For speci…city, the investigation of this paper is focused sharply on CBA of small
investments that only incrementally impact distant-future events. However, many climate
change investments may themselves be big and involve large impacts. Yet even after some
of these big investments have been made, the issue of choosing the appropriate long-term
rate of return for additional marginal investments remains important and is emblematic of
a whole series of thorny issues concerning how to conceptualize and how to evaluate actions
spanning across many generations. The discount rate represents the current price of future
bene…ts or costs, and as such it is a convenient shorthand vehicle for studying the general
nature of investment tradeo¤s over time.
    The famous Ramsey equation relates the discount rate to the underlying growth rate
of consumption. There is no harm in accepting the implicit causality of this route by
conceptualizing the growth rate of consumption as being the more primitive entity, which
then determines the discount rate via the Ramsey equation. Such an approach has the
advantage of rigorously laying bare the exact structure of uncertainty and its resolution,
which undergirds time-varying discount rates. This route has already been taken by many
researchers, and is the route taken here. For the convenience of having a uni…ed framework,
I henceforth pretend that all research on time-varying discount rates was done as if it came
from within this Ramsey framework where growth rates determine discount rates.
    Behind the uncertainty about how to discount the distant future, therefore, lie uncertain-
ties about what will be the growth rate of the global standard of living leading to this distant


                                               2
future. Many kinds of uncertainty are involved. One important uncertainty concerns long
term prospects for technological progress and the degree to which this future technological
progress will be able to meet, overcome, or fall behind the unknown unfolding challenges
of resource, environmental, and historical constraints.      Despite decades of research into
the subject of economic growth, including the development of so-called endogenous growth
theory, we are nowhere near being able to predict worldwide growth rates of the standard of
living much beyond anything more fundamental than rough guesstimates of what the future
portends. As we all know, individual views of long term future growth prospects can range
from ultra-optimistic to ultra-pessimistic.
    Thus, I think it is important to begin by recognizing that there is no deep reason of
principle that allows us to extrapolate past growth rates into the distant future. The in-
dustrial revolution itself began some two centuries ago, and only slowly thereafter permeated
throughout the world. Merely lea…ng through the pages of Angus Maddison’s monumen-
tal work The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective 1 should convince a reader that the
world-wide growth process is, in the book’s summing-up, “uneven in space and time” and
“in no way linear.” It is di¢ cult enough to predict worldwide economic growth in the
next decade or two. Making growth projections over the next century or two seems almost
unbearably fuzzy. Yet dealing with this kind of fuzzy distant uncertainty is exactly what is
required to infer long-term future discount rates.
    A line of research over the past few decades has shown that future growth rates of
consumption which are uncertain but persistent can lead to a schedule of discount rates that
decline over time. This line of research on the mechanics and consequences of time-declining
discount rates due to various forms of growth-rate persistence is su¢ ciently comprehensively
summarized in Christian Gollier’s new book2 that I do not feel the necessity to delve into
details of the underlying models here, except to note one point.
    For most of the underlying models in this literature, the variance of the average future
growth rate over a given future time horizon declines (towards zero) as the horizon lengthens,
due to the law of large numbers. In other words, the prediction interval for the average
future growth rate typically narrows rather than widens with the prediction horizon. This
seems to me like a counter-intuitive speci…cation. The more distant is the time horizon,
the more uncertain should we be now about the average future growth rate. It seems only
natural that predicting the average growth rate over the next two centuries is fuzzier and
more speculative than predicting the average growth rate over the next two decades. In
  1
     Maddison (2001). See especially Table 8b on page 263.
  2
     Pricing the Planet’s Future: The Economics of Discounting in an Uncertain World. Princeton Univer-
sity Press (forthcoming October 2012).



                                                  3
this paper I examine the discounting consequences of a speci…cation where the variability of
the predicted average future growth rate widens with the time horizon.
    It seems to me natural, at least on a …rst pass, to model such kind of increasingly uncertain
growth scenario as an evolving hidden-state stochastic process in which the underlying trend
growth rate is an unobservable random walk. The underlying random-walking trend growth
rate is hidden by noisy transitory growth shocks and can only be recovered as a probability
distribution via Bayesian updating in a manner …rst emphasized by Muth and Kalman.
Such an approach highlights our critical inability to separate out what is permanent and
predictable about our present growth experience from that which is temporary and transient.
In this paper I propose to apply the simplest standard model of a hidden-state stochastic
process to the topic of determining the long term discount rate.
    My intent, then, is to merge the Muth-Kalman updated-prediction apparatus with the
Ramsey discounting apparatus. I believe that such a hidden-state formulation raises impor-
tant questions about modeling future growth rates and sheds useful new light on the sources
of a time-declining future discount rate. One source of a time-declining future discount rate
is that we are uncertain about the present underlying trend growth rate, which e¤ect would
remain to be played out over time even if the future trend growth rate were to remain still
and do no further meandering. The other source of a declining discount rate is that we are
uncertain about the future trend growth rate of a random walk, which e¤ect would remain
even if we knew exactly the state of the present underlying trend growth rate.
    The Ramsey formula for deriving a discount rate schedule from a single representative
agent, who stands in for an enormously heterogeneous real world having widely dispersed
growth rates, degrees of risk aversion, and rates of pure time preference, all of which are
then projected into a hazy distant future, is at the outer limits of abstract modeling. We
wouldn’t be taking this route if the issues were not so important. For all of its oversim-
pli…cations, I believe that the Ramsey approach yields fundamental insights –and that the
novel combination of the Ramsey equation with a hidden-state model of uncertain growth
rates is especially fruitful in unpacking a few key relationships hitherto unexplored.
    I thus view the hidden-state Ramsey approach primarily as a conceptual device for under-
standing an important series of interconnected issues concerning discounting in the presence
of a hazy future. But there is no use pretending that such a super-aggregated super-abstract
model has direct operational consequences obtainable by merely plugging in numbers and
directly obtaining quantitative outcomes. In this paper I emphasize overall simplicity and
understandability by leaning heavily on speci…cations having great analytical tractability.
The formulation here yields a remarkably simple expression for a time-declining discount
rate, which, I believe, gives some fundamental insights into the nature of long-term discount-


                                               4
ing that would otherwise not be available. The basic components of this simple discounting
formula will be analyzed in terms of underlying parameters, followed by a few speculative
remarks about possible implications and applications.
    A word of warning is in order about any model attempting to derive discount rate sched-
ules for the distant future (including the model of this paper). The models we use in such
exercises are all oversimpli…ed approximations. We have relatively more con…dence in the
approximations when conditions being investigated are not too di¤erent from the current
familiar situation. As we move further into the future, however, we have relatively less
con…dence in the approximations because we are attempting to extrapolate the local into
the global. Typically, some implication or another of the model is not credible in the limit
as future time approaches in…nity. For example, as noted above, most models used to de-
rive future discount rates in the existing literature have the unbelievable feature that the
variance of the average future growth rate approaches zero in the limit, so that by the law
of large numbers we e¤ectively know with certainty the long term growth rate. The model
of this paper does not have this particular unbelievable feature, but instead has the di¤erent
unbelievable feature that discount rates decline inde…nitely, approaching minus in…nity in
the limit. The underlying problem with all such models of discount-rate formation is that
the oversimpli…ed local approximations are increasingly breaking down as the time horizon
lengthens.     I do not think there is any general cure for this problem except to be careful
when trying to use such oversimpli…ed models for much more than giving general insights
into the process of long term discounting.


2    Growth Rates as Random Walks
This section attempts to succinctly provide the backdrop analytical framework that will be
used to develop the hidden-state stochastic growth process used throughout the rest of the
paper.
   Time is broken up into discrete periods represented by the integer-valued variable t. The
present corresponds to time zero, while future times correspond to integer values t > 0 and
past times correspond to integer values t < 0. Consumption in period t is Ct . The growth
rate of consumption in period t is

                                    ln Ct   ln Ct   1   = Yt :                            (1)




                                              5
   In turn, Yt is decomposed into the expression

                                          Yt = Xt + zt                                     (2)

where Xt is the permanent component of the growth rate at time t, while zt is a transitory
shock to the growth rate at time t. The permanent growth-rate component Xt is a random
walk satisfying
                                     Xt = Xt 1 + wt :                                  (3)

   The random variables fzt g and fwt g are mutually independent iid Gaussian processes
with distributions
                                    zt N (0; Vy )                                   (4)

and
                                        wt        N (0; Vx )                               (5)

    The stochastic process (2)-(5) constitutes a standard model well represented in the lit-
erature. (The notation Vy is used as a mnemonic in (4) because the variance of zt impacts
Y via (2); likewise the notation Vx is used in (5) because the variance of wt impacts X via
(3).)
    Let t > 0 be some future time. De…ne new random variables

                                                       X
                                                       t
                                            Zt               zs                            (6)
                                                       s=1


and
                                                  X
                                                  t X
                                       Wt                         ws                       (7)
                                                   =1 s=1

    Carefully iterating out and summing the equations (1), (2), (3) yields, after applying (6),
(7), the basic result
                               ln Ct ln C0 = Zt + t X0 + Wt :                               (8)

   From equations (4) and (6), it is readily apparent that

                                       Zt        N (0; t Vy ):                             (9)

   As for Wt , reversing the order of summation in (7) gives

                                            X
                                            t
                                   Wt =           (t     s + 1)ws ;                       (10)
                                            s=1


                                                   6
                       P
whose variance is Vx ts=1 (t s + 1)2 , which in continuous time becomes the much neater
            Rt
formula Vx 0 (t s)2 ds = Vx t3 =3. If we had chosen to express the di¤erence equation (3) as a
continuous-time stochastic di¤usion process, we would then have obtained the neater formula
directly. Leaving aside the arbitrary discreteness of the period length, we have shown that
the random walk (3) exerts a stochastic in‡uence on the random variable ln Ct ln C0 whose
variance is cubic in time:
                                     Wt N (0; t3 Vx =3):                                 (11)

   Were X0 observed directly, formula (8) would be su¢ cient to push on further with the
analysis in the reduced form

                           ln Ct   ln C0   N (tX0 ; tVy + t3 Vx =3):                     (12)

   However, when the permanent component of the growth rate is not directly observable,
then X0 becomes a random variable that must itself be inferred from the the noisy past
growth rates that have been observed. The next section describes brie‡y this process of
hidden-state inference and updating.


3    Hidden-State Growth Rates
This section develops succinctly the simplest standard model of a Muth-Kalman hidden-state
stochastic process. This baby model is applied to growth rates that will subsequently be
plugged into the Ramsey formula for determining discount rates.
    The growth of consumption during period t is given by equation (1), which is the only
part of the stochastic system that is directly observable (after its realization). For ana-
lytical convenience, I assume that in any period there is an in…nite past record of previous
observations.
    When period t opens, with Yt 1 having just been observed at the very end of period t 1,
suppose that
                                     Xt 1 N ( t 1 ; Vxy )                               (13)

for some mean t 1 and variance Vxy yet to be determined. (Later it will become clear why
Vxy carries the mnemonic subscript xy.) From the symmetry of the situation with an in…nite
number of observations of past growth rates, it is reasonable to postulate (and can be proved
rigorously) that Vxy is a constant independent of t.
    At the very beginning of period t (immediately after Yt 1 has been observed), the random
walk described by (3) occurs and Xt 1 ! Xt . The realization of the unobserved random


                                              7
variable wt adds variance Vx to the variance Vxy in (13), so that the variance of the estimate
of Xt increases to Vxy + Vx throughout period t. At the very end of period t, the observation
Yt is made, which adds precision 1=Vy and thereby lowers the variance of Xt back down to
Vxy according to the equation
                                       1        1      1
                                             +     =      :                               (14)
                                   Vxy + Vx     Vy    Vxy


    The corresponding Bayesian updating formula for                       t    is
                                               1                   1
                                            Vxy +Vx       t 1   + Vy
                                                                          Yt
                                   t   =             1           1             :             (15)
                                                  Vxy +Vx
                                                            +    Vy


    Equations (15) and (14) re‡ect the fact that Bayesian updating of normal distributions
is expressed in terms of additive weights of the precision, which equals one over the variance.
    Solving the quadratic equation (14) for Vxy , one obtains the formula
                                            p
                                                4Vx Vy + Vx2              Vx
                                 Vxy =                                             :         (16)
                                                       2

     Notice in (16) that Vxy = 0 if either Vy = 0 or if Vx = 0. When Vy is much larger than
Vx , then a good approximation for the formula (16) is

                                             Vxy          x y:                               (17)

   Equation (15) can be solved recursively to yield (for time zero)

                                                          X
                                                          1
                                                                    s
                                       0   = (1       )                 Y s;                 (18)
                                                          s=0


where
                                                    Vy
                                           =                 :                               (19)
                                               Vxy + Vx + Vy
    To summarize, the mean of the normally distributed random variable t X0 is t       0,   while
its variance is t2 Vxy , so that
                                 t X0 N (t 0 ; t2 Vxy ):                                     (20)

   Decomposing equation (8) (or (12)) into the independent normal probability distributions




                                                      8
(9), (11), (20) gives the basic result that

                                                                              Vx 3
                       ln Ct   ln C0       N        0   t ; Vy t + Vxy t2 +      t :     (21)
                                                                               3

   It is much easier to think in terms of average growth rates than changes in the log of
consumption as given by formula (21). If we de…ne the average future growth rate over the
time horizon [0; h] to be the random variable

                                                ln Ch           ln C0
                                       Gh =                             ;                (22)
                                                            h

then from (21) it follows that

                                                    Vy         Vx
                               Gh      N       0;      + Vxy +    h :                    (23)
                                                    h           3

    From formula (23) the variance of the average growth rate eventually increases with the
                                          p
length of the future horizon h (for h > 3Vy =Vx ). In other words, the prediction interval
for the average growth rate widens with the prediction horizon. I would view this as an in-
tuitively desirable property because, once the law of large numbers has eliminated stationary
background noise, I think that future average growth rates should become increasingly un-
certain as the time horizon is more remote. However, the other side of this same coin is that
the probability of large negative (or large positive) growth rates becomes increasingly likely
over a longer time horizon Both features are outcomes of the random walk speci…cation (2).
It is di¢ cult to model the one feature without the other (while preserving a consistently
symmetric treatment of time), so there may be a deep issue of model tradeo¤s involved
here. Perhaps the best interpretation is to view (23) as an acceptable approximation for
large h (centuries?) but not for too large h (millennia?). Perhaps an asymmetric treatment
of time is warranted for very large h. In any event, this paper is devoted to analyzing
the consequences for Ramsey discounting of the simplest standard model of a Muth-Kalman
hidden-state stochastic growth process, to which application we now turn.


4     Ramsey Hidden-State Discount Rates
Viewed from the present time t = 0, consumption Ct at future time t > 0 is a random
variable. The normative welfare criterion used throughout this paper is the standard formula




                                                        9
for expected present discounted utility of consumption
                                            "                        #
                                                X
                                                1
                                                           t
                                        E             e        U (Ct ) ;                      (24)
                                                t=0


where U (C) is the utility function of consumption and          0 is the rate of pure time
preference or utility discount rate.
    Suppose that someone proposes a marginal “project”that costs some in…nitesimally small
amount of consumption now (at time t = 0) but will safely deliver some in…nitesimally
small amount of consumption at time t > 0 in the future, independent of the state of the
world then. Should this project be accepted? This is the prototype question of investment
criteria that we are seeking to answer from within the Ramsey hidden-state framework.
    Applying the additively-separable expected present discounted form (24) to this problem,
we should accept the marginal project if and only if

                                        t
                                    e       E[U 0 (Ct )] > U 0 (C0 ):                         (25)

   We can translate the investment criterion (25) into the more familiar language of a
continuously-compounded discount rate as follows. De…ne the relevant discount rate for in-
vestment payo¤s at time t to be the value rt satisfying the equation exp( rt t) = e t E[U 0 (Ct )]=U 0 (C0 ),
which can be rewritten as
                                       1      e t E[U 0 (Ct )]
                               rt =      ln                    :                            (26)
                                       t          U 0 (C0 )
   Then applying (26) to (25), the project should be approved if and only if

                                             exp( rt t) > :                                   (27)



    Adding up linearly from (27), the basic principle of CBA here is that safe marginal
investments should be undertaken if and only if their present discounted bene…ts exceed
their present discounted costs, where the discount rate schedule to be applied to payo¤s at
future time t is given by formula (26).
    To get a more interpretable formula than (26), we need to put more structure on the
problem. Pursuing the spirit of utmost simplicity that this paper tries to embrace, without
further ado I just postulate further that U (C) is of the isoelastic or constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) form
                                                C1
                                        U (C) =      ;                                    (28)
                                                1


                                                          10
where > 1 is the coe¢ cient of CRRA. Note from (28) that marginal utility here takes the
simple form U 0 (C) = C . The CRRA speci…cation (28) is a familiar standby in applications,
but its assumption is not innocuous. The same comment could apply to other familiar
speci…cations and functional forms being assumed throughout this model. The saving grace
is that one obtains a relatively simple discount-rate formula, which gives some clear basic
insights that hopefully apply more generally.
    Applying (28) to (26) enables the latter to be rewritten as

                                      1         t
                           rt =         ln e        + ln E (Ct =C0 )            :                (29)
                                      t

   Plug the identity (Ct =C0 )    = exp(            (ln Ct   ln C0 )) into (29), thereby obtaining the
expression
                                     1
                         rt =          ln E [exp( (ln Ct ln C0 ))] :                      (30)
                                     t
    Plug the distribution (21) into (30). Make use of the standard formula for the expectation
of a lognormal distribution and rearrange terms to obtain, at last,
                                                2
                                                                            Vx 2
                         rt =     +      0             Vy + Vxy t +            t :               (31)
                                               2                             3

   Equation (31) is the Ramsey riskfree discount rate formula for the simplest model of
a hidden-state Muth-Kalman stochastic growth process. The remainder of the paper is
devoted to analyzing this time-dependent Ramsey discount rate schedule.


5    Analyzing Ramsey Hidden-State Discount Rates
The most intuitive way to understand formula (31) is to build it up piece by piece out of its
constituent components.
   When there is no uncertainty (Vy = 0, Vx = 0), then expression (31) reduces to the
famous deterministic Ramsey equation for the discount rate

                                             rt =     +      0   :                               (32)

   When there is only the uncertainty of transitory shocks (Vy > 0, Vx = 0), then (31)
reduces to a familiar expression for the Ramsey equation modi…ed for the presence of iid-
normal growth uncertainty
                                                                 2
                                      rt =     +       0             Vy :                        (33)
                                                             2


                                                     11
    Formula (33) indicates the well known result that the presence of iid growth shocks uni-
formly lowers the Ramsey discount rate, because the attractiveness of a risk-free investment
increases when consumption is uncertain, but it does not cause the discount rate to change
over time. For the Ramsey discount rate on a safe investment to exhibit time dependence
of its term structure in an otherwise symmetric setting requires some persistence of growth
uncertainty.
    When there is only the uncertainty of the random walking permanent growth-rate com-
ponent (Vy = 0, Vx > 0), then (31) reduces to the expression

                                                     2
                                  rt =    +    0         Vx t2 :                          (34)
                                                    6

    It is perhaps not a surprise that modeling the permanent component of future growth
rates as a random walk causes a declining discount rate. What is perhaps more surprising
is that the decline in the discount rate schedule is quadratic in time. If we think of Vx as
being very small, then this quadratic time e¤ect may take a long time to exert its in‡uence.
But once exerted, its in‡uence can quickly expand quadratically to become very powerful.
    For a large enough time horizon t, the discount rate in equation (34) becomes negative.
To an extent this is an artifact of the possibility of negative outcomes from the normal
distribution in the speci…cation of the random walk equation (3), along with the assumption
of a CRRA utility function (28). The representative agent in this setup is very averse to
large negative growth rates, which become increasingly likely over time. Eventually, the
representative agent here would be willing to pay a positive price to guarantee the safe
delivery of consumption over a long enough time period ahead. A way to evade negative
discount rates is to mechanically avoid considering the very long time periods over which
they can manifest themselves. More basically and less literally, I think the quadratic term
in (34) is trying to tell us that, in a world where we are fundamentally unsure about how
distant future growth prospects could evolve, there are potentially strong forces that might
want to make us consider using very low discount rates for discounting distant-future events.
All of this is testimony to the fear-power of being so very unsure about where the world is
headed in the long run.
    Finally, when there is uncertainty about both the random-walking permanent component
of growth rates and about transitory growth shocks (Vy > 0, Vx > 0), then the full equation
(31) holds. If the quadratic time term 2 Vx t2 =6 is expressing fear of where we might be going
in the long term, the linear time term 2 Vxy t=2 is expressing fear of not knowing where we
might be now. When Vy is much bigger than Vx , then the coe¢ cient Vxy of the linear time
component is much bigger than the coe¢ cient Vx =3 of the quadratic time component. So


                                              12
the linear time component causes the discount rate to decline more powerfully in the short
run, while the quadratic component dominates in the long run.
    In this hidden-state formulation, we are unsure what is the current underlying trend
growth rate X0 because we are unsure about how to read the noisy past record. This e¤ect
would remain even if future random walking suddenly ceased altogether. To isolate sharply
the role of this linear time term 2 Vxy t=2 in (31), consider the following arti…cial thought
experiment. Suppose that the full stochastic formulation of this paper describes perfectly
the past behavior of the system, but that in the future all uncertainty will miraculously cease
((2) and (3) will no longer hold) so that e¤ectively Xt (for t > 0) will henceforth remain
frozen at X0 . In this thought experiment, equation (31) would become

                                                           2
                                       rt =       +    0       Vxy t:                     (35)
                                                           2

    The “as if”story being told by (35) is the following. A take-it-or-leave-it decision must
made now, just before time zero (call it time 0 ), about whether or not to make a marginal
investment that costs now but will yield a bene…t payo¤ at future time t. Right now, at
time 0 , the constant permanent future value of the growth rate of consumption is a random
variable whose realization is unknown. At time 0+ , this constant permanent growth rate is
realized as a random draw from N ( 0 ; Vxy ). A decision must be made now (at time 0 ,
just before the “true” state of the world is revealed at time t = 0+ ) about whether or not
to invest in the proposed project. Immediately after the investment decision is made, at
time 0+ , the true growth rate becomes known that will hold thenceforth, from time t = 0+
to time t = 1. What is the relevant discount rate?
    In the above setup, the relevant discount rate for CBA is given by formula (35). The idea
that uncertain future growth rates are permanent and materialize overnight is extreme, but
it has been used in the literature as a point of departure for giving insights into declining
discount rates.3 The point being made here is that such a story can be viewed as the
hypothetical outcome of a situation that in the past was subject to hidden-state uncertainty,
but in the future will not be subject to any further such uncertainty.
    Equation (35) indicates that Ramsey riskfree discount rates will decline over time and
eventually become negative, based just on uncertainty about what is the underlying per-
manent growth rate, even though this underlying permanent growth rate will henceforth
stay put and not move away from its current (and currently unknown) value. As with the
pure quadratic random-walking case (34), the pure linear fear-of-bad-growth case (35) comes
from the long (even if thin) left tail of the normal distribution, along with the assumption
  3
      For example, Gollier and Weitzman (2009).


                                                      13
of a CRRA utility function (28). Again here, a way to evade negative discount rates is
to mechanically avoid considering the very long time periods in which they can manifest
themselves. And again, more basically, I think that the eventually-negative discount rate in
(34) is trying to tell us that, in a world where we are fundamentally unsure now about what
will be distant future growth prospects, there are potentially strong forces that might want
to make us consider using very low discount rates for discounting distant-future events.
    In thinking about the declining discount rate schedules implied by formulas like (35), (34),
or (31), the underlying normality assumption cuts two ways. On the one hand, the long
negative tail of the normal distribution makes discount rates eventually become negative.
If we arti…cially truncated the left tail, it would impair the ability to generate eventually-
negative discount rates. On the other hand, the long negative tail of the normal distribution
is very thin with probability measure, so that if it were made fatter with mean-preserving
probability in the left side range where it is not truncated, discount rates could decline more
rapidly to whatever low values they eventually attain.
    The simplicity of formula (31), and the fact that it eventually yields negative values,
depends on the speci…c functional forms of the model. However, I believe that the more
general overarching message of the hidden-state model of this paper is the di¢ culty of avoid-
ing eventually-low Ramsey discount rates in a world where there is fundamental uncertainty
about interpreting past growth rates and projecting future changes in growth prospects.


6      A Numerical Example
Attempting to plug actual numbers into the model of this paper constitutes an unusually
brazen act of hubris. The model itself is at a nearly cosmic level of abstraction. Whose
preferences and future prognostications is the representative agent in this model supposed to
represent? So many di¤erent answers to this question are possible, with so many di¤erent
possible numerical values to plug into formula (31), that it practically rules out decisive
conclusions from the beginning.
    For the record, I will attempt here just one such “illustrative” numerical exercise. I do
not try hard to defend the numbers I use. The beauty of having a formula as simple as (31)
is that readers can readily plug in their own favorite numbers and see almost immediately
what emerges. Results are sensitive to the numbers being plugged in, but I let readers
explore this topic for themselves.
    For normative pure time preferences associated with intergenerational comparisons, I
choose in this example to not favor any particular generation by selecting = 0. Estimates
of the relevant value of the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion vary according to the individual

                                               14
or the study. A not uncommon idea is that the CRRA coe¢ cient should reasonably be
somewhere between one and four. For this example I choose = 2.
    Worldwide per-capita growth rates have averaged about 2% per year in the time since
1950, but with enormous variation across regions and sub-periods. For the purposes of this
example I choose 0 = 2%. The postwar variability of annual growth rates is relatively low
in the advanced OECD economies, say y 2% on average, but it is considerably higher for
the world as a whole or even for OECD countries prior to 1950. In this numerical example
I choose y = 3%.
    I think the trickiest, crudest, and most brazen calibration of all concerns the variability x
of the random walk for the permanent growth-rate component Xt . By (23), the term 2x t=3
is contributed to the variance of the average future growth rate by random walking of the
underlying trend growth rate I choose x by the following thought experiment. Suppose
there is zero transient uncertainty ( y = 0) and 0 = X0 is known to be 2%. I then
calibrate x by requiring that the probability of a stagnant (no growth) century due to the
random walk alone is one out of a million (10 6 ). With a normal distribution, the one-sided
probability 10 6 is a 4.265-sigma event. Therefore, the corresponding value of x which
makes such an extreme zero-average-growth random walk over a century have a probability
of one out of a million satis…es
                                     2                      2
                                     x               :02
                                         100 =                  ;                           (36)
                                    3               4:265

whose solution is x = :08% per year. I readily admit the incredible crudeness of this
calibration, but am unsure what else to do.
    The corresponding Ramsey hidden-state discount schedule from formula (31) is enumer-
ated in the following table.

                 t=     0 yrs 50 yrs 100 yrs 150 yrs 200 yrs 250 yrs
               rt = 3.8% 3.5%         2.9%     2.1%     1.2%       .4%
          Table 1: Discount rates rt (% per year) as function of time t (years)

    Considering the (unavoidable) casualness of the numbers plugged into formula (31), I
do not want to over-interpret the results. Di¤erent people can plug in their own favorite
numbers and may draw their own conclusions from what is but a single illustrative example.
I think Table 1 indicates loosely that even a very small amount of random walking in the
underlying trend growth rate can work its way through the hidden-state mechanism to have
non-negligible long term impacts on lowering the discount rate.



                                               15
7    Concluding Comments
I think that the paper suggests several themes.
     First, there is a sense that how we model current fuzziness about future growth rates
is likely to be an important ingredient in deriving and analyzing long-term discount rates.
The extent to which predicting future growth is a highly unresolved issue is disconcerting.
Modeling the growth process as a hidden-state stochastic process is one previously untried
route to deriving discount rate schedules, which is long overdue for analysis. This route
captures, however crudely, one aspect of what makes distant future growth so fuzzy. Perhaps
we need to try other routes, some of which may be similarly unorthodox and are similarly
overdue for analysis.
     The hidden state model of this paper is suggesting a kind of crude taxonomy for dis-
counting under uncertainty. In this approach, there are three stylized “source types” that
push riskfree discount rates lower. One is independent noisy growth shocks, which lowers
the Ramsey discount rate uniformly. A second “source type”of lower discount rates is the
idea that we are ignorant of what is the current underlying growth rate trend amidst all the
random noise of widely di¤erent past growth rates for various regions and periods. This
current ignorance of the true state contributes to a discount rate that declines linearly over
time. A third “source type” of lower discount rates is the idea that even if we knew the
current underlying trend growth rate, it will likely change over time. The uncertainty of
future random walking contributes to a discount rate that declines quadratically over time,
although it is multiplied by a variance coe¢ cient that is much smaller than the variance
coe¢ cient associated with the linear time term. A contribution of this paper is to spell
out in detail how these three “source types” for declining discount rates interact with each
other and depend di¤erently upon the time horizon.
     Over and above the arti…cial precision of its formulas, I think the paper is hinting that
random forces can act powerfully to lower discount rates over long time horizons. Even
very small amounts of random walking can eventually work their way into having strong
discounting e¤ects for the distant future.
     If, as I suspect, there is a fundamental problem with our long-term discounting models
depending heavily on how we conceptualize and express fuzzy future growth rates, then we
researchers have much work ahead of us.




                                             16
References
 [1] Arrow, Kenneth J. (1999), in Portney and Weyant (eds). Discounting and Intergener-
     ational Equity. Resources for the Future.

 [2] Arrow, K. J., W. R. Cline, K.-G. Maler, M. Munasinghe, R. Squitieri, and J. E. Stiglitz
     (1995). “Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic E¢ ciency.” In Bruce, Lee
     and Haites (eds.), Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate
     Change. Cambridge University Press.

 [3] Dasgupta, Partha. (2008). “Discounting climate change.” Journal of Risk and Uncer-
     tainty, 37: 141-169.

 [4] Gollier, Christian. (2012). Pricing the Planet’s Future: The Economics of Discounting
     in an Uncertain World. Princeton University Press (forthcoming October 2012).

 [5] Gollier, Christian, and Martin L. Weitzman (2010). “How Should the Distant Future be
     Discounted When Discount Rates are Uncertain?.” Forthcoming in Economics Letters.

 [6] Groom, B., P. Koundouri, E. Panopoulou and T. Pantelidis (2007). “Discounting the
     distant future: how much does model selection a¤ect the certainty equivalent rate?”.
     Journal of Applied Econometrics. 22 (3): 641-656.

 [7] Hepburn, Cameron. and Ben Groom (2007). “Gamma discounting and expected net
     future value.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 53 (1): 99-109.

 [8] Maddison, Angus (2001). The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective. OECD pub-
     lishing.

 [9] Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer (2004). “Uncertain discount rates in climate
     policy analysis. ” Energy Policy 32 (4): 519-529.

[10] Weitzman, Martin L. (1998) “Why the Far-Distant Future Should Be Discounted at Its
     Lowest Possible Rate.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36 (3):
     201-208.

[11] Weitzman, Martin L. (2001). “Gamma Discounting.” American Economic Review, 2001
     (March), 91 (1): 260-271.




                                            17
