NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL GAMES AND DEMAND MODELS FOR BUNDLES
Jeremy T. Fox
Natalia Lazzati
Working Paper 18155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18155
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

Thanks to Tilman Borgers and Stephan Lauermann for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jeremy T. Fox and Natalia Lazzati. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Identification of Potential Games and Demand Models for Bundles
Jeremy T. Fox and Natalia Lazzati
NBER Working Paper No. 18155
June 2012
JEL No. C35,L13
ABSTRACT
This paper studies nonparametric identification in binary choice games of complete information. We
allow for correlated unobservables across players. We propose conditions under which the binary choice
game is a so-called potential game and impose that the selected equilibrium maximizes its associated
potential function. Our framework is formally equivalent to a multinomial choice demand model where
a consumer can elect to purchase any bundle of products. We present a separate identification result
for two-player games that does not rely on equilibrium selection.
Jeremy T. Fox
Economics Department
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Ave
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jeremyfox@gmail.com
Natalia Lazzati
Economics Department
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Ave
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
nlazzati@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Our paper presents identification results for two classes of models that we show are formally
equivalent. For clarity, we discuss the two models separately in the introduction.

1.1

Discrete Choice Games

We study identification of static, binary choice games of complete information with two or
more players. Such models include games of product adoption with social interactions, entry
games, and labor force participation games, among many others.1 In these models the interaction effects capture the strategic interdependence among the decisions of players and are
therefore a fundamental target of estimation. Interaction effects are often hard to distinguish
from unobserved preferences that are correlated across players, as these two sources of interdependence have similar observable implications. For example, similar smoking behavior
among friends may be due to peer effects or to correlated tastes for smoking. Likewise, firms
may tend to enter into geographic markets in clusters because the competitive effects of entry
are small or because certain markets are profitable for unobservable reasons. Though it is
well known that not taking the correlation of unobservables into account can lead to a serious
bias in the estimates, much of the empirical literature assumes some kind of independence
or conditional independence. We introduce the class of potential games to model strategic
interactions and propose an identification approach that allows for correlated unobservables
across players.
A game is said to be a potential game if it admits a so-called exact potential function,
which is a real-valued function defined on the space of pure strategy profiles such that the
change in any player’s payoffs from a unilateral deviation equals the change in the associated
potential. In an influential paper, Monderer and Shapley (1996) show that any maximizer
of the potential function is a Nash equilibrium of the associated game (for exact potential
games) and that this function is uniquely defined up to an additive constant. Thus, the set of
maximizers does not depend on the specific potential function that we use and the potential
offers an equilibrium refinement. Under mild conditions, in our model the maximizer is
1

See, e.g., Heckman (1978), Bjorn and Vuong (1984), Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), Berry (1992), Mazzeo
(2002), Ciliberto and Tamer (2009), Hartmann (2009), Bajari et al. (2010) and Card and Giuliano (2012).

2

unique with probability 1. As we will discuss in more detail below, one necessary requirement
for a game to admit a potential function is that interaction effects, but not standalone utilities
from actions, be groupwise symmetric.
Recent theoretical and experimental work has provided economic justification to the
potential function refinement. Most importantly for our approach, Ui (2001) shows that if
a unique Nash equilibria maximizes the potential function, then that equilibrium is robust
in the sense of Kajii and Morris (1997a, 1997b), particularly the 1997b paper. Roughly
speaking, a Nash equilibrium of a complete information game is robust if every incomplete
information game with payoffs almost always given by the complete information game has an
equilibrium that generates behavior close to the original equilibrium. Ui does not show that
all robust equilibria maximize a potential function in a potential game, but, at a minimum,
the maximizer of the potential selects one such robust equilibrium. There is also experimental
evidence remarkably consistent with this equilibrium selection rule in the minimum effort
(stag hunt) game (Van Huyck et al. 1990, Goeree and Holt 2005, and Chen and Chen 2011).
An advantage of using any equilibrium selection rule is that the model can make unique
counterfactual predictions. As structural analysis is often motivated by a desire to estimate
policy counterfactuals, some selection rule will increase the precision (and ease of replication)
of certain conclusions in a typical empirical paper estimating a game theoretic model.
This paper explores the power of the potential function selection mechanism from an
econometric perspective.2 As we explain below, the equilibrium selection rule based on
potential maximizers not only completes the model, but it also links observed choices to
a single maximization problem that has an alternative economic interpretation: under this
refinement the game is observationally equivalent to a single agent discrete choice model for
bundles of goods.
The identification strategy that we pursue relies on exclusion restrictions at the level
of each player. These restrictions yield observed regressors that affect the payoff of one
player but not the others and enter payoffs additively separably. These exclusion restrictions
have been called special regressors in, for example, the literature on discrete choice (Lewbel
1998, 2000, Matzkin 2007, Berry and Haile 2010, Fox and Gandhi 2012). Our identification
2

Deb (2009) uses potential game to provide testable implications of a model of consumption with externalities.

3

strategy also requires a condition under which the inequalities implied by choice data can
be inverted in the unobservables. This condition calls for a vector of choices such that
whenever individual deviations are not profitable, then that vector of choices maximizes the
potential function associated to the game. We prove that this restriction is always satisfied
when there are two players, when the interaction effects are negative (i.e., games of strategic
substitutes), and when the interaction terms have arbitrary signs but are not too large in
absolute value (i.e., concave games in the sense of Ui 2008). Our restrictions are enough to
nonparametrically identify the entire structure of the game: players’ subutilities of choosing
each action as a function of the regressors and the actions of other players as well as the
distribution of potentially correlated unobservables.
The parametric identification and estimation of static, discrete choice games of complete
information has been recently studied by Bajari et al. (2010), Beresteanu et al. (2011),
Ciliberto and Tamer (2009), and Galichon and Henry (2010). Our paper departs from this
literature in that it is nonparametric and demonstrates point rather than set identification.
Given the trade-offs, our approach is more restrictive in other respects: we focus on the
binary actions case (enter or not, smoke or not) and assume a specific equilibrium selection
rule. Unlike some work on identification for complete information games, our proofs do not
rely on identification at infinity. We do require large support on regressors to identify the
joint distribution of the unobservables in the tails, just as in the binary and multinomial
choice literature (e.g., Manski 1988, Thompson 1989, Matzkin 1993, Lewbel 2000). Binary
games of incomplete information have received a lot of attention (e.g., Brock and Durlauf
2001, 2007, De Paula and Tang 2011, and Lewbel and Tang 2011). As Bajari et al. (2010)
explain, the challenges involved in complete information games are quite different.
For the special case of two players, we offer an alternative proof of identification that
does not rely on equilibrium selection and the symmetry restriction on the interaction effects
needed for the game to admit a potential function. Building on Tamer (2003), Berry and
Tamer (2006, Result 4) study identification in two-player, submodular games where the key
special regressors enter multiplicatively instead of additively. Both results, theirs and ours,
require knowledge of the signs of the interactions terms. The advantage of our identification
argument with respect to these two papers is that we do not rely on identification at infinity
to recover the interaction terms.
4

1.2

Discrete Demand for Bundles

Under the equilibrium selection rule based on potential maximizers, we show that the binary
game is formally equivalent to a multinomial choice demand model where a consumer can
elect to purchase any bundle of products. Therefore, our paper also investigates identification
in multinomial choice models for bundles of goods. When applied to these models, we
identify the stand-alone payoff of each choice, the terms representing complementarities or
substitutabilities among products, and the joint distribution of the unobservables for the
individual goods. Here again, we allow for correlated tastes for alternative goods, a distinct
explanation for purchasing bundles of goods from true interdependences in consumption.
For example, consumers could be seen to often purchase both cable television service and
large-screen televisions because there are complementarities in the consumption of these
two goods or because consumers with a high stand-alone utility for cable television tend to
also have a high stand-alone utility for large-screen televisions. Our identification approach,
relying on regressors that affect the stand-alone utility of one product but not the other, can
distinguish complementarities in utility from correlated unobservable preferences.
Gentzkow (2007a) studies a parametric demand model for interdependent goods. He focuses on demand for print and online newspapers, allowing the marginal utility of consuming
one good to depend on whether the other good is consumed as well. Athey and Stern (1998)
study a model where firms have the possibility to combine individual activities in order to
achieve their objective, and these activities are complements. To our knowledge, we are
the first to give conditions for nonparametric identification in models such as Gentzkow’s
and Athey and Stern’s. The sufficient conditions we propose to identify the distribution of
the unobservables are economically similar to some of the requirements imposed in tangentially related identification papers. For example, Berry, Gandhi and Haile (2011) provide a
sufficient condition under which a system of demand functions (with continuous outcomes
such as shares) can be inverted in unobservables. Their condition applies to goods that are
(connected) substitutes, and is loosely related to our result on games of strategic substitutes.
Matzkin (2007) studies the inversion of simultaneous equations in models with continuous
outcomes, imposing quasi-concavity. As we explained earlier, we suggest a discrete version
of her requirement.

5

1.3

Estimation

We do not formally explore estimation because the estimation problem is relatively straightforward conceptually once identification is established. One could apply simulated maximum
likelihood with sieve-based approaches for modeling the distribution of the unobservables and
the also infinite-dimensional standalone utilities and interaction effects (Chen 2007).
The rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the game. Section 3 defines
potential games, provides a precise condition under which the games we study admit a
potential function, and sheds light on the mechanism by which the potential selects among
multiple equilibria. Section 4 provides the identification results for potential games. Section
5 shows identification in two player games without relying on an equilibrium selection rule
or on symmetry in interaction effects. Section 6 presents identification results for models of
discrete demand for bundles of goods. Section 7 concludes. All proofs are collected in an
appendix.

2

The General Game

We consider a simultaneous discrete choice game with complete information. The set of
players is N = {1, ..., n} . Each player i ∈ N chooses an action ai from two possible alternatives {0, 1} . We denote by X ∈ X ⊆ Rk a vector of observable state variables (with x
the realization of the random variable) and let ε ≡ (εi )i≤n ∈ Rn indicate a vector of random
terms that are observed by the players but not by the econometrician. The random vector
ε is distributed according to the cumulative distribution function (CDF) Fε|x . We allow the
unobservables to be correlated even after conditioning on the observable state variables. The
payoff of player i from choosing action 1 is
U1i (a−i , x, εi ) ≡ ui (x) + vi (a−i , x) + εi ,

(1)

while the return from action 0, U0i (a−i , x, εi ), is normalized to 0. The first element of (1),
ui (x), is the stand-alone value of action 1, and vi (a−i , x) captures the effect that the choices

6

of other players have on player i. We denote this game by Γ (x, ε) .3
A vector of decisions a∗ ≡ (a∗i )i≤n is a pure strategy Nash equilibrium if, for all i ∈ N ,


 1,
∗
ai =
0,


1 or 0,


if ui (x) + vi a∗−i , x + εi > 0

if ui (x) + vi a∗−i , x + εi < 0
otherwise.

We write D (x, ε) for the equilibrium set (in pure strategies) of Γ (x, ε). The same conditions
that will facilitate identification of the game guarantee that D (x, ε) is non-empty.
The purpose of our analysis is to recover the structure of the game from available data
on choices and covariates. Before formalizing our objective, we introduce potential games.

3

Potential Games

In game theory, a potential function—or, more precisely, an exact potential—is a real-valued
function defined on the space of pure strategy profiles such that the change in any player’s
payoffs from a unilateral deviation is equal to the gain in the potential function. When a
game admits such a function it is called a potential game.4 This concept was first used in
economics as a way to prove existence of Nash equilibrium in pure strategies.5 The reason is
that the set of maximizers of the potential function corresponds to a subset of equilibria of the
related game. In finite games, the potential function has a finite set of values and always has a
maximizer. It follows that the equilibrium set (in pure strategies) of any finite potential game
is guaranteed to be non-empty. We will argue below that the distribution of unobservables,
, in our model implies that a unique pure strategy equilibrium will maximize the potential
3
The additive separability of ui (x) and vi (a−i , x) in U1i (a−i , x, εi ) does not impose any restriction on
the model; it is just a convenient way to write the payoffs. On the other hand, the additive separability of εi
in U1i (a−i , x, εi ) is a restriction in the sense that it eliminates the possibility of interaction effects between
the unobservables of player i and the choices of other players in the game.
4
Monderer and Shapley (1996) also define ordinal and weighted potential games. We study identification
for exact potential games. Thus, throughout, when we say potential, we mean exact potential. This follows
the recent theoretical literature on equilibrium refinements, which focuses on exact potentials (e.g., Ui 2000,
2001).
5
According to Monderer and Shapley (1996), this concept appeared for the first time in Rosenthal (1973)
to prove equilibrium existence in congestion games.

7

function with probability 1 (over ). Therefore, a potential maximizing equilibrium always
exists and is unique with probability 1.
Monderer and Shapley (1996) show that when a game admits an exact potential function,
this function is uniquely defined up to an additive constant. Thus, the set of maximizers
does not depend on the specific potential function we use and the potential offers an equilibrium refinement. Important work has been done to address whether this selection rule
is economically meaningful. Ui (2001) shows that if a unique Nash equilibrium maximizes
the potential function, then that equilibrium is generically robust in the sense of Kajii and
Morris (1997a, 1997b), particularly the definition in the 1997b paper. Roughly speaking, a
Nash equilibrium of a complete information game is said to be robust if every incomplete
information game with payoffs almost always given by the complete information game has
an equilibrium that generates behavior close to the original equilibrium. See Ui for a formal definition. All robust equilibria do not necessarily maximize a potential function in a
potential game, but, at a minimum, the maximizer of the potential selects one such robust
equilibrium. Ui writes that “It is an open question when robust equilibria are unique, if they
exist.”6
In lab experiments studying the so-called minimum effort game, observed choice data
were shown to be consistent with the maximization of objects close to the potential function
associated to the game (Van Huyck et al. 1990, Goeree and Holt 2005, and Chen and Chen
2011). For example, Van Huyck et al. find that subjects converge to high and low effort
levels according to the prediction of the potential maximizer refinement.7 While we do not
restrict ourselves to only minimum effort games, it is interesting that the potential maximizer
refinement can explain the subtle experimental evidence in this literature.
From an econometric perspective, finite potential games are attractive for at least two
6

In a certain two-player, exact potential game, Blume (1993) states that a log-linear strategy revision
process selects potential maximizers. See also Morris and Ui (2005) for a discussion of so-called generalized
potential functions and robust sets of equilibria. Weinstein and Yildiz (2007) present a deep critique of all
refinements of rationalizability, including Nash equilibrium. They write about the robustness definition in
Kajii and Morris (1997a): “Then the key difference between our notions of perturbation is that they focus on
small changes to prior beliefs without regard to the size of changes to interim beliefs, while our focus is the
reverse. Their approach is appropriate when there is an ex ante stage along with well understood inference
rules and we know the prior to some degree.”
7
See Monderer and Shapley (1996, Section 5) for the original discussion of how Van Huyck et al.’s
experimental evidence relates to potential games.

8

reasons. First, by offering a meaningful equilibrium selection rule, the potential function
completes the model. Second, this function links observed choices to a single maximization
problem that relates to other relevant economic problems (such as demand for bundles) and
aids identification.
We next specify the definition of a potential function and then provide a necessary and
sufficient condition for Γ (x, ε) to be a potential game. In what follows, Ui (ai , a−i , x, εi ) ≡
U0i (a−i , x, εi ) 1 (ai = 0) + U1i (a−i , x, εi ) 1 (ai = 1) .
Potential: A function V : {0, 1}n × X × Rn → R is a potential function for Γ if, for all
i ≤ n, all ai , a0i ∈ {0, 1} , and all a−i ∈ {0, 1}n−1 ,
V (ai , a−i , x, ε) − V (a0i , a−i , x, ε) = Ui (ai , a−i , x, εi ) − Ui (a0i , a−i , x, εi ) .
Γ is called a potential game if it admits a potential function.
Monderer and Shapley (1996) show that Γ is a potential game if (and only if) cross
effects on payoffs are symmetric for every pair of players. Ui (2000) provides an alternative
characterization of this class of games, which has the additional advantage of describing the
potential function. The next result derives from Ui (2000, Theorem 3). We write S(a) ⊂ N
for the set of players who select action 1 in a,
S (a) = {S ⊆ S (a) | |S| ≥ 2} , and S (a, i) = {S ⊆ S (a) | |S| ≥ 2, i ∈ S} .
Proposition 1. Γ is a potential game if and only if there exists a function
{Φ (S, x) | Φ (S, x) : S → R, S ⊂ N , |S| ≥ 2}
such that, for all a ∈ {0, 1}n and all i ∈ N ,
Ui (a, x, εi ) = (ui (x) + εi ) 1 (ai = 1) +

9

X
S∈S(a,i)

Φ (S, x) .

A potential function is given by
V (a, x, ε) =

X
i∈N

(ui (x) + εi ) 1 (ai = 1) +

X
S∈S(a)

Φ (S, x) .

If ε has an atomless support, then the maximizer of the potential function in Proposition
1 is unique with probability 1. By assuming that observed choices correspond to the potential
maximizer, we therefore guarantee there is a unique equilibrium in pure strategies in the data
generating process.8
The next example applies Proposition 1 to the case of two players. It clarifies the conditions under which the game is a potential game and sheds light on the mechanism by which
the potential selects an equilibrium when the model makes multiple predictions.
Example 1. (Two-Player Game) Let N = {1, 2}. The payoff of player i can be written
as
(ui (x) + εi + vi (x) 1 (a−i = 1)) 1 (ai = 1) for i = 1, 2.
There is only one set S to consider, i.e., {1, 2} . Interaction terms are given by
v1 (x) 1 (a1 = 1) 1 (a2 = 1) and v2 (x) 1 (a1 = 1) 1 (a2 = 1) .
Thus, by Proposition 1, Γ is a potential game if (and only if) v1 (x) = v2 (x) = Φ ({1, 2} , x) ,
in which case the potential function can be written as
V (a, x, ε) = (u1 (x) + ε1 ) 1 (a1 = 1)+(u2 (x) + ε2 ) 1 (a2 = 1)+Φ ({1, 2} , x) 1 (a1 = 1, a2 = 1) .
Therefore, interaction terms have to be the same for both players for the game to admit a
potential function. We write Φ (x) = Φ ({1, 2} , x) to simplify the exposition.
Because Γ is a finite potential game, it always has at least one equilibrium in pure
strategies. When the equilibrium is unique, it is always a potential maximizer. Under
multiple equilibria, the criterion by which the potential function selects one of them depends
8
Monderer and Shapley (1996) also discuss mixed strategy equilibria. We focus on only pure strategies
not because mixed strategies are inconsistent with the potential function, but because mixed strategies
complicate identification by reintroducing multiple equilibria.

10

on the sign of the interaction effect, as we explain next. We assume no tie events in the
analysis below.
When Φ (x) ≤ 0 and the game has multiple equilibria, then the equilibrium set is D =
{(0, 1) , (1, 0)}. In this case, (0, 1) maximizes the potential if
u2 (x) + ε2 > u1 (x) + ε1
and the maximizer is (1, 0) otherwise. Thus, the equilibrium selection rule induced by the
potential function predicts that the player choosing action 1 shall be the one with the highest
stand-alone value.
Alternatively, the equilibrium set is D = {(0, 0) , (1, 1)} when Φ (x) ≥ 0 and the game
has multiple equilibria. It can be easily checked that (1, 1) maximizes the potential if
(−u1 (x) − ε1 − v (x)) (−u2 (x) − ε2 − v (x)) > (u1 (x) + ε1 ) (u2 (x) + ε2 ) .
The maximizer is (0, 0) otherwise. That is, players coordinate on (1, 1) if the product of
deviation losses from selecting action 0 as compared to action 1 while the other player
selects action 1 are lower than the product of deviation looses from selecting action 1 instead
of action 0 when the other player selects action 0. In this case, the potential maximizer
corresponds to the less risky equilibrium of Harsanyi and Selten (1988).


Example 2. (Three-Player Game) Let N = {1, 2, 3}. Each player has its own standalone utility. The interaction terms are Φ ({1, 2} , x), Φ ({1, 3} , x), Φ ({2, 3} , x) and Φ ({1, 2, 3} , x).
Then, for example, the utility of choosing action 1 by player 1 is
u1 (x)+ε1 +Φ ({1, 2} , x) 1 (a2 = 1)+Φ ({1, 3} , x) 1 (a3 = 1)+Φ ({1, 2, 3} , x) 1 (a2 = 1, a3 = 1) .

These two examples shed light on the restrictions embedded in Proposition 1 for a game
to admit a potential function. Each interaction term Φ (S, x) needs to be the same across
all players in S ⊂ N . While interaction terms have to respect this groupwise symmetry, the
11

stand-alone values are allowed to deeply differ across individuals. Consider the example of
entry by discount realtors in the United States (e.g., Ellickson et al. 2010, Jia 2008). The
assumption of groupwise symmetry rules out that Walmart’s entry in a geographic market
lowers the profits of Kmart more than Kmart’s entry lowers the profits of Walmart. We do
allow the monopoly profit function of Walmart to vary considerably from that of Kmart, and
we impose no restrictions on the joint distribution of the unobservables entering the profits
of Walmart and Kmart. In the three-player case, the interaction term for both Kmart and
Walmart entering can differ from the interaction term for both Kmart and Target entering,
for example. There is a separate term Φ ({1, 2, 3} , x) for all three players (Kmart, Target,
Walmart) entering.
Many empirical applications impose that the Pareto optimal equilibrium is always selected in coordination games (see, e.g., Gowrisankaran and Stavins 2004, and Hartmann
2009). Under positive spillovers, this amounts to selecting the largest equilibrium (which
always exists in this set-up). The criterion based on the potential maximizer makes predictions that are more in line with the promoters of coordination failures (see, e.g., Cooper and
John 1988). Which selection device is more appropriate depends on the specific application
we are dealing with; more research needs to be done to address this question. We should
remark here that our results in Section 5 on the special case of two players offer a natural
environment for performing a nonparametric test of equilibrium selection.

4

Identification in Potential Games

4.1

Assumptions and Main Result

For our identification purpose, we will assume that Γ admits a potential function and that
observed actions correspond to a potential maximizer. Indeed, we consider games where
observed choice behavior derives from the maximization problem

maxa V (a, x, ε) ≡

X
i∈N

(ui (x) + εi ) 1 (ai = 1) +

12

X
S∈S(a)

Φ (S, x) | a ∈ {0, 1}

n


. (2)


We assume the econometrician observes the vector of covariates and choices, x, (ai )i≤n ,
for a cross section of independent n-player games that share the same structure Π =

(ui )i≤n , Φ, Fε|x . These independent games can be different markets or different groups
of friends, according to the particular application. The objective of the analysis is to combine initial assumptions with data to learn about Π.
We define
X
X
W (a, x) ≡
ui (x) 1 (ai = 1) +
Φ (S, x) .
i∈N

S∈S(a)

By our initial normalization, W (a = (0, 0, ..., 0) , x) = 0. For expositional ease, we order
the elements of {0, 1}n in terms of the lexicographic order so that a1 = (0, 0, ..., 0), a2 =
(1, 0, ..., 0), ..., and a2n = (1, 1, ..., 1).
We indicate by 4W (a0 , x) and 4ε (a0 ) the (2n − 1) −dimensional vectors
0

(W (a , x) − W (a , x))j≤2n ,aj 6=a0 and
j

X
i∈N

εi 1 (a0i

= 1) −

X
i∈N

εi 1

aji


=1

j≤2n ,aj 6=a0

respectively. Thus, for each a0 ,

P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x ≡ Pr (4ε (a0 ) ≤ 4W (a0 , x) | x)
captures the probability of observing choice vector a0 conditional on X = x, or in simpler
notation, Pr (a0 | x).9 The researcher can identify Pr (a0 | x) directly from the data.
We now introduce our assumptions and then discuss how these restrictions are satisfied
in alternative environments.


 
e with X
e ≡ X
ei
Assumption 1: Let X ≡ X 0 , X
. We assume ui (x) ≡ ui (x0 ) + x
ei ,
i≤n

9

More formally, let us define
X
X
4j ε (a0 ) ≡
εi 1 (a0i = 1) −
i∈N

i∈N

Thus 4ε (a0 ) is the vector 4j ε (a0 )
ˆ
0



P 4W (a , x) | x; Fε|x ≡

ˆ
...



εi 1 aji = 1 and 4j W (a0 , x) ≡ W (aj , x) − W (a0 , x) .


j≤2n ,aj 6=a0

, which has a distribution dF4ε(a0 )|x0 . Then,

 n


n
1 41 ε (a0 ) ≤ 41 W (a0 , x) ...1 42 ε (a0 ) ≤ 42 W (a0 , x) dF4ε(a0 )|x .

13

and Φ (S, x) ≡ Φ (S, x0 ) for all S ⊂ N such that |S| ≥ 2.
ei given the other covariates
Assumption 2: The conditional distribution of each player’s X
has support on all of R.
e and we write Fε|x0 as a consequence; and (ii)
Assumption 3: (i) ε is independent of X
E(ε | x0 ) = E(ε) = 0.
Assumption 4: ε has an everywhere positive Lebesgue density (on all Rn ) conditional on
x0 .
Assumption 5: For each x
b0 there exists a known vector b
a ∈ {0, 1}n with the following
properties. For all x
e, where x
b = (b
x0 , x
e), and for all ε, V (a, x
b, ε) is maximized at b
a if
V (b
ai , b
a−i , x
b, ε) ≥ V (ai , b
a−i , x
b, ε) for all i ∈ N , where ai = 1 − b
ai .
Assumption 1 requires exclusion restrictions
at

 the level of each player, meaning we have
0 e
e of player-specific
n excluded regressors. It assumes X ≡ X , X includes a subvector X
factors that enter payoffs in an additively fashion. These are the special regressors familiar
from the literature on binary and multinomial choice models without bundles (e.g., Manksi
1988 and Lewbel 2000). Exclusion restrictions are key to identifying Fε|x0 separately from
ei only affects player j’s action through
the interaction effects. The intuition is simple: X
interaction effects. So interaction effects must be present if changes in the realization x
ei
correspond to changes in the marginal probability of player j’s action.
Assumption 2 is a standard large support restriction on the special regressors. Without
such a restriction, one cannot identify the tails of the distribution of Fε|x0 , just as in the literature on binary and multinomial choice. This use of large support is not what is informally
called in the literature identification at infinity, which in our model would involve using only
covariate values x
e that set the probability of all but one agent taking the binary action to be
1 or 0. This in effect turns a multi-player game into a single-agent choice model. Identification at infinity would never allow the identification of the joint distribution of the vector ε,
which is key to our separate identification of correlated unobservables and interaction effects.
Tamer (2003) did use an identification at infinity argument to establish parametric identification of the interaction effects in two-player games. Berry and Tamer (2006, Result 4)
also looked at two-player games where special regressors enter multiplicatively and identified
the distribution of unobservables without identification at infinity but used identification at
14

infinity to identify the other parameters. The lack of a player-specific coefficient on x
ei is just
a scale normalization: utility is measured in the units of x
ei for each player.10
Assumption 3(i) is necessary to recover the distribution of unobservables ε from variation
in the special regressors x
e. Assumption 3(ii) provides a location normalization. For any x0 ,
the mean of ε is not separately identified from ui (x0 ), which subsumes the role of any
intercept.11

Assumption 4 gives probability zero to tie events. It also insures that P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0
is continuous and strictly monotone in some of its arguments in the vector 4W (a0 , x) (e.g.,
Matzkin 1993, Assumptions 2.5 and 2.6). We revisit the qualification “some of” below.
Assumption 5 is a key economic restriction that is new to our paper. It requires that
there exists a vector of choices (known by the econometrician) that maximizes the potential
function when individual deviations are non-profitable. In the next subsection, we provide
three sufficient conditions for Assumption 5 to hold.

The structure Π = (ui )i≤n , Φ, Fε|x0 is said to be identified whenever for two values, Π1
and Π2 , there exist values a and x where Pr (a | x; Π1 ) 6= Pr (a | x; Π2 ). Here Pr (a | x; Π) is
the probability of observing the actions a given covariates x when the true structure is Π.
By Assumptions 1–4, establishing identification for one point x will extend identification to
a set of x with positive measure. Our main identification result follows.

Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1–5, Π = (ui )i≤n , Φ, Fε|x0 is identified.
The proof of the theorem is the direct consequence of two lemmas, which we state separately in order to give some intuition for the steps of the identification argument.
Lemma 1. If Assumptions 1–3 and 5 are satisfied, then Fε|x0 is identified.
e to trace the
In this lemma’s proof, we leverage Assumption 5 and the special regressors X
distribution Fε|x0 . Given Assumption 5, this step is inspired by arguments in the literature
on binary and multinomial choice without bundles.
10

We have written x
ei as entering additively. By changing its units (multiplying by -1), the true underlying
regressor could enter negatively as well.
11
In the context of binary choice, Magnac and Maurin (2007) show that identification under the mean
independence assumption is sensitive to the large support assumption. They suggest alternative assumptions,
which we could presumably adapt here. More generally, many advances from the binary and multinomial
choice literatures could be used in the discrete games setting.

15

Lemma 2. If Assumptions 1–3 and 4 are satisfied and if Fε|x0 is identified, then the stand
alone utility functions and interaction terms (ui )i≤n , Φ are also identified.

The vector 4W (a0 , x) affects the value of equilibrium probabilities P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0 .
The second lemma argues that different parameter values give different 4W (a0 , x) and, by
Assumption 4, different probabilities Pr (a | x). On its surface, this lemma is also analogous to arguments in the literature on binary and multinomial choice without bundles (e.g.,
Matzkin 1993). However, the arguments in the case of discrete games (and later, multinomial
choice over bundles) are more complex for one key reason. In multinomial choice without

bundles, under Assumption 4, the equivalent to P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0 is strictly monotone
in each element of the equivalent to the vector 4W (a0 , x). In our setting, this does not
necessarily hold, which can be seen best by example.
Example 3. Consider the two-player game from the previous example. Let Φ (x0 ) < 0 for
all x0 . Say we are calculating the probability of the outcome a0 = (0, 0). This occurs when
the following inequalities hold
u1 (x0 ) + x
e1 + ε1 < 0
u2 (x0 ) + x
e2 + ε2 < 0
u1 (x0 ) + x
e1 + ε1 + u2 (x0 ) + x
e2 + ε2 + Φ (x0 ) < 0.
Because Φ (x0 ) < 0, when the first two inequalities hold then the last one is always true.
Therefore, the probability of the outcome a = (0, 0) will not be strictly monotone in one of
the elements of 4W ((0, 0) , x) , i.e., u1 (x0 )+e
x1 +ε1 +u2 (x0 )+e
x2 +ε2 +Φ (x0 )−0. In this case,
the empirical moments Pr ((0, 0) | x) for all x will not identify the interaction effects. The
proof of Theorem 1 states that some other action profile a can be found such that Pr (a | x)
identifies the interaction effects.


By Assumption 4, P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0 is strictly monotone in the set of inequalities
that are not implied by other inequalities. Our identification proof exploits the fact that
this set of inequalities depends only on the values of the interaction effects Φ (x0 ), not on the
realization of the unobservables.

16


This paper does not explore estimation. However, P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0 is the key
ingredient into the likelihood as a function of the infinite-dimensional objects in the structure

Π = (ui )i≤n , Φ, Fε|x0 . In likelihood-based estimation, sieve approximations would likely
be necessary for each of the infinite-dimensional objects (Chen 2007). More practically,
given a limited sample size a researcher might use a flexible functional form for only the
important unknown functions in the model. The most important unknown functions could
be the interaction effects and the distribution of unobservables, if distinguishing these two
explanations for correlated actions in the data is a key empirical objective.
In some cases, players will be anonymous, meaning that player indices i have no common
meaning across markets. In a study of smoking peer effects, we might have five friends in
each group of such friends. In an entry application without a focus on chains, we might
have two potential entrants. In these cases, it is reasonable to impose that the function
ui (x0 ) actually does not vary by the index of the agent i. Further, the interaction effects
Φ (S, x) should depend only on the number of players taking the action, not the identity of
the other players. Finally, the random vector ε should be exchangeable, conditional on x0 ,
in the indices of the players. All these restrictions are special cases of the general result in
Theorem 1.
In a similar model (demand for bundles), Gentzkow (2007b, Proposition 2) exploits the
linearity of utilities in the special regressors in order to analyze the counterfactual comparative statics of action probabilities in covariates. The same approach to comparative
statics can be used here upon identification of the structure Π. The next section proceeds
in the opposite direction: we use monotone comparative statics to facilitate identification.
More precisely, in the two-player case we use how action probabilities vary with the special
regressors to learn the sign of the interaction effect.

4.2

Sufficient Conditions for Assumption 5

4.2.1

Two-Player Games

The next lemma states that Assumption 5 always holds in two-player games.
Lemma 3. If Assumptions 1–4 are satisfied and N = {1, 2}, then (i) the sign of Φ (x0 ) is

17

identified at all x0 ; and (ii) Assumption 5 holds with b
a = (1, 0) or b
a = (0, 1) when Φ (b
x0 ) ≥ 0
and b
a = (0, 0) or b
a = (1, 1) when Φ (b
x0 ) ≤ 0.
The proof of Lemma 3 in the appendix involves two steps. We first show (using monotone
comparative statics techniques) that the sign of Φ (x0 ) is identified from data. We then prove
that this information is sufficient for Assumption 5 to hold. To shed light on this idea, recall
that by Example 1, if Γ is a two-player game we can write its potential function as
V (a, x, ε) = (u1 (x) + ε1 ) 1 (a1 = 1) + (u2 (x) + ε2 ) 1 (a2 = 1) + Φ (x0 ) 1 (a1 = 1, a2 = 1) .
If Φ (x) ≥ 0, then V is supermodular in (a1 , a2 ). Under Assumption 1, V has increasing
differences in both (a1 , x
e1 ) and (a2 , x
e1 ). Then, by Topkis’ theorem (see the appendix),

arg max V (a, x, ε) | a ∈ {0, 1}2
increases in x
e1 (with respect to the strong set order). By Assumption 3(i), ε is independent
of x
e1 . It follows that Pr (a1 , a2 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increases with respect to stochastic dominance in
x
e1 . In turn, this means that Pr (a1 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) and Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increase in x
e1 .
The same holds with respect to x
e2 .
0
Alternatively, if Φ (x ) ≤ 0, then V is supermodular in (a1 , −a2 ) and (under Assumption
1) it has increasing differences in both (a1 , x
e1 ) and (−a2 , x
e1 ) . Using the previous argument,
0
0
we get that Pr (a1 = 1 | x , x
e1 , x
e2 ) and Pr (a2 = 1 | x , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increase and decrease in x
e1 ,
respectively. In this case, the opposite holds regarding x
e2 .
The last two results show that x
e1 affects Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) in opposite directions
depending on the sign of Φ (x0 ). Thus, the sign of the interaction term can be identified from
data. With this information, it is easy to check that Assumption 5 holds with b
a = (1, 0) or
b
a = (0, 1) when Φ (x0 ) ≥ 0, and b
a = (0, 0) or b
a = (1, 1) when Φ (x0 ) ≤ 0.
4.2.2

Negative Interaction Effects

The second sufficient condition we propose relies on strategic substitutabilities among players. The next lemma shows that Assumption 5 holds if V (a, x, ε) has the negative singlecrossing property in (ai ; a−i ) for all i ∈ N .
18

Lemma 4. Assume V (a, x, ε) has the negative single-crossing property in (ai ; a−i ) for all
i ∈ N , i.e., for all a0i > ai and all a0−i > a−i (in the coordinatewise order) we have


V (a0i , a−i , x, ε) − V (ai , a−i , x, ε) ≤ (<) 0 =⇒ V a0i , a0−i , x, ε − V ai , a0−i , x, ε ≤ (<) 0.
Then Assumption 5 holds with b
a = (0, 0, ..., 0) for all x
b0 .
In this case, identification of Fε|x0 will use data on the fraction of markets or groups
where all agents take action 0, i.e., Pr ((0, 0, ..., 0) | x). The single-crossing condition in
Lemma 4 would be satisfied if, for instance, Γ were a game with negative interactions, i.e.,
a submodular game. This restriction is often assumed in the entry games often estimated in
industrial organization.
4.2.3

Concavity for Discrete Domains

Potential games that admit a concave potential function have been widely studied in economics. The reason is that when the potential function has this property, then the set of
maximizers coincides with the equilibrium set of the underlying game. Ui (2008) introduces
the concept of discrete concavity for potential games with discrete strategy spaces. His condition guarantees that local optimality of a vector of choices implies global optimality. The
next lemma is based on Ui (2008, Proposition 1).
Lemma 5. Assume that, for all a, a0 ∈ {0, 1}n with ka − a0 k = 2,
(
max0
00

a00 :ka−a k=ka −a00 k=1

V (a00 , x, ε)

> min {V (a, x, ε) , V (a0 , x, ε)} if V (a, x, ε) 6= V (a0 , x, ε)
.
≥ V (a, x, ε) = V (a0 , x, ε)
otherwise

Then Assumption 5 holds with any b
a ∈ {0, 1}n for all x
b0 .
Concavity imposes non-trivial restrictions on the cross effects of multivariate functions
and, in our model, the support of unobservables and regressors. In particular, if the unobservables and regressors are allowed to take values on the entire real line, then the interaction
effects need to be identically zero for concavity to hold globally. Thus, this approach is nontrivial only if the large support portions of Assumptions 2 and 4 are simultaneously relaxed.
19

For this reason, we cannot recommend basing identification off of concavity explicitly. However, one can view Assumption 5 as a weaker (local) version of concavity that is compatible
with our other restrictions.

5

Two-Player Games Without Selection Rules

The potential equilibrium selection rule for point identification in binary action games is
particularly relevant to the case of three or more players. Here we provide a proof of identification in two-player games that does not impose any equilibrium selection rule. As Bajari
et al. (2010) point out, the data generating process is now a mixture over equilibria in the
regions of ε under which there is more than one equilibrium. As the literature (Tamer 2003,
etc.) has exploited for the parametric case, our identification result will rely on the fact that
some outcomes only occur as unique equilibria in the two player case.
As we do not impose the potential selection rule, we do not require that interaction
effects have the pairwise symmetry property described above. We allow the interaction effect
for husbands’ actions on wives’ utilities to differ from that of wives’ actions on husbands’
utilities. Berry and Tamer (2006, Result 4), following Tamer (2003), study identification in
two-player, submodular games where the key special regressors enter multiplicatively instead
of additively. The advantage of our approach is that it does not rely on identification at
infinity to recover the payoff terms. As it was earlier defined, we let vi (x0 ) be the interaction
effect of the other player’s action on i’s utility.
Theorem 2. In the two-player game, assume that players follow a pure-strategy equilibrium
(but not necessarily a potential function maximizer) and that the game is either supermodular

or submodular. Under Assumptions 1–4, Π = (ui , vi )i≤2 , Fε|x0 is identified.
The full proof is in the appendix. Here we provide a sketch of the proof for the supermodular case. When vi ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2, then (1, 0) and (0, 1) are unique equilibria. The
probability that the first player chooses action 1 and the other one action 0 (given x) is given
by
Pr ((1, 0) | x) = Pr (−ε1 − u1 (x0 ) ≤ x
e1 , ε2 + u2 (x0 ) + v2 (x0 ) ≤ −e
x2 | x) .

20

Given that ε has a zero mean, we can use variation in x
e to identify F−ε1 ,ε2 |x0 . The subutilities
u1 (x0 ) and u2 (x0 ) + v2 (x0 ) can then be identified via conditional expectations using variation
in x0 . Similarly, we can use Pr ((0, 1) | x) to recover u2 (x0 ) and u1 (x0 ) + v1 (x0 ). Therefore
(ui , vi )i≤2 is identified. The distribution of unobservables can be recovered from F−ε1 ,ε2 |x0 . A
similar argument follows when the interactions are negative.
The nonparametric identification result in Theorem 2 relies on knowing the signs of the
interaction terms, but is independent of the equilibrium selection rule that guides players
choices. Thus, the two-player game offers a very natural environment to empirically test
competing theories about equilibrium selection, e.g., risk dominance versus payoff dominance.

6

Demand for Bundles

Our model for potential games is formally equivalent to a multinomial choice demand model
where consumers can pick bundles of individual alternatives. We draw out the equivalence
here and therefore present new identification results for multinomial choice models where
consumers can purchase bundles of goods.
Think of N as the set of available products for a consumer, and let us denote by x
e≡
(e
xi )i≤n the vector of (negative) prices. Prices will play the role of our special regressors in
Assumption 1. We need prices to vary across consumers in the sample. This could occur
from observing consumers in different markets or at different points in time. We could use
other special regressors than prices. For example, if a consumer is choosing between a set
of medical offices (say a hospital and an out-patient clinic), each x
ei could be the distance
between the consumer’s home and provider i. If the consumer’s utility function is quasilinear
in income, his or her maximization problem can be written as

max





V (a, x, ε) =

X
i∈N

(ui (x0 ) + x
ei + εi ) +

X
S∈S(a)

Φ (S, x0 ) | a ∈ {0, 1}n




.

(3)



This is a special case of (2). Here ui (x0 ) + x
ei + εi is the stand-alone utility the consumer gets
0
from acquiring good i and Φ (S, x ) is an interaction term that captures complementarities or
substitutabilities among the subset of goods S. The model restricts unobserved heterogeneity
21

to happen at the goods level; we do not allow unobservables in the Φ (S, x0 ) terms. Because
this is a special case of the potential game studied earlier, the following corollary to Theorem
1 holds.
Corollary 1. Let there be two goods and let Assumptions 1–4 hold. Then Π = (ui )i≤2 , Φ, Fε|x0
is identified.

Let there be three or more goods and let Assumptions 1–5 hold. Then Π = (ui )i≤n , Φ, Fε|x0
is identified.
The various sufficient conditions for Assumption 5 can be straightforwardly adapted to
the demand problem; we emphasize the two goods case in the statement of the corollary. The
other possible sufficient conditions are that all goods are substitutes or that utility is discrete
concave. There is no need to refer to Theorem 2 here because equilibrium selection is not
relevant in consumer choice. Note also that there is no need to generalize the model to allow,
for say the two good case, v1 (x0 ) 6= v2 (x0 ). There are no asymmetric complementarities in
the demand model. We do not discuss price endogeneity here, although this is important
in many empirical applications. Various techniques in the literature can be used to resolve
price endogeneity in multinomial choice models (e.g., Berry and Haile 2010, Fox and Gandhi
2012).
Gentzkow (2007a) studies a demand model for print and online newspapers with bivariate
normal unobservables. We offer a nonparametric version of his result. Importantly, like his
paper we allow for correlation in the unobservable tastes for the two goods. We can therefore
distinguish complementarities in utility from correlated preferences for products.
Similar conditions to our sufficient conditions for Assumption 5 have been used in tangentially related identification papers. For example, Berry, Gandhi and Haile (2011) provide
a sufficient condition under which a system of demand functions (representing, say, aggregate demand) can be inverted in unobservables. Their condition applies to goods that are
(connected) substitutes and is loosely related to our result. Matzkin (2007) studies the
inversion of simultaneous equations (again representing, say, aggregate demand), imposing
(quasi-)concavity as we do in Section 4.2.3.
For another example, we can think of N as the set of available practices a firm can
use. The problem of the firm is to select the subset of activities that maximize its objective
22



function (3), where ui (x0 ) + x
ei + εi captures the marginal contribution of each activity and
Φ (S, x0 ) is the extra output the firm gets by using the activities in the subset S together.
Athey and Stern (1998) provide a framework for testing theories about complementarity in
organizational practices within a cross section of firms. They address identification for two
specifications of the model that differ regarding the type of heterogeneity across firms: the
Random Systems Model (RSM) and the Random Practice Model (RPM). The RSM allows
unobserved heterogeneity across firms for both the marginal contribution of each activity
and the interaction terms. The specification of the RPM is similar to (3). Our approach to
identification and specification of the utility function differs from theirs in that we impose
more conditions on payoffs but rely on fewer exclusion restrictions. One way to achieve
identification in a model where a consumer can pick bundles of choices is to redefine the
alternatives by incorporating in the choice set all combinations of individual options. Doing
this, Athey and Stern provide an identification argument that relies on exclusion restrictions
for each bundle of choices (i.e., the enlarged choice set). In the demand setting, this would
require bundle-specific prices that flexibly vary across consumers or markets. Doing this,
one can appeal to nonparametric identification results from the literature on multinomial
choice by treating each bundle as a separate good. It is only because we do not rely on
bundle-specific exclusion restrictions that our identification results are new.

7

Conclusion

We explore identification in binary choice games of complete information. We derive conditions under which a binary choice game is a potential game and impose as the equilibrium
selection rule that the selected equilibrium maximizes the resulting potential function. This
makes our game formally equivalent to a multinomial choice demand model where a consumer
can elect to purchase any bundle of products.
We show that the model is identified. We recover from data the subutility function of
each player, the interaction effects among each group of players, and the joint distribution
of potentially correlated, player-specific unobservables. We state some alternative key assumptions: two players, a submodular game, and concavity of the game. These conditions
also have analogs for demand for bundles. For the two-player case, we present a separate
23

identification result that does not rely on equilibrium selection.
It is likely our results will lead to nonparametric identification outcomes in other classes
of potential games. For example, Monderer and Shapley (1996) and Qin (1996) discuss
the connection between noncooperative potential games and cooperative games. It follows
from their results that many cooperative solution concepts can be expressed as in (2), and
therefore our previous results can be applied to these types of interactions.

A

Proofs

A.1

Proof of Theorem 1

We divide the proof in the next two Lemmas.
A.1.1

Proof of Lemma 1 (Identification of Fε|x0 )

By Assumption 5, for each x0 , there exists a known vector b
a ∈ {0, 1}n for which for any
a−i , x, ε) for all
x = (x0 , x
e) and ε, V (a, x, ε) is maximized at b
a if V (b
ai , b
a−i , x, ε) ≥ V (a0i , b
i ∈ N and a0i = 1 − b
ai . Under Assumption 1, this condition holds if, for all i ∈ N ,
(1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)) εi ≥
X
X
0
Φ
(S,
x
)
−
Φ (S, x0 ) − (1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)) (ui (x0 ) + x
ei ) ,
0
S∈S(a )

(4)

S∈S(b
a)

where a0 is obtained from b
a by changing only b
ai . By Assumptions 2 and 3, we will show that
we can recover Fε|x0 from variation in x
e using Pr (b
a | x0 , x
e). Applying Assumption 5 shows
that
Pr (b
a | x0 , x
e) = Pr ((4) holds for all i ∈ N | x0 , x
e) .
Let the new random variable µi for each i ∈ N be
µi = (1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)) εi
X
X
0
−
Φ
(S,
x
b
)
−
0
S∈S(a )

0

S∈S(b
a)



Φ (S, x
b ) + (1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)) (ui (x0 )) .

24

Let µ = (µ1 , . . . , µn ), which is independent of x
e conditional on x0 . Therefore,
Pr (b
a | x0 , x
e) = Pr (µi ≥ (1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)) (e
xi ) for all i ∈ N | x0 , x
e) .
Therefore, we identify the upper probabilities of the vector µ, conditional on x0 , at all points
((1 (b
a1 = 1) − 1 (b
a1 = 0)) (e
x1 ) , . . . , (1 (b
an = 1) − 1 (b
an = 0)) (e
xn )) .
By Assumption 2 and the fact that (1 (b
an = 1) − 1 (b
an = 0)) is at most a sign change,


 
 
e1 , . . . , (1 (b
en
(1 (b
a1 = 1) − 1 (b
a1 = 0)) X
an = 1) − 1 (b
an = 0)) X

has support on all of Rn . Therefore, we learn the upper tail probabilities of µ conditional on
x0 for all points of evaluation µ∗ . Upper tail probabilities completely determine a random
vector’s distribution, so we also identify the lower tail probabilities of µ conditional on x0 ,
also known as the joint CDF of µ conditional on x0 . Note that εi is the only random variable
in µi , conditional on x0 . By Assumption 3(ii), E(ε | x0 ) = 0. Therefore, up to the possible
sign change in (1 (b
ai = 1) − 1 (b
ai = 0)), the distribution of ε conditional on x0 is obtained
from the distribution of µ − E (µ | x0 ) conditional on x0 .

A.1.2

Proof of Lemma 2 (Identification of (ui )i≤n , Φ



Under Assumption 1
V (a, x, ε) ≡

X
i∈N

(ui (x0 ) + x
ei + εi ) 1 (ai = 1) +

X
S∈S(a)

Φ (S, x0 ) .

To facilitate the exposition, recall that
4j ε (a0 ) ≡

X
i∈N

εi 1 (a0i = 1)−

X
i∈N


εi 1 aji = 1 and 4j W (a0 , x) ≡ W (aj , x)−W (a0 , x) .

25

Thus 4ε (a0 ) is the vector (4j ε (a0 ))j≤2n ,aj 6=a0 , which has a distribution dF4ε(a0 )|x0 . Then,

P 4W (a0 , x) | x; Fε|x0
ˆ
ˆ


n
n
≡ ... 1 41 ε (a0 ) ≤ 41 W (a0 , x) ...1 42 ε (a0 ) ≤ 42 W (a0 , x) dF4ε(a0 )|x0 .

Each (ui )i≤n , Φ clearly leads to a different vector of functions W (a, x). Therefore,
f 6= W. We first pick an x where the subvector x
consider W
e will satisfy certain properties
that we delay discussion of until the end of the proof. Let
C ≡ arg maxa

n


o
f (a, x) | a ∈ {0, 1}n
W (a, x) − W



f (a, x) > 0 (the other case follows by a similar argument).
and suppose maxa W (a, x) − W
Define D ≡ {a ∈
/ C | a ∈ {0, 1}n }. We know C 6= ∅. The fact that D 6= ∅ follows as
f (a = (0, 0, ..., 0) , x) = 0.
W (a = (0, 0, ..., 0) , x) = W
f (a0 , x) = W (a, x) − W
f (a, x) for all a ∈ C,
Fix some a0 ∈ C. We know that W (a0 , x) − W
f (a0 , x) > W (a, x) − W
f (a, x) for all a ∈ D. Rearranging terms,
and W (a0 , x) − W
f (a0 , x) − W
f (a, x) for all a ∈ C, and
W (a0 , x) − W (a, x) = W
f (a0 , x) − W
f (a, x) for all a ∈ D.
W (a0 , x) − W (a, x) > W
Assume there exists some a00 ∈ D for which W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a00 , x) does not necessarily
hold whenever W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a, x) for all a 6= a0 , a00 (see Example 3). Saying differently,
knowing that a0 maximizes W (a, x) over all a 6= a0 , a00 is not enough to conclude that
W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a00 , x). We show this always holds below. Then, by Assumption 4
ˆ

ˆ
...
ˆ

>



n
n
1 41 ε (a0 ) ≤ 41 W (a0 , x) ...1 42 ε (a0 ) ≤ 42 W (a0 , x) dF4ε(a0 )|x0
ˆ 



f (a0 , x) dF4ε(a0 )|x0
f (a0 , x) ...1 42n ε (a0 ) ≤ 42n W
... 1 41 ε (a0 ) ≤ 41 W

26




0
f
i.e., P 4W (a , x) | x; Fε|x0 > P 4W (a , x) | x; Fε|x0 . Thus W identified, and (ui )i≤n , Φ
can be recovered directly from these action probabilities.
We now prove that there exists some a0 ∈ C and a00 ∈ D for which W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a00 , x)
is not implied by W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a, x) for all a 6= a0 , a00 . By contradiction,
we will show that

 if
f (a, x) >
this were not true then (0, 0, ..., 0) ∈ C, which is not possible as maxa W (a, x) − W
0.
For each a0 ∈ C there are (at least) n inequalities that are not implied by the others.
These inequalities correspond to vectors of actions that differ from a0 regarding the action
of one single player. To shed light on this point, let a00 be equal to a0 except for some player
i who selects action 1 at a0 and action 0 at a00 . Then W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a00 , x) if and only if
0



ui (x0 ) + x
ei +

X
S∈S(a0 )

Φ (S, x0 ) ≥

X
S∈S(a00 )

Φ (S, x0 ) .

All other inequalities, W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a, x) with a 6= a0 , a00 , will involve at least one other
special regressor x
ej with (j 6= i). Thus, we can always find a vector (e
xi )i≤n such that
W (a0 , x) ≥ W (a, x) with a 6= a0 , a00 and yet W (a0 , x) < W (a00 , x). Thus assume a00 ∈ C.
By repeating this process ka0 k times, we will need to assume (0, 0, ..., 0) ∈ C. But this is not
possible as we explained before.


A.2

Proof of Lemma 3

The proof of Lemma 3 relies on Topkis’ theorem (see, e.g., Topkis (1998)) and the concept
of stochastic dominance. We include a simple version of these concepts next.
Proposition 2. Topkis’ theorem: Let f (a1 , a2 , x) : A1 × A2 × R → R, where A1 and A2
are finite ordered sets. Assume that f (a1 , a2 , x) (i) is supermodular in (a1 , a2 ) ; and (ii) has
increasing differences in (a1 , x) and (a2 , x) . Then, arg max {f (a1 , a2 , x) | (a1 , a2 ) ∈ A1 × A2 }
increases in x with respect to the strong set order.12 (According to this order, we write A ≥S B
if for every a ∈ A and b ∈ B, we have that a ∨ b ∈ A and a ∧ b ∈ B.)
For any two elements a, a0 ∈ A1 × A2 we write a ∨ a0 (a ∧ a0 ) for the least upper bound (greatest lower
bound). We say f (a1 , a2 , x) is supermodular in (a1 , a2 ) if, for all a, a0 ∈ A1 × A2 ,
12

f (a ∨ a0 , x) + f (a ∧ a0 , x) ≥ f (a, x) + f (a0 , x) .

27

The concept of first order (or standard) stochastic dominance (FOSD), is based on upper
sets. Let us consider (Ω, ≥), where Ω is a set and ≥ defines a partial order on it. A subset
U ⊂ Ω is an upper set if and only if x ∈ U and x0 ≥ x imply x0 ∈ U.
First Order Stochastic Dominance: Let X 0 , X ∈ Rn be two random vectors. We say
X 0 is higher than X with respect to first order stochastic dominance if
Pr (X 0 ∈ U ) ≥ Pr (X ∈ U )
for all upper set U ⊂ Rn .
Proof of Lemma 3: (i) By Example 1 and Assumption 1, if Γ is a two-player game, then
V (a, x, ε) = (u1 (x0 ) + x
e1 + ε1 ) 1 (a1 = 1)+(u2 (x0 ) + x
e2 + ε2 ) 1 (a2 = 1)+Φ (x0 ) 1 (a1 = 1, a2 = 1) .
If Φ (x0 ) ≥ 0 then V (a, x, ε) is supermodular in (a1 , a2 ). In addition V (a, x, ε) has increasing
differences in (a1 , x
e1 ) and (a2 , x
e1 ) (here the cross partial derivative is 0). Then, by Topkis’
theorem,

a∗ (x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 , ε) ≡ arg max V (a, x, ε) | (a1 , a2 ) ∈ {0, 1}2
increases in x
e1 . By Assumption 4, the probability that the argmax is not unique is 0. By
e1 and let U be an
Assumption 3(i), the unobservables are independent of x
e1 . Let x
e∗1 > x
upper set in the space of pure-strategy equilibria, then
Pr (a ∈ U | x0 , x
e01 , x
e2 ) = Pr (a∗ (x∗ , x
e01 , x
e2 , ε) ∈ U | x0 , x
e∗1 , x
e2 )
≥ Pr (a∗ (x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 , ε) ∈ U | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) = Pr (a ∈ U | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) ,
i.e., Pr (a1 , a2 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increases with respect to first order stochastic dominance in x
e1 . Because first order stochastic dominance is preserved under marginalization, Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 )
..
increases in x
e1 (see, e.g., Muller and Stoyan 2002, Theorem 3.3.10, p. 94). In a similar way,
We say f (a1 , a2 , x) has increasing differences in (a1 , x) if, for all a01 > a1 and x0 > x,
f (a01 , a2 , x0 ) − f (a1 , a2 , x0 ) ≥ f (a01 , a2 , x) − f (a1 , a2 , x) .

28

we can show that Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increases in x
e2 .
On the other hand, V (a, x, ε) is supermodular in (a1 , −a2 ) if Φ (x0 ) ≤ 0. In addition,
V (a, x, ε) has increasing differences in (a1 , x
e1 ) and (−a2 , x
e1 ) (here the cross partial derivative
is 0). By Assumption 4, the probability that the argmax is not unique is 0. By Assumption
3(i), the unobservables are independent of x
e1 . Thus, Pr (a1 , −a2 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increases with
respect to first order stochastic dominance in x
e1 . Because first order stochastic dominance
is preserved under marginalization, Pr (−a2 = 0 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) increases in x
e1 , and therefore
Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) decreases in x
e1 . In a similar way, Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) decreases in
x
e2 .
By Assumption 4, unless Φ (x0 ) = 0, neither Pr (a2 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 ) nor Pr (a1 = 1 | x0 , x
e1 , x
e2 )
are constant as a function of x
e1 and x
e2 , respectively. From the last two paragraphs, the sign
0
of Φ (x ) is identified from data.
(ii) For Φ (x0 ) ≥ 0 let b
a, as defined in Assumption 5, be (b
a1 , b
a2 ) = (1, 0). We need to
show that if V ((1, 0) , x, ε) ≥ V ((1, 1) , x, ε) and V ((1, 0) , x, ε) ≥ V ((0, 0) , x, ε) hold, then
V ((1, 0) , x, ε) ≥ V ((0, 1) , x, ε) . The first two conditions are satisfied if and only if
u2 (x0 ) + x
e2 + ε2 + Φ (x0 ) ≤ 0

(5)

u1 (x0 ) + x
e1 + ε1 ≥ 0.

(6)

Since Φ (x0 ) ≥ 0, then (5) implies u2 (x0 ) + x
e2 + ε2 ≤ 0. By this observation and (6) we get
0
0
that u1 (x ) + x
e1 + ε1 ≥ u2 (x ) + x
e2 + ε2 , i.e., V ((1, 0) , x, ε) ≥ V ((0, 1) , x, ε) . A similar claim
holds if we select (b
a1 , b
a2 ) = (0, 1) .
0
For Φ (x ) ≤ 0, Assumption 5 holds by selecting (b
a1 , b
a2 ) = (0, 0) or (b
a1 , b
a2 ) = (1, 1) . The
proof is almost identical so we omit it.


A.3

Proof of Theorem 2

Assume Γ (X, ε) is supermodular, i.e., vi (X) ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2. Under Assumption 4, when
(1, 0) is an equilibrium, it is the only equilibrium with positive probability. Thus, under
Assumptions 1 and 4,
Pr ((1, 0) | x) = Pr (−ε1 − u1 (x0 ) ≤ x
e1 , ε2 + u2 (x0 ) + v2 (x0 ) ≤ −e
x2 | x) .
29

e We can identify Fα|x0 with
By Assumption 3(i), ε is independent of X.
α = (α1 , α2 ) ≡ (−ε1 − u1 (x0 ) , ε2 + u2 (x0 ) + v2 (x0 ))
from variation in x
e. Using the same logic, we can recover Fβ|x0 with
β = (β1 , β2 ) ≡ (ε1 + u1 (x0 ) + v1 (x0 ) , −ε2 − u2 (x0 )) .
By Assumption 3(ii), ε is mean independent of X 0 . Thus,
E [(α1 , α2 ) | x0 ] = (−u1 (x0 ) , u2 (x0 ) + v2 (x0 ))
E [(β1 , β2 ) | x0 ] = (u1 (x0 ) + v1 (x0 ) , −u2 (x0 ))
E [(α1 , α2 ) | x0 ] + E [(β1 , β2 ) | x0 ] = (v1 (x0 ) , v2 (x0 )) .
Then (ui , vi )i≤2 are identified from variation in x0 . By Assumption 3(ii), ε has zero mean
conditional on x0 . Thus the previous information allows us to identify Fε|x0 .
We omit the proof for the submodular case, i.e., vi (X) ≤ 0 for i = 1, 2, as it is almost
identical.


A.4

Proof of Lemma 4

Assume V (a, x, ε) has the negative single-crossing property on (ai ; a−i ) for all i ∈ N , i.e.,
for all a0i > ai and all a0−i > a−i we have


V (a0i , a−i , x, ε) − V (ai , a−i , x, ε) ≤ (<) 0 =⇒ V a0i , a0−i , x, ε − V ai , a0−i , x, ε ≤ (<) 0. (7)
We next show that Assumption 5 holds with b
a = (0, 0, ..., 0) .
Assume V (b
ai = 0, b
a−i = (0, 0, ..., 0), x, ε) ≥ V (ai = 1, b
a−i = (0, 0, ..., 0), x, ε) for all i ∈
n−1
N . Then, by (7), for all a−i ∈ {0, 1}
, and all i ∈ N ,
V (b
ai = 0, a−i , x, ε) ≥ V (ai = 1, a−i , x, ε)
Thus, V ((0, .., 0) , x, ε) ≥ V (a, x, ε) for all a ∈ {0, 1}n .
30



A.5

Proof of Lemma 5

Assume the required conditions of the lemma hold. Then, by Ui (2008, Proposition 1),
V (b
a, X, ε) ≥ V (a, X, ε) for all a ∈ {0, 1}n with kb
a − ak ≤ 1 is satisfied if and only if
n
V (b
a, X, ε) ≥ V (a, X, ε) for all a ∈ {0, 1} . Thus, Assumption 5 holds at any b
a ∈ {0, 1}n . 

References
[1] Bajari, P., H. Hong, and S. Ryan (2010). Identification and estimation of a discrete
game of complete information. Econometrica 78, 1529–1568.
[2] Berry, S. (1992). Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry. Econometrica
60, 889-917.
[3] Berry, S., and P. Haile (2010). Nonparametric identification of multinomial choice demand models with heterogeneous consumers. Yale University working paper.
[4] Berry, S., A. Gandhi, and P. Haile (2011). Connected Substitutes and Invertibility of
Demand. Yale University working paper.
[5] Berry, S., and E. Tamer (2007). Identification in Models of Oligopoly Entry. Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress, vol.
2.
[6] Bjorn, P., and Q. Vuong (1984). Simultaneous equations models for dummy endogenous
variables: A game theoretic formulation with application to labor force participation.
Mimeo.
[7] Blume, L. (1993). The statistical mechanics of strategic interaction. Games Econ. Behav.
5, 387–424.
[8] Bresnahan, T. and P. Reiss (1991). Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets.
Journal of Polical Economy, 99, 977-1009.

31

[9] Brock, W., and S. Durlauf (2001). Discrete choice with social interactions. Rev. Econ.
Stud. 68, 235-260.
[10] Brock, W., and S. Durlauf (2007). Identification of binary choice models with social
interactions. J. Econometrics 140, 52-75.
[11] Card, D. and L. Giuliano (2012), Peer Effects and Multiple Equilibria in the Risky
Behavior of Friends. University of California, Berkeley working paper.
[12] Chen, R., and Y. Chen (2011). The potential of social identity for equilibrium selection.
Amer. Econ. Rev. 101, 2562–2589.
[13] Chen, X. (2007). Large Sample Sieve Estimation of Semi-Nonparametric Models. Handbook of Econometrics.
[14] Ciliberto, F., and E. Tamer (2009). Market structure and multiple equilibria in airline
markets. Econometrica 77, 1791–1828.
[15] Cooper, R. , and A. John (1988). Coordinating coordination failures in Keynesian models. Quart. J. Econ. 103, 441-463.
[16] De Paula, A., and X. Tang. (2011). Inference of signs of interaction effects in simultaneous games with incomplete information. Econometrica 80, 143-172.
[17] Deb, R. (2009). A Testable Model of Consumption with Externalities. J. Econ. Theory.
144, 1804–1816
[18] Ellickson, P., S. Houghton and C. Timmins (2010). Estimating Network Economies in
Retail Chains: A Revealed Preference Approach. Duke University working paper.
[19] Fox, J. and A. Gandhi (2012). Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Random
Coefficients in Multinomial Choice Models. University of Michigan working paper.
[20] Galichon, A. and M. Henry (2011). Set identification in models with multiple equilibria.
Review of Economic Studies 78, 1264–1298.

32

[21] Gentzkow, M. (2007a). Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity: Online
Newspapers. The American Economic Review 97, 713-744.
[22] Gentzkow, M. (2007b). Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity: Online
Newspapers. University of Chicago working paper.
[23] Goeree, J., and C. Holt (2005). An experimental study of costly coordination. Games
Econ. Behav. 51, 349–364.
[24] Gowrisankaran, G., and J. Stavins (2004). Network externalities and technology adoption: Lessons from electronic payments. RAND Journal of Economics 35, 260-276.
[25] Harsanyi, J., and S. Selten (1988). A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in Games.
MIT Press.
[26] Hartman, W. (2010). Demand estimation with social interactions and the implications
for targeted marketing. Journal Marketing Science 29, 585-601.
[27] Heckman, J. (1978). Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation System.
Econometrica 46, 931–959.
[28] Jia, P. (2008). What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis
of the Discount Retailing Industry. Econometrica. 76, 1263–1316.
[29] Kajii, A., and S. Morris. (1997a). The robustness of equilibria to incomplete information.
Econometrica, 65, 6, 1283-1309.
[30] Kajii, A., and S. Morris. (1997b). Refinements and Higher Order Beliefs: A Unified
Survey. Northwestern University working paper.
[31] Lewbel, A. (1998). Semiparametric latent variable model estimation with endogenous
or mismeasured regressors. Econometrica. 66, 105-121.
[32] Lewbel, A. (2000). Semiparametric qualitative response model estimation with unknown
heteroscedasticity or instrumental variables. 97, 145-177.

33

[33] Lewbel, A., and X. Tang (2011). Identification and estimation of games with incomplete
Information using excluded regressors. Boston College working paper.
[34] Magnac, T. and E. Maurin (2007). Identification and information in monotone binary
models. Journal of Econometrics. 139, 76–104.
[35] Manski, C (1988). Identification of Binary Response Models. Journal of the American
Statistical Association. 83, 729-738.
[36] Matzkin, R. (1993). Nonparametric identification and estimation of polychotomous
choice models. J. Econometrics 58, 137-168.
[37] Matzkin, R. (2007). Heterogeneous Choice. Advances in Economics and Econometrics,
Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress of the Econometric Society.
[38] Mazzeo, M. (2002). Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure. RAND Journal of
Economics 33, 221–242.
[39] Monderer, D., and L. Shapley (1996). Potential Games. Games Econ. Behav. 14, 124143.
[40] Morris, S. and T. Ui (2005). Generalized potentials and robust sets of equilibria. Journal
of Economic Theory 124, 45–78.
..

[41] Muller, A., and D. Stoyan (2002). Comparison Methods for Stochastic Models and
Risks. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
[42] Nelsen, R. (1971). Introduction to Copulas. Lecture Notes in Statistics: 139. SpringerVerlag New York, Inc.
[43] Qin, C. (1996). Endogenous formation of cooperation structures. J. Econ. Theory 69,
218-226
[44] Rosenthal, R. (1973). A class of games possessing pure-strategy Nash equilibria. Int. J.
Game Theory 2, 65–67.

34

[45] Tamer, E. (2003). Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Model with Multiple
Equilibria. Review of Economic Studies 70, 147–165.
[46] Thompson, S. (1998). Identification of semiparametric discrete choice models. Mimeo.
[47] Topkis, D. M. (1998). Supermodularity and Complementarity. Princeton University
Press.
[48] Ui, T. (2000). A Shapley value representation of potential games. Games Econ. Behav.
31, 121–135.
[49] Ui, T. (2001). Robust equilibria of potential games. Econometrica 69, 1373–1380.
[50] Ui, T. (2008). Discrete concavity for potential games. Int. J. Game Theory Review 10,
137-143.
[51] Van Huyck, J., R. Battalio and R. Beil. (1990). Tactic Coordination Games, Strategic
Uncertainty, and Coordination Failure. American Economic Review 80, 234–248.

35

