                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO MALE-FEMALE WAGE DI˙FFERENTIALS REFLECT DIFF˙ERENCES IN
         THE RETURN TO SKILL? CROSS-CITY EVIDENCE FROM 1980-2000

                                            Paul Beaudry
                                            Ethan Lewis

                                        Working Paper 18159
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18159


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




Comments welcome. The authors acknowledge the helpful comments of seminar participants at the
University of British Columbia, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Queens College, and
Dartmouth College. Mark Doms was heavily involved in the early stages of this project, and we are
indebted to him for his substantial input. All errors are our own. Paul Beaudry's research is funded
in part by the SSHRC of Canada and the Bank of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Paul Beaudry and Ethan Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Male-Female Wage Di˙fferentials Reflect Diff˙erences in the Return to Skill? Cross-City
Evidence From 1980-2000
Paul Beaudry and Ethan Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 18159
June 2012
JEL No. J16,J24,J31,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

Over the 1980s and 1990s the wage differentials between men and women (with similar observable
characteristics) declined significantly. At the same time, the returns to education increased. It has
been suggested that these two trends may reflect a common change in the relative price of a skill which
is more abundant in both women and more educated workers. In this paper we explore the relevance
of this hypothesis by examining the cross-city co-movement in both male-female wage differentials
and returns to education over the 1980-2000 period. In parallel to the aggregate pattern, we find that
male-female wage differentials at the city levels moved in opposite direction to the changes in the
return to education. We also find this relationship to be particularly strong when we isolate data variation
which most likely reflects the effect of technological change on relative prices. We take considerable
care of controlling for potential selection issues which could bias our interpretation. Overall, our cross-city
estimates suggest that most of the aggregate reduction in the male-female wage differential observed
over the 1980-2000 period was likely due to a change in the relative price of skill that both females
and educated workers have in greater abundance.


Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
and University of British Columbia
and also NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

Ethan Lewis
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
1       Introduction

Over the 1980-2000 period the US wage gap between men and women with similar charac-
teristics decreased significantly. Since 2000 this wage gap has stayed quite stable.1 There
are many proposed explanations for the observed decrease in the gender wage gap, includ-
ing increased positive selection of women into the labor market (Mulligan and Rubinstein,
2008), an improved match between actual and potential measures of experience (O’Neill
and Polacheck, 1993) – among other increases in women’s labor market skills induced by
their greater labor force attachment (Bailey, Hershblein, and Miller, 2012) – and decreased
discrimination.2 One especially intriguing observation is that the gender wage gap has mir-
rored rather closely movements in the return to education over this period (see Figure 1),
with the gender gap decreasing when the return to education increased.3 This has had lead
some researchers, most notably Welch (2000), to conjecture that the two patterns may be
driven by a common underlying force.4 According to this conjecture, men and women (with
similar education) bring to the market different bundles of skills, as do more educated rel-
ative to less educated individuals. When methods of production change drastically – such
as with the introduction and diffusion of the PC – this changes the price of different skill
attributes which in turn induces movements in the gender wage gap and education wage
gaps, since both gaps compare the value of skill bundles. To be more precise, if individuals
are viewed as bringing to the market both soft-cognitive skills (or interpersonal skills) and
hard-motor skills (or brawn), and if women and more educated workers are both relatively
more endowed is such softer skills, then an increase in the relative price of soft versus hard
skills should cause the male-female wage gap to decrease at the same time as the return
to education increases. While some evidence lends support to this view, the literature on
    1
     It is also quite stable prior to 1980 going back as far as the 1930s (O’Neill and Polacheck, 1993).
    2
     O’Neill and Polacheck (1993) and others also attribute some of the decline to a decrease in blue-collar
wages. Gender discrimination is often mentioned, but, as it is difficult to quantify, its importance is not
usually empirically assessed. One exception is Blau and Kahn (2006), who look for indirect evidence whether
the smaller residual decline in the male-female wage gap in the 1990s compared to the 1980s could be due
to women reaching “glass ceilings” in the 1990s. Though they show some evidence in support of this, they
also evaluate other interpretations, including changes in selection, and the slowing rate of computerization.
   3
     The regression of the gender wage gaps in Figure 1 on the college-high school wage gap gives -0.625 for
the high school level gender gap and -0.787 for the college level gender gap.
   4
     Another view was that rising wage gaps should have lowered women’s relative wages, since women are
lower in the wage distribution than men (Blau and Kahn, 1997; Card and DiNardo, 2002). This follows
from viewing skill as a single index, which contrasts with the two attribute model which we pursue in this
paper. Blau and Kahn did note in their paper that the higher rate of computer use among women than men
suggested women may have actually relatively benefitted from, rather than been harmed from, skill-biased
technological change.



                                                                                                           2
gender gaps appears to remain skeptical of its relative importance in explaining the decrease
in the wage gap observed over the 1980s and 1990s, since the claim is backed-up foremost by
time-series evidence (which could easily be spurious) or else does not directly analyze gender
wage gaps.5 The object of this paper is to more thoroughly flesh out the empirical content of
this conjecture and then explore its implications for cross-city observations on gender gaps
and returns to education.

The idea that a change in the relative price of soft/cognitive skills versus hard/motor skills
could be behind some or all of the decrease in the gender wage gap observed over the 1980-
2000 period is a rather straightforward proposition. However, empirically evaluating its
relevance is hindered by the fact that the relevant relative price is not directly observable.
As we will show using a simple two attribute model, when female workers and more edu-
cated workers have relatively more soft-cognitive versus hard-motor skills than other types
of workers, then the relative price of soft versus hard skills plays the role of a common latent
factor that drives in opposite directions the gender gap and the return to education. The
main idea of this paper is to examine the quantitative relevance of this unobserved factor by
examining how city level measures of the gender gap and the return to education change in
response to forces that likely caused changes in the local price of these skills. If this common
factor is present, then the gender gap and the return to education should systematically co-
move in opposite directions in response to forces that affect the relative price of soft versus
hard skills.

The main challenge in implementing this simple idea is finding city level factors that plausibly
affects city level relative prices of skill.6 To make headway in identifying such factors, we
refer to the capital-skill complementarity literature which argues that 1980 to 2000 was a
period where the introduction of new capital equipment – most notably the PC – drastically
changed the relative price of certain skills since it acted as a substitute for many motor
   5
     The evidence in support of this view includes the time series correlation between the male-female wage
gap and the returns to education (such as in Figure 1; also Welch, 2000, and Fortin and Lemieux, 2000) the
decline in wages in jobs which require motor skills and the rise in wages in jobs which require cognitive skills
(Baccolod and Blum, 2010), and the correlation across industries between the change in female employment
share and the adoption of computers, especially in blue collar jobs (Weinberg, 2000). Black and Spitz-Oener’s
(2010) finding that a majority of women’s relative wage increases in Germany between 1979 and 1999 can be
accounted for by a large relative shift away from “routine cognitive” tasks (which Autor, Levy, and Murnane
(2003) found was associated with computerization) is also consistent with the decline in the wage gap having
a technological origin.
   6
     To identify the relevant co-movement, these factors must simultaneously be uncorrelated with other
residual factors which may affect either the gender wage gap or the returns to skill.




                                                                                                              3
or hard skills, and a complement for more cognitive skills.7 Based on this view, one may
consider regressing city level observations of both changes in gender wage gaps and in returns
to education on measures of technological adoption — such as the local use of PCs – and see
if these two wage differentials move in opposite directions. While we will report the results
of such an exercise, such an approach is potentially problematic as technological adoption
is itself an endogenous process. For this reason, we also use insight from the endogenous
technological adoption literature (similar to that used in Beaudry, Doms & Lewis, 2010)
to illustrate how local labor market conditions prior to the introduction of the PC can be
used as instruments for technology adoption. The main idea is that, if PCs complement soft
skills and substitute for hard skills, then they should be adopted most strongly in localities
where soft skills were initially relatively abundant. Hence this idea suggests that the city
level change in the gender wage gap and the return to education should respond in opposite
directions to measures of a city’s pre-PC-era relative abundance of these skills.

Using data from the 1980 and 2000 Censuses of Population, we begin by examining whether
the gender wage gap and the return to education moved in opposite directions across cities
during this period. Interestingly, we find that the cross-city evidence echoes the time series
pattern of strong negative co-movement, thereby providing initial evidence supporting the
conjecture that the gender wage gap and the return to education may be driven by a common
latent force. However, based on OLS estimates, the cross-city co-movement is substantially
weaker than that found in the time series. We then exploit the insights of the endogenous
technological adoption literature in the presence of capital skill complementarity to explore
instrumental variable estimates of this relationship. Again, this class of models suggest that
cities where soft skills were most abundant “pre-PC” (in 1980) should be the same cities
where PCs are adopted most rapidly, inducing a greater increase in the return to education
and a greater decrease in the gender gap. We report evidence in support of each element
of this process. Our main finding is that, once we isolate variation in the wage data more
likely driven by changes in the relative prices of unobserved skills, we find that the cross-city
link between gender wage gap and the return to education to be very similar to that found
   7
    One view of recent technological change is that the PC is a “revolutionary” technology (Caselli, 1999) of
discretely higher skill intensity than previous technology; its adoption is therefore depends on comparative
advantage: the relative price of (and therefore supply of) skill. This is empirically supported in Beaudry
and Green, 2003, 2005; and Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis, 2010. Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) also
model computer adoption as responding to skill ratios, and a version of their model will be the main model
of production we consider in this paper. Another view is that PCs are the latest example of ongoing
improvements in the quality of capital that favor skilled workers which perhaps goes back as much as a
century (Goldin and Katz, 2008).



                                                                                                           4
in the time series. We then use the cross-city evidence to help answer our initial time series
question. Our results suggest that most of the aggregate reduction in the male female wage
differential observed during the 1980-2000 period can be attributed to the change in a latent
relative price of a skill which is more abundant in both female and more educated workers.

The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the
simple theoretical structure which guides our approach to the data. The theory encompasses
two elements: first, we clarify how gender gaps and returns to education are related in a two
attribute model of wage through a common latent factor. Then we use insights from the
literature on capital-skill complementarity and endogenous technological adoption to discuss
the identification of the effects of the common latent factor. Section 3 presents the data
used to examine determinants of the gender wage gaps and discusses implementation and
identification issues. Section 4 presents our main results, and Section 5 presents robustness
checks. In the empirical analysis, we examine in depth issues of selection (see Mulligan and
Rubinstein, 2008) that may bias our results, as such issues are thought to be potentially
very important in the behavior of the gender wage gap over our period of interest. Section 6
discusses the implication of the estimates for aggregate changes. Section 7 offers concluding
comments.



2      Theory

The idea we want to evaluate is whether changes in the gender wage gap and in the return
to education may be driven by a common underlying force reflecting the price of a skill
which is relatively more abundant among women and more educated workers. In particular,
the main hypothesis is that the role of this common factor driving the gender wage gap
became most evident during the 1980-2000 period when technological change – as reflected
in the diffusion of PCs– considerably changed relative prices of skills. The object of this
section is to present a simple theoretical structure which will clarify how we can use cross-
city variation in wage outcomes to examine the issue. As noted in the introduction, there
are two distinct components which underly the theory. On the one hand, there is the notion
that wages reflect payments to bundles of skills. On the other hand, there is the idea that
the diffusion of PCs tended to increase the relative price of cognitive-soft skills because of its
complementarity to such factors, while it acts as a substitute for more routine-hard skills.
We now present each of these elements in turn in order to derive estimating equations and


                                                                                                5
associated instrumental variable strategies.


2.1     The gender wage gap and the returns to education in a two
       attribute model

To begin, consider an environment where each worker brings to the market a two dimensional
vector of skills. The two components will be referred to as cognitive-soft skill (denoted S)
and raw labor (denoted L). Individuals differ in the amount of each skill they possess.
     S
Let γeg represent the amount of cognitive skill embodied in a a worker with education e ∈
                                                      L
{e1 , e2 , ..., eN } and gender g ∈ {m, f }, and let γeg represent the amount of raw labor embodied
in the same individual. For an individual in city c at time t his wage will be given by


                S S       L L
(1)   Wegct = (γeg wct + γeg wct )ηegct ,


       S       L
where wct and wct are the local prices of the cognitive skill and of raw labor respectively at
time t, and ηegct combines any systematic discrimination θegt (that can potentially vary over
time by gender and education) and a pure measurement error term νegct ( ηegct = θegt + νegct ).
For now, we need not focus on why people with different skills may cluster more in some
locations than others. Instead, we can take the cross-city distribution of worker types as
given and postpone a discussion of the related endogeneity issues.

The main difficulty with using equation (1) is that none of the right hand side terms are
directly observable. Nonetheless, we can pursue some of its empirical implications by exam-
ining wage gaps across individuals. We begin with the male-female log wage gap at education
level e, which we denote M F dif fect . From (1), this can be expressed as




      M F dif fect = ln Wemct − ln Wef ct
                         L               S  S     S   S
                                               !         !
                        γem            γem wct   γef wct
                   = ln L + ln 1 + L L − ln 1 + L L + ln ηemct − ln ηef ct
                        γef            γem wct   γef wct
                                      S
                         γL     S                   S
                                               !
                               γem   γef           wct
                     ≈ ln em
                          L
                             +  L
                                   −  L             L
                                                       + ln ηemct − ln ηef ct ,
                         γef   γem   γef           wct




                                                                                                 6
or, to simplify the notation, we can express it as:


(2)   M F dif fect ≈ αe1 + βe1 PctS + εect ,

                   L                S           S
                                               γef                  S
                                                                   wct
where αe1 = ln γγem   1
                 L , βe =
                                   γem
                                    L
                                   γem
                                         −      L
                                               γef
                                                     , PctS =       L
                                                                   wct
                                                                       ,   and εect = ln ηemct − ln ηef ct . Equation
                    ef
(2) says that the cross-city differences in the male-female wage gap depend on a common
education group effect and varies across cities because of differences in the relative price of
skills, PctS . Similarly, the within gender wage gap between education levels ej and ei can also
be expressed as a function of the relative price of skills.




(3)   Eji dif fgct = ln Wej gct − ln Wei gct
                           2      2
                        ≈ αjig + βjig PctS + εeji gct


                γeL g                 γeSj g       γeSi g
      2                  2
with αjig = ln γ Lj and βjig =        γeLj g
                                               −   γeLi g
                                                            and εeij gct = ln ηei gct − ln ηej gct .
                 ei g


Equations (2) and (3) illustrate that in a two attribute model, both the gender wage gap
and the returns to education are linked by the relative price of skills which acts as a latent
common factor. Moreover, if we are willing to assume that at a given level of education men
have a smaller ratio of soft skills to raw labor (which implies βe1 < 0) and that within gender
                                                                                   2
more educated workers have have relatively more soft skills (so if ej > ei , then βjig > 0),
then we see that change in the relative price of skills P S will cause the gender wage gap and
the returns to education to move in opposite directions.

Although (3) and (2) still cannot be directly estimated, part of what we will exploit in esti-
mation is changes in the prices of skills during the era of PC diffusion. So taking differences
of (3) and (2) we get:


(4)   ∆M F dif fec ≈ βe1 ∆PcS + ∆εec

                      2
(5)   ∆Eji dif fgc ≈ βjig ∆PcS + ∆εeji gc


Note that the error terms in (5) and (4) may not have a zero mean as they potentially
contain changes in systematic discrimination (changes in θegt ). If we substitue (5) into (4) to

                                                                                                                   7
eliminate the unobserved skill price, we get the following relation between the gender wage
gap and the returns to education:

                           βe1                          βe1
(6)   ∆M F dif fgec ≈       2
                                ∆Eji Dif f gc + ∆ε ec −  2
                                                             ∆εeji gc
                           βjig                         βjig

                                                   2
Our conjectures about skill endowments imply βe1 /βjig < 0.             8
                                                                            One of our main goals will be
to estimate (6) consistently, as this will be necessary to help evaluate the role of changes in
skill price for explaining aggregate changes in the gender wage gap. However, even leaving
aside the potential endogeneity of cross-city wage variation in (6), the fact that wage gaps are
likely measured with error implies OLS estimates of βe1 /βjig
                                                          2
                                                              will be substantially attenuated.
In order to estimate (6) consistently, we will therefore need instruments for the returns to
education that reflect changes in the relative price of skill ∆P S . For this reason, we now
discuss how we can use insights from the capital-skill complementarity literature to find such
instruments.


2.2      Production and Endogenous PC Adoption

In order to discuss factors determining the relative price of skills, consider an environment
where there is only one produced good and where prices reflect marginal products. Initially,
the good is produced using only the skills of different workers. Then we consider the in-
troduction of a new capital good which is meant to capture the introduction of PC’s. Our
aim is to highlight how this affects the price of the two different skill attributes. For exposi-
tional simplicity, we follow Autor, Levy , and Murnane (2003) (hereafter, ALM) and model
the economy after the arrival of computing technology with the following Cobb-Douglass
production structure:

                                 α
(7)   Qc = A µPc C P Cc + Lc           Sc1−α


where Qc represents aggregate output, Lc is the aggregate level of raw labor supplied by the
different individuals hired in market c, Sc represents the aggregate amount of soft skilled
hired in market c, P Cc represents the use of personal computers, and α ∈ (0, 1). The only
way in which this production function differs from ALM is the factor loading µPc C , which
  8 1   2
   βe /βjig   may vary across education groups but we will restrict it to be constant in our estimation.


                                                                                                           8
we include to capture potential city-specific productivity differences in the use of PCs.9 The
important element of this technology is that PCs substitute for raw labor and complement
the soft-cognitive skill. The results we exploit in what follows relies on this assumption but
not on the particularly restrictive functional form given by 7.10

Now, consider a period before the arrival of PCs, which we will call t = 1980 to match our
empirics below. We model this by setting µPc C = 0, so Qc = ALαc Hc1−α . This implies that
before the arrival of PCs, the relative price of soft skills versus raw labor is given by:

                       wS
                                                                       !
                                     α       Sc,1980                               α
(8)     S
       Pc,1980     = ln c,1980
                        L
                               = ln     − ln                               = ln       − lnsc,1980
                       wc,1980      1−α      Lc,1980                              1−α

                           Sc,1980
where sc,1980 =            Lc,1980
                                   .   Equation (8) simply indicates that the relative price of soft skills
prior to the introduction of PCs was negatively related to the local abundance of soft skills.11
After the arrival of the P C, which we assume is available in all localities at the same price
(denoted P P C ), we can express the change in the relative price of skills in two different
manners depending on whether or not we use the optimally condition for the determination
of P Cs which is given by:

                                                        P Cc
                                                               
       ln       αµPc C A       − (1 − α) ln       µPc C        + 1 + (1 − α) ln sc = ln P P C
                                                         Lc

If we use this optimally condition in conjunction with the marginal product conditions for
each skill, we can express the change the in the price of skill as:

                                                                                 
                           ln (αA) − ln P     PC                      ln µPc C
(9)    ∆ ln PcS =                                   + ln sc,1980 +
                                 1−α                                   1−α

Equation (9) indicates that the change in the relative price of skill at the city level will be
greatest where its relative supply is initially most abundant (i.e. where sc,1980 is greatest).
This property reflects the capital-skill complementary of the arrival of the PC.12 Before the
arrive of the PC, regions with more soft-cognitive skills have a relatively low price for this
   9
     In ALM, this production function represented many industries, each with different αs.
  10
     See Beaudry, Doms and Lewis (2010) for a more general discussion.
  11
     This property holds for a wide variety of production setups and we can easily generalize the structure
as not to obtain a unit elasticity.
  12
     This property does not rely on the particular functional form of the production function but does depends
on the arrival a new technology where the PC is a complement to soft skills and a substitute to hard skills.

                                                                                                            9
skill and a high price for hard skills. This makes the adoption of PCs very attractive in such
a market. Therefore, PCs should be adopted more aggressively in such market causing the
relative price of soft skill to increase most where soft skills are initially more abundant. If
we use (9) to replace ∆P S in 4 and 5 we get
                                                                                  
                            ln (αA) − ln P   PC                         ln µPc C
(10) ∆M F dif fec = βe1                           + βe1 ln sc,1980 + βe
                                                                      1
                                                                                       + ∆εec
                                  1−α                                     1−α
                                                                                      
                     2 ln (αA) − ln P
                                      PC
                                            2                 2
                                                                  ln µPc C
(11) ∆Eji dif fgc = βjig                 + βjig ln sc,1980 + βjig          + ∆εeji gc
                             1−α                                    1−α

The interesting aspect of these two equations is that they now contrast how cross-city move-
ments in the gender wage gap and the returns to education will respond differently to a
potentially observable aggregate factor: the relative supply of skills. In particular, these
equations indicate that following the introduction of the PCs, we should see the gender wage
gap fall most in cities where soft skill were most abundant prior to the arrival to the PC
(since, again, βe1 < 0). Moreover, it indicates that we should simultaneously see the greatest
increase in the return to education precisely in these same cities. If we have a measure of
these relative skills, then in principle we can estimate (10) and (11) consistently by OLS un-
der the assumption that the local skill supply prior to the arrival of PC was not anticipating
which cities would be best at using PCs (ie, the skill supply in 1980 is not systematically
related to µPc C ). These two equations also suggest that one way of estimating equation (6)
is to use measured skills in 1980 as an instrument for ∆EDij dif fc . This should also allow
for consistent estimates under the assumption that skill supply in 1980 did not forecast PC
efficiency across cities.

While equation (9) offers a simple and useful way of linking changes in the relative price of
skill and initial skill supplies, it hides much of the mechanism underlying the the model. In
particular, by using the optimality condition for the adoption of PCs, we have somewhat
obscured the fact that it is the adoption of the new technology that, according to the capital-
skill complementarity view, is causing the opposite movements in the gender wage gap and
the returns to education. In order to see these intermediate forces more explicitly, it is useful
to express the change the relative price of skill using only marginal product conditions for
each skill. In this case, we can express the change in the relative price of skill as

               P Cc
(12) ∆PcS ≈         − ∆ ln sc + µPc C
                Lc

                                                                                                10
Now using 12 to replace the price of skill in 4 and 5, we obtain

                            P Cc
(13) ∆M F dif fec ≈ βe1          − βe1 ∆ ln sc + βe1 µPc C + ∆εec
                             Lc


                     2      P Cc    2          2
(14) ∆Eji dif fgc ≈ βjig         − βjig ∆sc + βjig µPc C + ∆εeji c
                             Lc

Equations (13) and (14) now makes more explicit the relationship between the gender wage
gap, returns to education and technological change. In particular, these equations indicate
that greater PC adoption should be associated with a greater reduction in the gender wage
gap and a greater increase in the return to education. Moreover, it suggests that a faster
increase in the relative supply of skills should be associated with increases in the gender
wage gap and decreases in the returns to skill. The difficulty with these two equations,
relative to equations (10) and (11), is that they are much more prone to endogenity. In
particular, observed adoption of PCs will be correlated with local efficiency of PC use (µPc C ).13
To address the endogeneity of P C adoption, we use 1980 measures of skill supply as the
instruments, under the assumption that pre-PC-era skill supplies were not anticipating PC
efficiency. The formulation given by equations (13) and (14) also highlight the potential
use of PC adoption as an instrument for estimating equation (6). Although PC adoption is
endogenous and correlated with µPc C , this terms does not enter the error term in equation
(6) and hence is potentially a valid candidate as an instrument.

In summary, our model of capital-skill complementarity in a two attribute model has high-
lighted different factors that should cause opposite movements in the gender gap and the
returns to education. Furthermore, the model has provide insight regarding what instru-
ments are potentially admissible for exploring these relationships. In the empirical section
we will examine these implications to show that the ideas behind this simple model find
considerable support in the data. Once this is shown, we will discuss how the estimated
relationships based on cross-sectional observation can be used to evaluate the role of skill
price changes in explaining the decrease in the aggregate gender wage gap observed over the
1980-2000 period.
  13
   The change in the local supply of skill is also possibly correlated with the error terms in (13) and (14),
something we will discuss further below.




                                                                                                          11
3       Data and Empirical Methods

Our empirical investigation will focus on estimating the main relationships described in the
previous section (these are equations (6), (10),(11), (13) and (14)) using data on aggregate
outcomes drawn from U.S. metropolitan areas. We will begin this section by discussing the
data and then we will further discuss implementation and identification issues.


3.1     Data and Measures

Our goal is to estimate three types of relationships across 230 U.S. metropolitan areas. First,
the relationship between male-female and education wage gaps as described in (6). Second,
the relationships between the pre-PC era supply of skill and each of the two wage gaps –
the gender gap and the returns to education – as described in (10) and (11). And finally the
relationship between the use of PCs and the two wage gaps as described in (12) and (13).
To this end, we compute wages and skill supplies “pre-PC” using the 5% public-use version
of the 1980 Census of Population (Ruggles et al., 2010), and “post-PC” using the 2000
Census of Population. Skill mix was constructed using only data on those aged 16-65 with
positive (potential) work experience (age - years of schooling - 6 > 0), not living in group
quarters. Hourly wages were constructed for the further subsample with positive wage and
salary earnings and hours worked in the past year, without any self-employment earnings,
currently employed and not in school. Hourly wages were “Windsorized” to be between two
and 200 dollars in 1999 dollars.

Male-female wage gaps are constructed separately for five education groups that can be
consistently identified across censuses: high school dropouts, high school graduates, those
with some college education (but less than four years), four-year college graduates, and
advanced degrees.14 As compositional changes are known to have substantially affected the
gender wage gap over this period (e.g., Blau and Kahn, 2006), wages are regression adjusted,
separately by gender, education group, and year, for a quartic in potential work experience
and dummies for foreign-born, black, Hispanic, and being born after 1950 (where Lemieux,
2006, describes a cohort break in trends in returns to schooling.) To account for heterogeneity
in years of education among workers in the dropout, some college, and advanced degree
  14
    In the 1980 Census, “high school” and “college” workers are defined as those who have completed exactly
12 years and 16 years of schooling, respectively, and in the 2000 Census, are those who report being in the
category “high school graduate” and “Bachelor’s degree.”


                                                                                                        12
groups, we also includes a linear control for years of education and its interaction with the
dummy for being born after 1950 for these groups.15 To make the means interpretable,
adjusted wages are centered on the predicted values for the average female characteristics
(in our whole sample of metropolitan areas) in each year.16

The main education wage gap we use on the right hand side is the simple average of male
and female adjusted college-high school wage gaps (which come from the same adjustment
procedure). We use the average to avoid any possibility of there being a “mechanical”
relationship between the left- and right-hand side wage gaps.

Our empirical implementation of the quantities of “soft-cognitive skill ” and “raw labor”
consists of the following. First, raw labor input is assumed to vary only with gender and not
with education, and we normalize γfl = 1, so γm
                                              l
                                                can be written as 1 + Θ , for some Θ > 0,
which will be estimated from average male-female wage gaps (described below). Letting `M
                                                                                       ct
and `Fct represent aggregate hours worked by men and women, respectively, in local labor
market c in year t, we therefore define


(15) Lct = (1 + Θ)`M     F
                   ct + `ct .



Next, we impose that cognitive skill is linearly increasing in years of education above ten
years (and is flat below that) by the same amount for both genders, which roughly describes
the relationship between wages and education by gender (see Figure 2). That is, we define

               X
(16) Sct =          λ · max[(e − 10, 0)]`ect ,
                e


where `ect represents the aggregate hours worked of all persons with e years of schooling
living in metropolitan area c and year t, and λ is the return to schooling.

To obtain estimates of Θ and λ we use the wage sample with more than 10 years of education
in the 1980 Census to estimate an individual level regression of ln(hourly wage) on years of
  15
      In neither census is there literally a “years of education” variable, but categories of years (1980) or degrees
(2000). Within these three education groups with heterogeneous education, the grouping of education is quite
different in the two censuses. In both cases, we impute years from the midpoint of the categories in the
group.
   16                                                          0
      In equation form, we estimate ln Wiegct = aegct + βegt        Xiegct + uiegct , where ln Wiegct is the natural log
hourly wage of person i of education group e and gender g living in city c in year t, which is regressed on
fixed effects, aegct , and the adjustment variables, Xiegct , mentioned above. This is evaluated at the national
female mean Xef t , and thus the adjusted male-female wage gap in education group e, city c and year t is
given by M F dif fect = aemct − aef ct + (β̂emt − β̂ef t )0 Xef t .

                                                                                                                    13
schooling and a male dummy. The coefficient on schooling is λ̂ = 0.077, and on the male
dummy is Θ̂ = 0.423. Substituting these into (15) and (16) generates our estimates of L̂ct
and Ŝct and our skill mix measure, ŝct = Ŝct /L̂ct . Note that this translates education and
hours worked into human capital using fixed coefficient in all cities and years. (The choice
of λ̂, in particular, is immaterial.)

This skill mix measure may appear unusual, and it imposes the extreme assumption that
gender wage gaps are entirely driven by gender differences in raw labor input per hour.17
However, Figure 3 shows that, in both 1980 and 2000, it is highly correlated with a more con-
ventional skill mix measure used in studies of the effect of computerization on skill demand:
the natural log of the ratio of college “equivalent” to high school equivalent hours.18 In that
figure, each circle represents one of the 230 metropolitan areas in our final sample. Circle
sizes are proportional to the 1980 population, the weights used throughout the analysis. Our
analysis will also construct standard errors to be asymptotically robust to arbitrary error
correlation within metropolitan area (across skill groups) and to heteroskedasticity.

Our measure of computerization is personal computers per worker at the average employer
in the metropolitan area, adjusted for three-digit (SIC) industry crossed with size category
dummies. The underlying data are firm level data collected by the marketing firm Harte-
Hanks in 2000 and 2002. For simplicity, we will refer to this as “2000” data.

(Weighted) summary statistics on our metropolitan-level wage gap and skill mix measures
are shown in Table 1. In each year there are 1,150 observations on the male-female wage gap
from 230 metropolitan areas and five education groups. As has been documented elsewhere,
the male-female wage gap declined over this period, by about 12 log points in our data.
This decline was largest between less-educated men and women. Table 1 also shows there is
“something to be explained” - there is variation in the level and change in the gender wage
gap across labor markets, even within education group, which itself is perhaps a new fact.
We now ask whether it is related to returns to education in the way the model suggests.
   17
      In contrast, for example, just controlling for a gender-specific quartic in potential experience reduces the
estimate of Θ̂ to 0.12.
   18
      As in Card(2009), Figure 3 defines college equivalents as those with a four year degree plus 0.4 share
of those with 1-3 years college. High school equivalents are 0.6 share of those with 1-3 years college, plus
all of those with exactly 12 years, plus 0.7 share of those without a high school degree. (The fractional
divisions derive from the workers in an education group supplying less than one efficiency unit per hour
and/or dividing their labor supply between college and high school tasks.)




                                                                                                               14
3.2     Further Identification issues

There are at least four forces which could bias our inferences. First, there is Mulligan and
Rubinstein’s (2008) (MR) claim that rising returns to skill differentially induced entry of
high skill women into the labor market, shrinking the gender wage gap through a change
in the selection of working women from negative to positive. Second, the importance of
Mincer and Polacheck’s (1974) explanation for the gender wage gap – that women interrupt
their careers to have children – may have diminished as women’s labor force attachment has
increased.19 Third, declines in gender discrimination may have occurred differentially across
markets during this period. Fourth, there may be other compositional differences across
markets, such as industry mix, that affect changes in the gender wage gap.

In our view, the most important potential source of bias comes from the MR story. In our
model, education and male female wage gaps are negatively correlated because of common
unobserved skill prices, but in the MR story they are related for a different reason: high
returns to skill differentially induce high skill women to enter the workforce. In this view,
the arrival of computers could still reduce the male-female wage gap, but through changes in
selection (rather than through changes in the “quality constant” male-female wage gap).20

We do three things to address this type of selection. First, we will include estimates which
control for selection in a manner similar to the way MR did. We will use an inverse mills
ratio transformation of the predicted probability of female employment, using the presence
of kids under age six in the household (whose effect is allowed to vary by marital status)
as an instrument for female employment. Further details on this estimation strategy are
below. In keeping with MR, this selection correction is allowed to vary by year, and in our
case, regionally. Second, also like MR, we will examine groups of women whose employment
is likely less sensitive to the wage structure, including single women without kids. Third,
and more simply, we control for female employment rates. As these could be endogenous
outcomes of wages, however, we use and interpret these controls cautiously.

To minimize the influence of unobserved differences in female work experience across markets
  19
      The diffusion of new birth control technology may have driven this (Goldin and Katz, 2002; Bailey,
2006). Bailey, Hershblein, and Miller (2012) provide evidence that early legal access to the birth control pill
induced women to increase the total hours worked by a given age, among other investments in skills.
   20
      MR do not take a stand on what is generating the changes in the return to skill. Note that even in the
MR story, selection may or may not bias our estimates: our male-female wage gaps condition on education
(in addition to other observables, described below), so the MR-type bias will arise only if residual wage gaps
are also larger in more high skilled cities.


                                                                                                            15
and over time, all of our wage gaps are adjusted for for gender (x education x year)-specific
potential experience profiles. In addition, since changes in labor force attachment largely
occur across (birth) cohorts, we will show estimates which examine within cohort changes in
the gender wage gaps (restricting the sample to men and women from the same birth cohort
in both years).

We do not have strong reason to believe differential changes in gender discrimination biases
our estimates, but to help control for this, we will include estimates that control for state
fixed effects. Among other things, these capture the effect of any state-level legislation
improving the rights of women.

Could there be other compositional differences correlated with skill mix and changes in the
relative wages of females? One plausible source of potential bias is differences in industry mix
across metro areas. Olivetti and Petrongolo (2011) find that differences in industry mix can
account for a substantial portion of cross-country differences in the gender gap. In addition,
during this time period the decline in the wages of less-skilled men in manufacturing could
have simultaneously lowered male-female wage gaps and raised college-high school wage gaps
in manufacturing-intensive locales (which is correlated with being a less-skilled locale).21
While some of this might be due to technological change, some of it might be due to other
forces (like a decline in union power). Therefore we will control for measures of industry
mix, and manufacturing share in particular (described below). To address the possibility
that other types of compositional differences bias our estimates, we will also evaluate the
sensitivity of our estimates to controls for demographic mix (e.g., black share, immigrant
share) and other city characteristics.



4      Results

4.1     Ordinary Least Squares

Columns (1)-(7) of Table 2 shows OLS estimates of the relationship in equation (6), between
changes in the male-female and college-high school wage gaps between 1980 and 2000, with
various sets of controls. The controls have been demeaned so that the intercept, which
is shown, can be interpreted as the counterfactual change in the male-female wage gap
  21
    O’Neill and Polachek (1993) find that the decline in blue collar wages accounts for a quarter of the
decline in the male-female wage gap in the 1980s.


                                                                                                     16
in a location with the average value of controls but no increase in the returns to college.
(See Section 5, below.) The estimates also pool together gender wage gaps for our five
different education categories (and, again, standard errors are calculated to be robust to
error correlation across education groups in a metro area).

Controlling only for education group effects (which by definition make no difference to the
point estimates, since the education wage gap does not vary across education groups) pro-
duces a coefficient of -0.231, or that a one percentage point increase in the return to college is
associated with a 0.231 percentage point decline in the male-female wage gap. Despite having
(what is likely a very) noisy right-hand side variable, this relationship is highly significant.

Other columns of Table 2 add controls. In light of Olivetti and Petrongolo (2011), we believe
that it may be important to control for industry mix. So in columns (2)-(4) we explore three
different versions of industry mix controls. To begin with, we control for durable and non-
durable manufacturing employment shares, measured in 1980, whose impact is allowed to
vary by the two, what we will call “broad,” education categories that Olivetti and Petrongolo
(2011) used: (1) workers with some college or below or (2) four years of college or more.22 As
expected, this lowers the coefficient, as the decline in male wages in manufacturing-intensive
locales lowers both male-female and raises college-high school wage gaps. These controls do
not, however, account for all of the OLS relationship.

Differences in the size of manufacturing may be the most plausible source of industry-mix
driven bias, but they may not be the only source.23 However, with only 230 metro areas,
adding detail to the industry mix controls can quickly make estimates imprecise and will also
tend to make measurement error attenuation worse. So we have tried to find parsimonious
ways of controlling for detailed industry mix. In column (3) we use an alternative wage
adjustment (for the dependent variable) which controls for a full set of census industry
dummies.24 These estimates are larger than the ones in column (2). This may mean that
detailed industry controls make little additional difference, though the estimates in column
(3) are also conceptually different – they are within industry gender wage gaps, and so do
  22
     Defining broad education groups this way is also consistent with evidence suggesting that workers of
different education levels within these broad groups are near perfect substitutes (e.g., Goldin and Katz,
2008).
  23
     We found that adding other two-digit sector employment shares as controls has little additional impact
on the point estimate, though it does make the standard errors larger.
  24
     We use the approximately 200 industry categories that are harmonized to 1990 industry categories
(Ruggles et al., 2010). These controls are in addition to the other controls included in the wage adjustment,
described in the previous section, which is again separately estimated by gender, education group, and year.



                                                                                                          17
not capture any broader effects of industry mix on wage gaps of men and women not in
a particular industry. To account for this, in column (4) we control for the manufacturing
shares as before, and add an index which measures the
                                                  P average “womanpower” requirements
                                                      fjb `jc
of the local detailed industry mix (in 1980), as in Pj `jc , where fjb represents the female
                                                                 j
share of total hours worked in industry j (in our entire sample of 230 metropolitan areas)
for broad education group b, and `jc is total hours worked in industry j and city c. This is
calculated separately for the same two broad education groups as before.25 These estimates
are similar to column (2), but with the smallest standard errors of any of the approaches.
This reinforces the value of using a parsimonious set of controls. Throughout the rest of the
paper we will use these as our controls for industry mix.

Regional differences in the extent of gender discrimination might affect our estimates. These
are very difficult to quantify. To at least try to capture the effects of state policies which
might affect the male-female wage gap, we control in column (5) for state dummies. The
coefficient is larger in magnitude with this control, suggesting such policies do not work in
the same direction as our results.26

Column (6) adds a few other controls which might have a compositional impact. These
include the share foreign-born, black, and Hispanic, and the unemployment rate and the
natural log of the the city’s labor force. The latter two attempt to capture any differences
in sensitivity of male-female wage gaps to the business cycle or agglomeration effects. The
others might shift skill and gender ratios where they settle (recall that wage gaps are already
adjusted for nativity, race, and ethnicity at the individual level). Column (7) controls for
female employment rates by broad education. This is meant to address a possible concern
related to MR’s evidence that working women were historically negatively selected. If this
negative selection were particularly strong in high skill markets – which it might be because
returns to skill were low in these markets – then this would be another force which could
account for the positive relationship between skill share and male-female wage gaps. In fact,
these controls have only a little impact. As this control is potentially an endogenous outcome
of the male-female wage gap, we added it last, and below, we examine other methods for
  25
      To account for productivity differences across education groups within these broad education categories,
the female share of hours is calculated for college and high school “equivalents” (Card, 2009, definition).
The college equivalent female demand index is applied to the top two education groups, and the high school
equivalent one is applied to the bottom three.
   26
      Indeed, male-female wage gaps were (perhaps unexpectedly) highest in 1980 in highly educated markets
like San Francisco, Minneapolis, and Boston where it is likely that there was more widespread support for
equal treatment of women: the Equal Rights Amendment, for example, was ratified in California, Minnesota,
and Massachusetts, among other states in their regions.


                                                                                                           18
correcting for selection.

Column (8) replaces the independent variable, the college-high school wage gap, with (sim-
ilarly regression-adjusted and averaged over men and women) estimated linear return to
schooling (above 10 years), multiplied by four. The estimates using this measure are quite
similar, though less precise. They may be less well measured because of the need to interpo-
late education education categories into a linear “years of education,” which is constructed
differently in 1980 and 2000 because of the change in how education is coded. (See Figure
2.) We believe these coding changes are likely less of a problem for measuring the wage gaps
between college and high school workers. So we will continue using college-high school wage
gaps as our main measure of education wage gaps.


4.2    Relationship to Skill Mix

Now we turn to reduced form estimates of the relationship between wage gaps and our proxy
for the initial relative abundance of soft-cognitive skills, ŝc,1980 , which we will call “human
capital/raw labor.” As outlined in the theory section, this is expected to have opposite-
signed relationships with changes in male-female and changes in college-high school wage
gaps. In particular, as (10) and (11) described, initial human capital is expected to have a
negative relationship with the change in male-female wage gap and a positive relationship
with the change in college-high school wage gap.

Table 3 shows the relationship of the male-female (in Panel A) and college-high school (in
Panel B) with skill in 1980. As before, column (1) controls only for education group dummies.
The coefficient on ŝ is negative in Panel A and positive in Panel B, as the theory predicts.
For the most part, the controls have little impact on these relationships, though the industry
controls, added in column (2) enlarge the magnitude of both relationships a bit. The high
stability of the estimates in panel B is particularly reassuring for the validity of the approach
we are taking, because Panel B estimates are also the “first stage” relationship for the main
IV estimates of the relationship between changes in male-female and college-high school
wage gaps (below). Figure 4 shows residual plots of the bivariate relationship between the
changes in wage gaps, corresponding to the first four columns of Table 3. Reassuringly, the
relationship does not appear to be driven by any particularly influential points.




                                                                                              19
4.3       PC Adoption

Tables 4a shows the relationship between PCs per worker in 2000 and the 1980-2000 change
in male-female wage gap, while Table 4b shows the relationship with the 1980-2000 change
in the college-high school wage gap. PCs per worker in 2000 is a proxy for the intensity of
computer adoption over 1980-2000, in light of the fact that PCs per worker was zero in 1980.
As per equation (13) and (14), all regressions control for the change in skill mix over the
period (although this turns out to make little difference).

Panel A of Table 4a shows least squares estimates. The coefficient on PCs in column (1) with
limited controls is -0.204, which says a 0.1 increase in PCs per worker (a little more than a
standard deviation – Table 1) is associated with a 2.4 percentage point decline in the growth
of the male-female wage gap. As expected, an increase in skill supply, ∆ŝ is associated
with an increased male-female wage gap.27 The industry controls have little effect on the
relationship with PCs, while controls added in other columns diminish the relationship.

As discussed in the theory section, OLS estimates are expected to be biased towards zero by
unobserved factors which make PCs more productive. Panel B shows instrumental variables
estimates, where the personal computer variable is treated endogenous, and the instrument
is 1980 human capital/raw labor. First stage F-stats are shown below Panel B. Without
controls other than education effects, the first stages F-stat is 136, and with all of the
controls it is 63, both quite strong. Figure 5 also shows the bivariate relationship between
PCs per worker in 2000 and skill mix in 1980 is strong and not driven by outliers, consistent
with other work showing a relationship between local skill mix and PC adoption (Caselli
and Coleman, 2001; Doms and Lewis, 2006). As expected, the point estimates in Panel
B are larger. In addition, unlike OLS estimates, they also do not generally diminish with
the addition of controls. The point estimate here suggests a 0.1 increase in PCs per worker
lowers the male-female wage gap roughly four percentage points.

The change in skill mix is treated as exogenous in Panel B, though it may not be. To
address this, we tried a couple of things. First, we used the size of immigrant “enclaves” in
1970 to predict changes in skill mix 1980-2000, exploiting the fact that there was a boom in
immigration over this period, and that immigrants tend to cluster near immigrants of the
same origin. Though this variable does a reasonable job of predicting changes in skill mix, it
does not have enough power to do so within state, so the approach does not work once state
 27
      In equation (13), recall, the parameter βe1 is expected to be negative.


                                                                                           20
effects are controlled for. Nevertheless, using this approach, the estimates without state
effects are quite similar to the estimates in columns (1) and (2) of panel B.28 In addition, we
tried dropping the change in skill mix as a control. As can be seen in Appendix Table A1a,
this has little effect (on either the OLS or IV estimates).

Table 4b performs a parallel set of estimates where the dependent variable is the change in the
college-high school wage gap. The pattern of estimates is quite similar to Table 4a, except,
as expected, with coefficients of the opposite sign. The alternative instrumental variables
strategies produce similar estimates in this case as well.29 In summary, U.S. labor markets
with greater PC adoption tend to experience both faster increases in the college-school wage
gap and faster declines in the male-female wage gap.


4.4      IV estimates of the co-movement between the gender gap and
        the returns to college

Table 5 puts together the male-female and education wage gap results into instrumental
variables estimates (which are the ratio of coefficients in panels A and B of Table 3). All
of the estimates show a negative significant relationship between the wage gaps, with a
magnitude roughly around 0.6-0.7. This is larger in magnitude than the OLS estimates in
Table 2, consistent with OLS estimates being attenuated. It is, however, approximately the
same magnitude of comovement found in the aggregate. In particular, a regression using
aggregate annual data for 1980-2000, stacking adjusted male-female gaps (for our same five
education groups) on college-high school gaps produces a coefficient (standard error) of -0.710
(0.0452).30

In light of the significant relationship between wage gaps and PC adoption, another approach
  28
      In particular, the coefficient estimate (standard error) on PCs per worker with just education group
effects is -0.242(0.064) and with industry mix controls is -0.339(0.080) when we add the ethnic enclave
instrument and treat changes in skill mix as endogenous. The corresponding coefficient on skill mix changes
are 0.796(0.227) and 0.862(0.267).
   29
      With the ethnic enclave instrument added, the coefficient (standard error) on PCs in column (1) would
be 0.425(0.129) and in column (2) would be 0.458(0.179). The point estimates on the change in skill mix
are -2.049(0.480) and -2.238(0.600) for columns (1) and (2), respectively. Estimates dropping the change in
skill mix control can be found in Appendix Table A1b.
   30
      Standard error clustered on year. Wage series constructed using merged outgoing rotation groups of the
Current Population Survey, using only data on those aged 16-65 with positive (potential) work experience
(age - years of schooling - 6 > 0), positive wage and salary earnings and hours worked in the past year, and
currently in the labor force. Hourly wages were “Windsorized” to be between two and 200 dollars in 1999
dollars. Some of the wage series used in the regressions are shown in Figure 1.



                                                                                                         21
is using PC adoption as an instrument.31 PC adoption is, after all, our proxy for the
“treatment”: the adoption of computers is what we hypothesize is driving the changes in
the wage structure. In addition, recall that the error term of the (“first stage”) relationship
between education wage gaps and PCs, (14), is, according to the theory, uncorrelated with
the error in the wage gap relationship we are trying to identify, (6). In practice, the IV
estimates we get using our PC adoption variable as the instrument are a bit more sensitive
to controls (see Appendix Table A2), though they are in the same ballpark.32



5       Robustness Checks

In this section, we examine three important robustness checks: (1) To what extent are
our estimates driven by changes in the selection of women into areas’ workforces? (2) To
what extent are the estimates driven by the cohort composition of women? And, (3) does
the timing of wage changes match the timing of the arrival of PCs, or were there similar
changes in wage structure occurring before the arrival of PCs? The first is an important
alternative explanation for the aggregate trend in Figure 1 raised by MR; we need to establish
whether similar changes in selection correlated with changes in returns to education occurred
differentially across metropolitan areas. The second speaks to another alternative source of
changes in male-female wage gap over this period: the greater labor force attachment of
more recent cohorts of women. Finally, it is important to establish whether similar wage
structure changes predated computerization.


5.1       Is It Selection?

In a prominent recent paper, MR argue that rising returns to skill have induced the selection
of women into work to become more positive. This suggests an alternative mechanism for
our results so far: rather than being driven by common unobserved skill prices, the negative
relationship between changes in college-high school and male-female wage gaps might be due
to differential changes in selection. To investigate this possibility, in Table 6 we apply MR’s
selection correction methods to our data. Some of these methods are data intensive, and so
in this section we restrict our sample to a set of 159 larger metropolitan areas where these
 31
      The first stage corresponding to this IV specification is shown in panel A of Appendix Table A1b.
 32
      Coefficient estimates (standard errors) range from -0.940(0.491) to -0.425(0.310).



                                                                                                          22
methods are feasible.33

Column (1) of Table 6 shows the estimated relationship between male-female and college-
high school wage gaps in this subsample, with OLS estimates in Panel A, and instrumental
variables estimates in Panel B. Compared to column (6) of Table 2 (for OLS) and column
(4) of Table 5 (for IV), these estimates are quite similar: the change of sample has little
impact on the estimates. Columns (2) and (3) compute male-female wage gaps only using
female demographic groups with a high probability of working. MR argued that this allowed
for “identification at infinity”: intuitively, women with a high probability of working are
plausibly less sensitive to the wage structure in their employment decisions, and so their
wages are likely less biased by selection. One way in which we identified women with a “high
probability of working” is as follows. We estimated, separately for each education group,
probits for being in the wage sample, that is


(17) P r(wgobsic ) = Φ (ac + β 0 Xic + Γ0 Zic + ic ) ,


where P r(wgobsic ) represents the probability that woman i in metro area c meets our criteria
for being in the wage sample (see Data section). The probit includes metro area fixed effects,
ac ; a vector of adjustment controls, Xic , which are identical to what is used in to adjust wages
in earlier estimates but also includes dummies for marital status and their interaction with
black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and a set of instruments Zic , used by MR, that are two-
way interactions between marital status and presence of children under age six, which we
further interact again with black, Hispanic and foreign-born.34 (Although the validity of
these instruments is questionable, something MR acknowledge, we nevertheless would like to
probe the sensitivity of our results to using them.) We constructed the predicted values for
the average metro area, that is, putting in a in place of the vector of estimated fixed effects.
We define women with a high probability of working as those with at least a 0.6 probability
of working. To avoid compositional changes, we estimate this probit using the 1980 data
alone, and apply the same estimates to define such women in 2000.35
  33
      Specifically, we limit the sample to metro areas with at least 100 wage observations in all five education
groups in both 1980 and 2000, and for which all of the probits for female employment converged within 10
iterations.
   34
      MR limit the sample to white non-Hispanics. We have tried this as well. It has little effect on the
estimates, but, predictably, leads the standard errors to be a bit larger.
   35
      By 2000, the probability of women working had shifted up, so the women who met this threshold in
2000 also would have at least a 0.6 probability of working.



                                                                                                             23
Estimates using this subsample of women are shown in column (2). Comparing to column
(1), there some sign that this diminishes the magnitude of the estimates. In column (3) we
take a simpler approach with the same motivation, looking only at native-born non-Hispanic
white women without kids under age 6. The estimates in this subsample tend to be, if
anything, larger in magnitude.

Another approach we can take is to use the full sample of women but control for selection. In
performing the wage adjustments on women, we control for an inverse mills ratio transforma-
tion of the estimate of (17) (now allowed to vary by year) which accounts for selection under
the assumption of normal errors.36 The estimates, shown in column (4) are similar to those
in column (1). Not shown is the fact that the mean of our selection adjusted male-female
wage gap replicates the result of MR: there is no longer any average decline in male-female
wage gap once this adjustment is made. Nevertheless, this adjustment does not eliminate
the correlation between changes in wage gaps across metro areas.

One of the key points MR raise is that the selection function itself may depend on the wage
structure. So rather than just estimate a single probit for each year x education group, in
column (5) we allow the probit estimates to vary by metro area. There is little systematic
sign in column (5) that this diminishes the estimates. It should be said that estimating
the adjustment separately for each MSA clearly pushes the data beyond its limits, leading
the estimates to be very imprecise and to include zero in the confidence interval.37 So it
perhaps fair to say that these estimates do not completely rule out that selection is driving
our results. However, the point estimates here, combined with earlier results which control
for female employment rates, seem to suggest selection only explains part of the observed
comovement of wage gaps.38
  36
      In the wage adjustment step, we add to the list of controls described in the Data section marital status
controls interacted with dummies for black, Hispanic, and foreign born; and, for females, the interaction of
the inverse mills ratio with dummies for black, Hispanic, and foreign born. The adjusted wages are evaluated
at the national mean of female characteristics and with the inverse mills ratio set to zero.
   37
      In many metro area-education group-year cells in the probit, the coefficients on the Z’s are also not
jointly significant, making the estimates only identified off of functional form.
   38
      This is consistent with Blau and Kahn (2006). Using methods similar to Neal (2004), they show that if
you use work histories and other information to infer where non-working men and women would be in the
wage distribution, you can account for very little of the increase in the female relative to male median wages
between 1979 and 1998.




                                                                                                           24
5.2     Is it Changes in Cohort Composition?

As Bailey, Hershblein, and Miller (2012) (hereafter, BHM), among others, have shown that
much of the decline in the male-female wage gap over the 1980-2000 period was “across
cohorts”: the gap shrinks as new entrants with smaller male-female wage gaps replace the
retiring older cohorts. A key reason for this may be that younger women look ahead to a
career of greater labor force attachment than previous cohorts (in part because of greater
control over their fertility), and invest more in their labor market skills in a variety of ways.
In short, it is a partial “undoing” of the Mincer-Polacheck (1974) explanation of the male-
female wage gap. BHM, in particular, provide support for the view that women with access
to the birth control pill by age 18 have greater labor force attachment throughout their
career and make other skill investments to a greater degree; they argue that the arrival of
the pill can account for perhaps 10 percent of the aggregate decline in the male-female wage
gap in the 1980s and 30 percent in the 1990s.

How does this impact the findings of this present paper? To the extent that changes in
cohort composition are correlated with changes in returns to skill or our instrument, we
might under- or overstate the impact of technological change. One reason to expect that
the magnitude of our earlier estimates are overstated is that areas with younger workforces
tend to be more educated, and so the faster decline in male-female wage gap they experience
could be driven partly by faster cohort turnover rather than changes in skill prices.

To account for this, the estimates Table 7 limits the sample to just those cohorts of women
who were of working age in both 1980 and 2000.39 To further hold the cohort composition
constant, in this table the unit of analysis is education x five-year birth cohort cells. In
other words, we ask if the same differential change in the male-female wage gap found in
previous tables occurs within birth cohorts. To make the estimation feasible, we collapsed
the education categories down to two groups, those with at least a four year college degree,
and everyone else.40

Column (1) show the estimates controlling only for cohort x broad education effects, with
OLS in panel A and IV estimates in Panel B.41 (Standard errors are again calculated to be
  39
      That is, the 1935-1964 birth cohorts, though the 1960-64 cohort is not included for more educated
workers, as they were still in school in 1980.
   40
      Using two education groups instead of five in earlier tables produces nearly the same estimates, with
slightly larger standard errors.
   41
      The dependent variable is regression adjusted the same way as was described above, separately by (broad)



                                                                                                           25
robust to arbitrary error correlation among observations on the same metropolitan area.)
They are similar, but perhaps a bit smaller in magnitude than the corresponding estimates
in Tables 2 and 5. The same description applies to the estimates with controls. Thus,
even within cohort there is support for the idea that rising returns to cognitive skills helped
diminish the male-female wage gap over this period. The fact our estimates are a bit smaller
within cohort leaves room for increases in female labor force attachment to account for part
of the decline in the male-female wage gap over this period.


5.3       The Timing of the Changes

As an additional test of the model, in Table 8 we examine more closely the timing of the
changes. Our key empirical fact is that changes in the male-female and college-high school
wage gap moved in opposite directions in the 1980-2000 period. We argued that this was
due to the arrival of PCs during this period, which resulted in a shift in the production and
wage structure. Because PC adoption is likely endogenous, we used 1980 skill mix to identify
the relationship. If we find similar relationships prior to the introduction of PCs, therefore,
it would cast serious doubt on the interpretation that the relationship was being driven by
the introduction of PCs.

To see if this is the case, in Table 8 we examine the same relationships before and after the
PC is introduced. There are some minor data issues that must be addressed in order to
carry out this estimation, due to the fact that 1970 census is both much smaller and has
much less detailed measures of geography and hours worked than later censuses. (These
issues are detailed in the notes to Table 8.) Table 8 therefore examines a sample of 137 large
metropolitan areas which can be consistently identified in 1970 and in later censuses. It turns
out that only with the 1970, 1980, and 1990 censuses – and not with the 2000 census – can
we construct wage measures entirely consistently.42 To insure that any differences in results
in the 1970s come from the change of decade and not of methods, Table 8 also examines the
post-PC 1980-1990 period, using data construction methods that are available in the 1970
census.
education, gender, and year. The five educated and six less-educated cohorts across 230 metropolitan areas
– minus the oldest educated cohort which has no observations for one area (Jacksonville, NC) – produces a
final regression sample of 2,529 observations.
   42
      Specifically, the 2000 Census does not include the “hours worked last week” variable that is used in this
construction. The 1970 data come from the two one percent public-use “county-group” files, and the 1990
data are from the five percent public use data (both Ruggles et al., 2010).



                                                                                                            26
Panel A shows the OLS relationship between changes in male-female and college-high school
wage gaps, like in Table 2, but with the smaller sample. Column (1) shows the relationship
in the “pre-PC” (1970-1980) period. Unlike in Table 2, there is no significant relationship.
Column (2) makes clear that this not because of the change of sample or methods, because
1980-1990, using the same methods, there is a negative significant relationship between the
changes in wage gaps, which is, if anything, larger in magnitude that comparable estimates
(in column (6)) in Table 2. There is also a significant relationship in this sample 1980-2000
using our original wage construction methods in this sample (column (3)).

Panel B looks at the relationship between the change in the male-female wage gaps and the
instrument, 1980 human capital/raw labor. Column (1) of Panel B shows that although the
reduced form relationship is negative 1970-1980, it is not significant.43 The point estimate
is also much larger after 1980 than before. The size of the standard errors in column (1)
are unfortunate, because it means we cannot totally rule out similar pre-PC trends in the
male-female wage gap. But the relationship appears to at least be much weaker before the
arrival of PCs.44



6       Implications for Aggregate Outcomes

We started this paper with the observation that the wage differential between men and
women with similar levels of education decreased substantially between 1980 and 2000, while
at the same time the return to education increased substantially. As suggested by, among
others, Welch (2000), this decrease in the gender wage gap could reflect a change in a the
relative price of skill which is more abundant among women and more educated workers.
We have now shown that this idea finds considerable support also in cross-city data: the
male female wage differentials and the return to education at the city level appear to react
in opposite directions to factors that likely influence the relative price of soft-cognitive skills
versus hard-raw motor skills. In this section we want to discuss how our cross-city estimates
can be used to infer about the potential role of changes in skill prices in explaining the
  43
      The “first stage” relationship with the change in the college-high school wage gap 1970-80 is also not
significant, which is why we show the reduced form rather than the IV estimate.
   44
      It is also possible that a weak relationship exists in the 1970s because at least some similar technological
change occurred before the arrival of PCs. For example, Autor, Levy, and Murnane find evidence of shift in
the skill-biased shift in the task content of the economy in the 1970s that is similar in nature and smaller
in magnitude than later decades. Goldin and Katz (2008) argue that technological change has been “skill-
biased” throughout the twentieth century, but only recently has the growth in the supply of skills failed to
keep up with demand, generating increased education wage gaps.

                                                                                                               27
decrease in the aggregate male-female wage gap between 1980 and 2000.

There are two ways of using our cross-city estimate to evaluate the role of skill prices changes
in explaining the gender wage gap. First, if we are ready to assume that the aggregate
movement in the return to college reflects mainly a change in the relative price of skill, then
                                     β1
we can use our estimates of          β2
                                          obtained from the IV estimation of equation (6) to calculate
the contribution of increase in skill price on the the gender gap. In particular, over this
period we observed the return to college increase by 19.2 percentage points. If we multiply
                                β1
this by our estimates of        β2
                                     reported in Table 5, we get predicted effects on the male-female
wage differential ranging from -10.2 to -15.9 percentage points. Since the decrease in the
male-female wage differential over this period was approximately 12.4 percentage points, this
exercise implies that essentially all of the decrease in the gender wage gap can be explained
by the change in the relative price of skills. The OLS estimates of the relationship (Table 2)
can account for about one-quarter. Interestingly, the within cohort estimates (Table 7) can
account for 60-80 percent, roughly complementing the 10-30 percent that BHM found was
driven by early legal access to the birth control pill.

If we are not willing to assume that the change in the aggregate return to education over
this period was driven only by a change in a relative prices, there is a second way to proceed.
Starting from equation (6), consider taking a weighted sum of each term where the weights
are the relative population weights of the cities. The weighted sum of the error terms
(including any estimated intercept for this regression) then gives us an estimate of the change
in the male-female wage differential which cannot be attributed to the change in the skill
price. In fact, this can be seen by directly be examining our estimate of the intercept of this
regression.45 When we estimate this relationship by OLS (Table 2) we find that the intercept
is significantly negative. In contrast, when we estimate this relationship by instrumental
variables, we find that the intercept is insignificantly different than zero, indicating that
on average across cities the “predicted” local increase in the returns to college – combined
                          β1
with the estimate of      β2
                               – is sufficient to explain the changes in the gender wage gap over the
period.46 Hence, we believe that that these two pieces of evidence point in the same direction:
Most of the decrease in the gender wage gap over the 1980-2000 period can be attributed to
a change in the relative price of a skill – which we have referred to as a soft-cognitive skill –
that is more abundant among women and more educated workers.
 45
      Recall that all of the controls are demeaned, and all regressions are weighted by 1980 population.
 46
      We also find this when using PC use as the instrument (Appendix Table A2).



                                                                                                           28
7      Conclusion

Motivated by the simultaneous decline in male-female and rise in education wage gaps in
recent decades, this paper has asked whether both trends were driven by a change in the
relative price of an an unobserved skill which both women and educated workers have in
abundance – we called it “soft-cognitive” skills – induced by skill biased technological change.
This idea has been suggested before. But by exploring cross city variation in wages and skill
mix between 1980 and 2000, we are able to move beyond the aggregate relationships and,
for the first time, directly examine the relationship between the return to education and
male-female wage gaps.

Consistent with the idea that females are relatively abundant in soft skills, we find that
after the arrival of PCs, markets that experienced faster increases in the college-high school
wage gap saw bigger drops in the male-female wage gap. This relationship remains strong
when controlling for industry mix, or when examining differences in education wage gaps
induced by our proxy for the supply of human capital: consistent with a standard model of
skill-biased technological change, the decline in male-female and increase in education wage
gaps was largest in initially human capital intensive markets.

As robustness checks, we show that our estimates survive attempts to account for cross-city
differences in the selection of women in the workforce, including focusing on female subgroups
with high propensities to work, as well as controlling for an estimate of the selection bias. In
addition, we show that there was no significant trend in the relationship between education
and male-female wage gaps in the 1970s, before the introduction of PCs.

Overall, our estimates are consistent with a substantial role for changing skill prices in
accounting for the decline in the male-female wage gap between 1980-2000. Even applying
our OLS estimates, which we have reason to believe are substantially attenuated, suggests
that the rise in the return to education between 1980 and 2000 accounted for one-fourth of
the decline in the male-female wage gap over the period. Our IV estimates can account for
most of the increase. This does not mean that other forces cannot influence gender equality
in earnings. For example, our within cohort estimates are consistent with a non-trivial role
for increased labor force attachment of newer cohorts of women.47 However, it does suggest
the historically dramatic decline in the male-female wage gap in the 1980s may have been
  47
   Our estimates are also adjusted for individual characteristics, which may partly or entirely reflect choices
made in response to changes in labor market opportunities driven by other forces.


                                                                                                            29
largely driven by technological forces unique to that period. The relative stagnation of the
male-female wage gap in more recent years may reflect that.




                                                                                         30
References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Em-
ployment and Earnings.” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 2011, pp. 1043-1171.

Altonji, Joseph and David Card. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
of Less-Skilled Natives.” in John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration,
Trade and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 201-34.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):
November 2003, pp. 1279-1334.

Bacolod, Marigee, and Bernardo S. Blum. “Two Sides of the Same Coin: U.S. ’Residual
Inequality’ and the Gender Gap.” Journal of Human Resources 45(1): Winter 2010, pp.
197-242.

Bailey, Martha J. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on
Women’s Lifecycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): February 2006,
pp. 289-320.

Bailey, Martha J., Brad Hershblein. and Amalia R. Miller. “The Opt-In Revolution? Con-
traception and the Gender Gap in Wages.” American Economic Review: Applied Economics
: May 2012.

Beaudry, Paul, Mark Doms, and Ethan Lewis. “Should the PC be Considered a Technological
Revolution? Evidence from US Metropolitan Areas.” Journal of Political Economy 118(5):
October 2010, pp. 988-1036.

Beaudry, Paul and David Green. “Wages and Employment in the United States and Ger-
many: What Explains the Differences?” American Economic Review 93(3): June 2003, pp.
573-602.

—. “Changes in U.S. Wages, 1976-2000: Ongoing Skill Bias or Major Technological Change?”
Journal of Labor Economics 23(3): July 2005, pp. 609-648.

Black, Sandra and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. “Explaining Women’s Success: Technological
Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
92(1): February 2010, pp. 187-194.

                                                                                      31
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. “Swimming Upstream: Trends in teh Gender
Wage Differential in the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1): January, 1997, pp. 1-42.

—-. “The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing Convergence.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 60(1): October 2006, pp. 45-66.

Card, David and John E. DiNardo. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20(4): October 2002,
pp. 733-83.

Caselli, Francesco. 1999. “Technological Revolutions.” American Economic Review 89(1):
May 1999, pp. 78-102.

Caselli, Francesco and John Wilbur Coleman II. “Cross-Country Technology Diffusions: The
Case of Computers.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91(2): May 2001,
pp. 328-335.

Doms, Mark and Ethan Lewis. “Labor Supply and Personal Computer Adoption.” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper #2006-15, June 2006.

Fortin, Nicole M. and Thomas Lemieux. “Are Women’s Wage Gains Men’s Losses? A
Distributional Test.” The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90(2): May
2000, pp. 456-460.

Goldin, Claudia; Katz, Lawrence F. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110 (4): August
2002, pp. 730-70.

Goldin, Claudia and Larry Katz. The Race Between Education and Technology. Cambridge
and London: Harvard University Press, Belknap Press, 2008.

Lemieux, Thomas. “The Mincer Equation Thirty Years after Schooling, Experience, and
Earnings.” in S. Grossbard-Shechtman, ed., Jacob Mincer, A Pioneer of Modern Labor
Economics, Springer Verlag, 2006.

Lewis, Ethan. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital-Skill Complementarity.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126(2): May 2011, pp. 1029-1069.

Minnesota Population Center. National Historical Geographic Information System: Pre-
release Version 0.1. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota, 2004; available at http://www.nhgis.org.

                                                                                         32
Mulligan Casey, B. and Yona Rubinstein. “Selection, Investment, and Women’s Relative
Wages.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(8): August 2008, pp. 1061-1110.

Neal, Derek. “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap Among Women is Too Small.” Journal
of Political Economy 112(S1): February 2004, pp. S1-S28.

Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo. “Gender Gaps across Countries and Skills: Sup-
ply, Demand and the Industry Structure.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #17349, August 2011.

O’Neill, June and Solomon Polachek. “Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the
1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 11(11): January 1993, pp. 205-228.

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.

Weinberg, Bruce. “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 53(2): January 2000, pp. 290-308.

Welch, Finis. “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality among Men: One
Phenomenon or Two?” The American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 90(2): May
2000, pp. 444-449.




                                                                                     33
.6           Figure 1. Male-Female, College-HS Wage Gap*, 1979-2010
                                              M-F Wage Gap:                     College-HS Wage Gap:
                                              High School                       Average**
                                              College
.5
.4
.3
.2




      1980                            1990                            2000                        2010
     *Adjusted for gender x year specific quartic in potential experience (age-years ed-6),
     evaluated at the female average over 1979-2010.
     **Simple average of male and female adjusted college-high school wage gaps.
                           Figure 2. Ln(Wage) by Years of Education
                                  1980 and 2000, by Gender
                                    A. 1980                                                    B. 2000
          3.5




                                                                      3.5
                            Females                                                    Females
                            Males                                                      Males
Mean ln(Wage), 1999$




                                                            Mean ln(Wage), 1999$
                  3




                                                                              3
2.5




                                                            2.5
          2




                                                                      2




                       0   5           10         15   20                          0   5           10         15   20
                               Years of Education                                          Years of Education
Figure 3. Human Capital/Raw Labor vs. ln(College/HS Equivalent Hours),
                           1980 and 2000
                        1980                                           2000
 .3




                                                .3
 .25




                                                .25
 .2




                                                .2
 .15




                                                .15
 .1




                                                .1




       -1.5     -1        -.5         0    .5         -1.5     -1        -.5         0    .5
              ln(Coll/HS Equiv Hrs),1980                     ln(Coll/HS Equiv Hrs),2000
            Figure 4. Residual Plots: Change in Wage Gaps, 1980-2000
                        vs. 1980 Human Capital/Raw Labor
                   Male-Female                                    College-High School
.6




                                                      .2
            Education group effects (column 1)                    Education group effects (column 1)
.4




                                                      .1
.2




                                                      0
0




                                                      -.1
-.2
-.4




                                                      -.2
      -.1   -.05             0             .05   .1         -.1   -.05            0             .05    .1
.6




                                                      .2
                     + industry mix (2)                                   + industry mix (2)
.4




                                                      .1
.2




                                                      0
0




                                                      -.1
-.2
-.4




                                                      -.2




      -.1   -.05             0             .05   .1         -.1   -.05            0             .05    .1
.6




                                                      .2




                     + state effects (3)                                  + state effects (3)
.4




                                                      .1
.2




                                                      0
0




                                                      -.1
-.2
-.4




                                                      -.2




      -.1   -.05             0             .05   .1         -.1   -.05            0             .05    .1
.6




                                                      .2




                     + city controls (4)                                  + city controls (4)
.4




                                                      .1
.2




                                                      0
0




                                                      -.1
-.2
-.4




                                                      -.2




      -.1   -.05             0             .05   .1         -.1   -.05            0             .05    .1
                            Figure 5. 2000 Adjusted* PCs/Worker vs. 1980 Human Capital/Raw Labor
               .7
   Adjusted PCs per worker, 2000
                            .6




                                                                                               Boston
                                                                                                Minneapolis SF Bay Area
                                                                                                      Denver
                                                                                             NYC Seattle
                                                                                         Houston
                                                                                        Chicago
                                                                                  St. Louis           DC
                  .5




                                                                       CharlotteLas Vegas Los Angeles
                                                                                                 Honolulu
         .4




                                                                           El Paso
                                                                                     Fresno, CA
                                                                     Scranton, PA
.3




                                                 Hickory, NC


                                   .1                               .15                   .2                     .25
                                                                   Human Capital/Raw Labor, 1980
                                   *Adjusted for Size x Industry
                                                        Table 1. Descriptive Statistics


                                                       1980                                 2000                         Change 1980-2000
                                              Mean            Stand Dev            Mean            Stand Dev            Mean            Stand Dev
                                                (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)
Adjusted Male-Female Wage Gap
  All Education Levels                        0.376             0.098              0.254             0.054             -0.123             0.082
   High School Dropouts                       0.461             0.075              0.261             0.054             -0.200             0.068
   High School Graduates                      0.445             0.063              0.283             0.054             -0.162             0.041
   >0 and <4 years college                    0.380             0.053              0.248             0.047             -0.132             0.038
   4 Years College                            0.337             0.055              0.236             0.048             -0.102             0.052
   Advanced Degree                            0.257             0.068              0.239             0.054             -0.018             0.067

Adjusted College-HS Wage Gap                  0.257             0.045              0.449             0.046              0.192             0.046
Human Capital/Raw Labor                       0.188             0.021              0.231             0.023              0.043             0.014
Adjusted PCs/Worker                                                                0.497             0.055

Number of Metro Areas                                   230                                  230                                  230
Notes: Raw data sources are the 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use 5% censuses of population for the w age and human capital
variables, and 2000 and 2002 surveys by Harte Hanks for PCs per w orker, both of w hich have been collapsed (using sample w eights for Census
variables) to a metropolitan area-average level dataset w hose descriptive statistics are show n in this table. Sample used to compute human
capital/raw labor consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year,
and not residing in group quarters. This variable is close to an hours-w eighted average years of schooling above 10 years (multiplied by the
estimated return to schooling in 1980, 0.077), w ith an adjustment for the share of hours w orked by females -- see text for details. Wage sample
further limited to those w ho are currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently enrolled in
school. Wage adjusted, separately by gender and education (and year), for a quartic in potential experience, linear returns to education (for high
school dropouts, some college, and advanced degree categories) and dummies for foreign-born, black, Hispanic, and being born after 1950. (The
latter is also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). PCs per w orker are regression adjusted for 3 digit industry x employer
size dummies. The descriptive statistics in this table are w eighted by1980 population.
         Table 2. Change in Male-Female Wage Gaps vs. Change in Schooling Wage Gaps, 1980-2000, Estimated by OLS

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
Adj Coll-HS Wage                   -0.231          -0.128          -0.163          -0.141          -0.207         -0.167          -0.151
   Gap, 1980-2000                   (0.059)         (0.049)         (0.047)         (0.046)         (0.057)        (0.053)         (0.054)
4 x Adj (linear) Return                                                                                                                            -0.149
   to Schl, 1980-2000                                                                                                                              (0.080)
Intercept                            -0.078         -0.098          -0.066          -0.095          -0.083         -0.091          -0.094          -0.114
                                     (0.012)        (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.005)
Root MSE                             0.054           0.052           0.046           0.051          0.050           0.049           0.049           0.049
R-squared                            0.577           0.613           0.491           0.617          0.655           0.660           0.664           0.662
Observations                         1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150          1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150
Controls
Education Group?                        Y              Y               Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y
Industry Mix                            N           2 Manuf         Detailed       2 Manuf         2 Manuf         2 Manuf        2 Manuf         2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                             (Individual)      +Index          +Index          +Index         +Index          +Index
State Effects?                          N               N              N               N               Y               Y              Y               Y
City Controls?2                         N               N              N               N               N               Y              Y               Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                 N               N              N               N               N               N              Y               Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use censuses of population, w hich are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and,
for the dependent variable, x 5 education groups (high school dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that are
the units of observation in the regressions. Sample consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of education -6) and
hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters,w ho are currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and
not currently enrolled in school. Dependent variable is the gap betw een the average ln hourly w age of men and w omen w ith the same broad education
level, adjusted in gender x education (x year) specific regressions for a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for dropouts, some college, and
advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after 1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three
groups). Independent variable is the average of (simililarly adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen. All regressions in table w eighted
by 1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error
correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2) and (4)-(8) control for the share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing their interactions
w ith a dummy for being in the "some college" or low er broad education group. Column (3) adds to the indvidual-level w age adjustments controls for detailed
census of population industries that corresponds roughly to the level of industry detail in 1980. Columns (4) and higher control for a female demand "Index"
w hich is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national female employment shares by detailed industry using local employment by industry
as w eights. This index is constructed separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four years college
and advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories dropouts, high school and some
college) but entered as a single control variable. 2City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of
the labor force. 3Female employment rates entered separately for those w ith some college or less and four years college or more.
              Table 3. Change in Wage Gaps on Human Capital/Raw Labor, 1980

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
               A. Change in Adjusted Male-Female Wage Gap, 1980-2000
Human Capital/               -0.528      -0.804    -0.891      -1.048                               -0.932
 Raw Labor, 1980            (0.142)     (0.177)    (0.252)     (0.316)                              (0.315)

R-squared                            0.578           0.630           0.661          0.666           0.667

           B. Change in Adjusted College-High School Wage Gap, 1980-2000
Human Capital/               0.993        1.248       1.258      1.267                               1.287
 Raw Labor, 1980            (0.276)      (0.381)     (0.289)    (0.351)                             (0.389)
R-squared                            0.207           0.274           0.588           0.603           0.604
Observations                         1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150
Controls
Education Group?                        Y               Y               Y              Y               Y
Industry Mix                            N           2 Manuf         2 Manuf        2 Manuf         2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                +Index          +Index         +Index          +Index
State Effects?                          N               N               Y              Y               Y
City Controls?2                         N               N               N              Y               Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                 N               N               N              N               Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 Censuses of Population, w hich are
aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas (and, for the dependent variable in panel A, x 5 education groups -- high
school dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree). Sample for
constructing independent variable consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience
(age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters. "Human capital" is
the sum of the interaction of hours w orked w ith years of education beyond 10 times 0.077, and "raw labor" is
1.423 times the sum of male hours w orked plus the sum of female hours w orked. The w age sample is the
subsample w ho are currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings
and not currently enrolled in school. Dependent variable in panel A is the (change in the) gap betw een the
average ln hourly w age of men and w omen w ith the same broad education level, w here the adjustment are
gender x education (x year) specific regressions on a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for
dropouts, some college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after
1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). Dependent variable in panel
B is the average of (simililarly adjusted change in the) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen.
All regressions in table w eighted by 1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates,
are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan
area. 1Columns (2)-(5) control for the share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing their
interactions w ith a dummy for being in the "some college" or low er broad education group, and for a female
demand "Index" w hich is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national female employment
shares by detailed industry using local employment by industry as w eights. This index is constructed
separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four
years college and advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for
broad education categories dropouts, high school and some college) but entered as a single control variable.
2
  City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of
the labor force. 3Female employment rates entered separately for those w ith some college or less and four
years college or more.
      Table 4a. Change in (Adjusted) Male-Female Wage Gaps, 1980-2000, vs. Personal
                                Computer Adoption Intensity

                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                                                A. Ordinary Least Squares
Personal Computers/                           -0.204       -0.207      -0.157                             -0.115              -0.089
 Worker, 2000                                 (0.048)      (0.041)     (0.052)                            (0.061)             (0.066)
Change in Hum Cap/                             0.821        0.417       0.032                              -0.192              -0.355
 RL, 1980-2000                                (0.180)      (0.172)     (0.338)                            (0.365)             (0.408)

Root MSE                                       0.053               0.051               0.050               0.049               0.049
R-squared                                      0.591               0.626               0.654               0.659               0.663

                                                 B. Instrumental Variables
Personal Computers/                           -0.239       -0.363       -0.367                            -0.482              -0.440
 Worker, 2000                                 (0.063)      (0.081)      (0.095)                           (0.152)             (0.158)
Change in Hum Cap/                             0.845        0.547        0.589                             0.371               0.178
 RL, 1980-2000                                (0.188)      (0.203)      (0.367)                           (0.466)             (0.479)

Root MSE                                       0.053               0.051               0.050               0.051               0.050
Observations                                   1,150               1,150               1,150               1,150               1,150
First Stage F-Stat                             136.5               107.9                93.8                74.1                63.1
 p-value                                       0.000               0.000               0.000               0.000               0.000
Controls
Education Group?                                   Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
Industry Mix                                       N              2 Manuf             2 Manuf             2 Manuf             2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                              +Index              +Index              +Index              +Index
State Effects?                                     N                  N                   Y                   Y                   Y
City Controls?2                                    N                  N                   N                   Y                   Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                            N                  N                   N                   N                   Y
Data So urce: Dependent variable and human capital -- 5% P ublic-use 1980(Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 Censuses o f P o pulatio n,
which are aggregated to 230 metro po litan areas, and, fo r the dependent variable, x 5 educatio n gro ups (high scho o l dro po uts,
graduates, so me co llege <4 years, 4 years co llege, and advanced degree) that are the units o f o bservatio n in the regressio ns.
Sample used to co mpute human capital/raw labo r, co nsists o f wo rkers age 16-65 with po sitive po tential wo rk experience (age -
years o f educatio n -6) and ho urs wo rked last year, and no t residing in gro up quarters. "Human capital" is the sum o f the interactio n
o f ho urs wo rked with years o f educatio n beyo nd 10 times 0.077, and "raw labo r" is 1.423 times the sum o f male ho urs wo rked plus
the sum o f female ho urs wo rked. The wage sample is the subsample who are currently emplo yed, with po sitive wage earnings but
zero business and farm earnings and no t currently enro lled in scho o l; dependent variable is the change in the adjusted wage gap
between the average ln ho urly wage o f men and wo men with the same bro ad educatio n level, where the adjustment are gender x
educatio n (x year) specific regressio ns o n a quartic in po tential experience, linear educatio n (fo r dro po uts, so me co llege, and
advanced degree) and dummies fo r black, Hispanic, fo reign-bo rn, and bo rn after 1950 (with latter also interacted with years
educatio n fo r the same three gro ups). P Cs per wo rker co mputed fro m stacked 2000 and 2002 marketing surveys by Harte Hanks,
which are regressio n adjusted fo r 3 digit industry x emplo yer size dummies. Instrument is 1980 human capital/raw labo r. A ll
regressio ns in table weighted by 1980 po pulatio n. Standard erro rs, in parentheses under slo pe estimates, are co mputed to be
ro bust to arbitrary fo rms o f hetero skedasticity and erro r co rrelatio n within metro po litan area. 1Co lumns (2)-(5) co ntro l fo r the
share o f emplo yment in no n-durable and durable manufacturing their interactio ns with a dummy fo r being in the "so me co llege" o r
lo wer bro ad educatio n gro up, and fo r a female demand "Index" which is the female share o f emplo yment o btained by averaging
natio nal female emplo yment shares by detailed industry using lo cal emplo yment by industry as weights. This index is co nstructed
separately fo r "co llege equivalents" (which is is used as the co ntro l fo r bro ad educatio n catego ries fo ur years co llege and
advanced degrees) and "high scho o l equivalents" (which is is used as the co ntro l fo r bro ad educatio n catego ries dro po uts, high
scho o l and so me co llege) but entered as a single co ntro l variable. 2City co ntro ls are share black, Hispanic, and fo reign-bo rn; and
the unemplo yment rate and the natural lo g o f the labo r fo rce. 3Female emplo yment rates entered separately fo r tho se with so me
co llege o r less and fo ur years co llege o r mo re.
  Table 4b. Change in Adjusted College-High School Wage Gaps, 1980-2000, vs. Personal
                              Computers Adoption Intensity

                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                                                 A. Ordinary Least Squares
Personal Computers/                             0.306        0.256       0.246                              0.210               0.204
 Worker, 2000                                  (0.089)      (0.088)     (0.063)                            (0.062)             (0.063)
Change in Hum Cap/                             -1.242       -1.117       0.748                              0.850               0.938
 RL, 1980-2000                                 (0.258)      (0.277)     (0.525)                            (0.538)             (0.520)

Root MSE                                        0.041               0.040               0.030               0.030               0.030
R-squared                                       0.227               0.253               0.584               0.598               0.602

                                                  B. Instrumental Variables
Personal Computers/                             0.463        0.526        0.467                             0.544               0.567
 Worker, 2000                                  (0.139)      (0.185)      (0.119)                           (0.148)             (0.175)
Change in Hum Cap/                             -1.349       -1.341        0.160                             0.338               0.387
 RL, 1980-2000                                 (0.288)      (0.346)      (0.544)                           (0.521)             (0.525)

Root MSE                                        0.041               0.042               0.032               0.032               0.032
Observations                                    1,150               1,150               1,150               1,150               1,150

First Stage F-Stat                              136.5               107.9                93.8                74.1                63.1
 p-value                                        0.000               0.000               0.000               0.000               0.000
Controls
Education Group?                                   Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
Industry Mix                                       N              2 Manuf             2 Manuf             2 Manuf             2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                              +Index              +Index              +Index              +Index
State Effects?                                     N                  N                   Y                   Y                   Y
City Controls?2                                    N                  N                   N                   Y                   Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                            N                  N                   N                   N                   Y
Data So urce: Dependent variable and human capital -- 5% P ublic-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 Censuses o f P o pulatio n,
which are aggregated to 230 metro po litan areas. Sample used to co mpute human capital/raw labo r, co nsists o f wo rkers age 16-65
with po sitive po tential wo rk experience (age - years o f educatio n -6) and ho urs wo rked last year, and no t residing in gro up quarters.
"Human capital" is the sum o f the interactio n o f ho urs wo rked with years o f educatio n beyo nd 10 times 0.077, and "raw labo r" is
1.423 times the sum o f male ho urs wo rked plus the sum o f female ho urs wo rked. The wage sample is the subsample who are
currently emplo yed, with po sitive wage earnings but zero business and farm earnings and no t currently enro lled in scho o l;
dependent variable is the change in the average o f male and female ln ho urly wage gaps between co llege and high scho o l wo rkers,
where the adjustments are gender x educatio n (x year) specific regressio ns o n a quartic in po tential experience, linear educatio n (fo r
dro po uts, so me co llege, and advanced degree) and dummies fo r black, Hispanic, fo reign-bo rn, and bo rn after 1950 (with latter also
interacted with years educatio n fo r the same three gro ups). P Cs per wo rker co mputed fro m stacked 2000 and 2002 marketing
surveys by Harte Hanks, which are regressio n adjusted fo r 3 digit industry x emplo yer size dummies. Instrument is 1980 human
capital/raw labo r. A ll regressio ns in table weighted by 1980 po pulatio n. Standard erro rs, in parentheses under slo pe estimates, are
co mputed to be ro bust to arbitrary fo rms o f hetero skedasticity and erro r co rrelatio n within metro po litan area. 1Co lumns (2)-(5)
co ntro l fo r the share o f emplo yment in no n-durable and durable manufacturing their interactio ns with a dummy fo r being in the
"so me co llege" o r lo wer bro ad educatio n gro up, and fo r a female demand "Index" which is the female share o f emplo yment
o btained by averaging natio nal female emplo yment shares by detailed industry using lo cal emplo yment by industry as weights. This
index is co nstructed separately fo r "co llege equivalents" (which is is used as the co ntro l fo r bro ad educatio n catego ries fo ur years
co llege and advanced degrees) and "high scho o l equivalents" (which is is used as the co ntro l fo r bro ad educatio n catego ries
dro po uts, high scho o l and so me co llege) but entered as a single co ntro l variable. 2City co ntro ls are share black, Hispanic, and
fo reign-bo rn; and the unemplo yment rate and the natural lo g o f the labo r fo rce. 3Female emplo yment rates entered separately fo r
tho se with so me co llege o r less and fo ur years co llege o r mo re.
   Table 5. Male-Female Wage Gaps vs. College-High School Wage Gaps, Estimated by
                               Instrumental Variables

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
Adj Coll-HS Wage                    -0.532          -0.644         -0.708          -0.827          -0.724
  Gap, 1980-2000                     (0.206)         (0.288)        (0.279)         (0.383)         (0.365)
Intercept                             -0.020          0.001          0.014           0.036           0.017
                                     (0.038)         (0.054)        (0.053)         (0.073)         (0.069)
Root MSE                             0.0555          0.0557          0.0523         0.0535          0.0522
R-squared                            0.549           0.549           0.617          0.601           0.620
Observations                         1,150           1,150           1,150          1,150           1,150
Controls
Education Group?                        Y               Y               Y               Y              Y
Industry Mix                            N           2 Manuf         2 Manuf         2 Manuf        2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                +Index          +Index          +Index         +Index
State Effects?                          N               N               Y               Y              Y
City Controls?2                         N               N               N               Y              Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                 N               N               N               N              Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use censuses of population, w hich
are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and, for the dependent variable, x 5 education groups (high school
dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that are the units of
observation in the regressions. Sample consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork
experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters,w ho are
currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently
enrolled in school. Dependent variable is the gap betw een the adjusted average ln hourly w age of men and
w omen w ith the same broad education level, w here the adjusted w age comes from gender x education (x
year) specific regressions of ln(w age) on a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for dropouts,
some college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after 1950
(w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). Independent variable is the
average of (simililarly adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen. The instrument is 1980
"human capital/raw labor"; first stage and further description of this variable are found in the notes to tables
3a and 4a. All regressions in table w eighted by 1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under
slope estimates, are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error correlation
w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2)-(5) control for the share of employment in non-durable and durable
manufacturing their interactions w ith a dummy for being in the "some college" or low er broad education group,
and for a female demand "Index" w hich is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national
female employment shares by detailed industry using local employment by industry as w eights. This index is
constructed separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education
categories four years college and advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the
control for broad education categories dropouts, high school and some college) but entered as a single
control variable. 2City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and
the natural log of the labor force. 3Female employment rates entered separately for those w ith some college
or less and four years college or more.
                                         Table 6. Correcting for Selection

                                                   Female Subsample                  Sel Corr: Adjusted for Inverse
                                                 Predicted   NatBn,Non-                        Mills Ratio
                                                Emp. Rates   Hs Whites                Estimated        Estimated
                                                  High1     w/no kids<6               Nationally        By MSA
                                   (1)              (2)          (3)                      (4)              (5)

                A. Change in Adjusted Male-Female Wage Gap, 1980-2000, OLS
Adj Coll-HS Wage        -0.150         -0.085       -0.335       -0.185                                   -0.354
  Gap, 1980-2000         (0.070)        (0.079)      (0.101)       (0.072)                                 (0.318)

Root MSE                          0.047             0.075              0.096              0.050             0.312
R-squared                         0.684             0.512              0.422              0.895             0.247

                 B. Change in Adjusted Male-Female Wage Gap, 1980-2000, IV
Adj Coll-HS Wage        -0.610         -0.452       -0.924       -0.490                                   -0.884
  Gap, 1980-2000         (0.317)        (0.276)      (0.401)       (0.282)                                 (0.775)
Root MSE                          0.049             0.075              0.097              0.050             0.313
Observations                       795               795                795                795               795
Controls
Education Group?                    Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                  Y
Industry Mix                    2 Manuf            2 Manuf           2 Manuf            2 Manuf            2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?2            +Index             +Index            +Index             +Index             +Index
State Effects?                      Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                  Y
City Controls?3                     Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                  Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use censuses of population, w hich are
aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and, for the dependent variable, x 5 education groups (high school dropouts,
graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that are the units of observation in the
regressions. Sample consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of education-
6) and hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters,w ho are currently employed, w ith positive w age
earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently enrolled in school. Dependent variable is the gap
betw een the average ln hourly w age of men and w omen w ith the same broad education level, adjusted in gender x
education (x year) specific regressions for a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for dropouts, some
college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after 1950 (w ith latter also
interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). Independent variable is the average of (simililarly
adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen. All regressions in table w eighted by 1980 population.
Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of
heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. The instrument, used in panels B, is 1980 "human
capital/raw labor," w hich is discussed in notes to previous tables. 1Women w ith characteristics associated w ith a
greater than 60 chance of w orking in the average metropolitan area (as of 1980). To determine this, a probit for being
in the w age sample (among w omen age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience not residing in group quarters)
on the same variables as the w age adjustment plus dummies for marital status interacted w ith a dummy for children
under six, w as separately estimated by gender and education using the 1980 data. The predicted values, p, from this
probit (evaluated at the average of the metropolitan area effects) w as computed and w omen w ith p>0.6 w ere retained.
2
  The share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing and their interactions w ith a dummy for being in
the "some college" or low er broad education group, and a female demand "Index" w hich is the female share of
employment obtained by averaging national female employment shares by detailed industry using local employment by
industry as w eights. The index is constructed separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for
broad education categories four years college and advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used
as the control for broad education categories dropouts, high school and some college) 3City controls are share black,
Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of the labor force.
            Table 7. Change in Male-Female Wage Gaps, 1980-2000, Within Cohort

                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)

                                       A. Ordinary Least Squares
Change in College-HS                 -0.164       -0.076      -0.084                 -0.094          -0.079
 Wage Gap, 1980-2000                 (0.054)      (0.051)     (0.054)                (0.056)         (0.056)

Root MSE                              0.097           0.096           0.095           0.095           0.095
R-squared                             0.652           0.663           0.674           0.675           0.676
                                        B. Instrumental Variables
Change in College-HS                 -0.441       -0.329        -0.249               -0.526          -0.416
 Wage Gap, 1980-2000                 (0.137)      (0.159)      (0.217)               (0.295)         (0.258)

Root MSE                              0.098           0.097           0.095           0.096           0.096
Observations                          2,529           2,529           2,529           2,529           2,529
Controls
Cohort x Broad Education                 Y               Y               Y              Y               Y
Industry Mix                             N           2 Manuf         2 Manuf        2 Manuf         2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                 +Index          +Index         +Index          +Index
State Effects?                           N               N               Y              Y               Y
City Controls?2                          N               N               N              Y               Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                  N               N               N              N               Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use censuses of population, w hich
are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and, for the dependent variable, x tw o education groups (4 years or
more college, and <4 years college) x five-year birth cohort that are the units of observation in the
regressions. Sample consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of
education -6) and hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters,w ho are currently employed, w ith
positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently enrolled in school and born
betw een 1935 and 1959 (1964 for the less educated group). Dependent variable is the change in the gap
betw een the adjusted average ln hourly w age of men and w omen in the same broad education x cohort cells,
w here the adjustment comes from gender x education (x year) specific regressions of ln(w age) on a quartic
in potential experience, years of education, and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after
1950, and an interaction betw een born after 1950 w ith years of education. The independent variable is the
average of (simililarly adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen (constructed in the same
w ay as in earlier tables, w ithout cohorts). The instrument is 1980 "human capital/raw labor"; first stage and
further description of this variable are found in the notes to tables 3a and 4a. All regressions are w eighted by
1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be robust to
arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2)-(5) control
for the share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing their interactions w ith a dummy for
being in the low er broad education group, and for a female demand "Index" w hich is the female share of
employment obtained by averaging national female employment shares by detailed industry using local
employment by industry as w eights. This index is constructed separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is
used as the control for higher broad education category) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as
the control for the broad education category) but entered as a single control variable. 2City controls are share
black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of the labor force. 3Female
employment rates entered separately for those w ith some college or less and four years college or more.
        Table 8. Change in Male-Female Wage Gap by Period, Large MSA subsample

         Analysis Period:            1970-1980                   1980-1990                  1980-2000
                                        (1)                         (2)                        (3)

                  A. Versus Change in College-High School Wage Gap
Change in College-High         0.126                -0.250                                    -0.198
 School Wage Gap              (0.105)               (0.061)                                   (0.071)

R-squared                               0.409                      0.582                       0.745

                              B. Versus 1980 Human Capital/Raw Labor
Human Capital/                        -0.377              -1.380                               -1.088
 Raw Labor, 1980                     (0.409)             (0.295)                              (0.436)

R-squared                               0.408                       0.592                      0.749
Observations                             685                         685                        685
Wage Methods:1                           1970                       1970                    1980-2000
Controls
Education Group?                           Y                          Y                          Y
Industry Mix                           2 Manuf                    2 Manuf                    2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?2                   +Index                     +Index                     +Index
State Effects?                             Y                          Y                          Y
City Controls?3                            Y                          Y                          Y
Data Source: 1970 public-use "county group," 1980 5% public use, (both Ruggles et al., 2010) and 1990 and
2000 5% public use censuses of population, w hich are aggregated to 137 metropolitan areas x 5 education
groups (high school dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that
are the units of observation in the regressions. Sample for human capital/raw labor consists of w orkers age
16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, not
residing in group quarters; w age sample further limited to those w ho are currently employed, w ith positive
w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently enrolled in school. Dependent variable
is the gap betw een the average ln hourly w age of men and w omen w ith the same broad education level,
adjusted in gender x education (x year) specific regressions for a quartic in potential experience, linear
education (for dropouts, some college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born,
and born after 1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). Independent
variable in Panel A is the average of (simililarly adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen.
Independent variable in Panels B is "human capital" -- the sum of the interaction of annual hours w orked w ith
years of education beyond 10 times 0.077 -- divided by "raw labor" --- 1.423 times the sum of male annual
hours w orked plus the sum of female hours w orked. All regressions in table w eighted by 1980 population.
Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of
heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1"1970" w age methods employ categorical
versions of "hours last w eek" and "w eeks last year" available in the 1970 Census, interpolated to continuous
hours and w eeks (using means in 1980 census data) to compute annual hours w orked. Column (3), like the
other tables, uses reports of (continuous) "usual hours per w eek" and "w eeks last year" to compute annual
hours w orked. 2The share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing and their interactions w ith
a dummy for being in the "some college" or low er broad education group, and a female demand "Index" w hich
is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national female employment shares by detailed
industry using local employment by industry as w eights. The index is constructed separately for "college
equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four years college and advanced
degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories
dropouts, high school and some college) 3City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the
unemployment rate and the natural log of the labor force.
  Appendix Table A1a. Alternative Estimate of Change in (Adjusted) Male-Female Wage Gaps, 1980-
       2000, vs. Personal Computer Adoption Intensity, Dropping Change in Hum Cap Control

                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)

                                             A. Ordinary Least Squares
Personal Computers/                   -0.170         -0.185         -0.156                     -0.123              -0.105
 Worker, 2000                         (0.062)        (0.045)        (0.052)                    (0.062)            (0.066)

Root MSE                               0.054              0.051              0.050              0.049             0.049
R-squared                              0.573              0.623              0.654              0.659             0.662
                                                B. Instrumental Variables
Personal Computers/                   -0.285             -0.405        -0.337                  -0.464              -0.429
 Worker, 2000                         (0.080)           (0.091)        (0.102)                 (0.163)            (0.169)

Root MSE                               0.054              0.052              0.050              0.051             0.050
Observations                           1,150              1,150              1,150              1,150             1,150
First Stage F-Stats
Personal Computers                     119.9              111.2              160.3               68.9              58.3
 p-value                               0.000              0.000              0.000              0.000             0.000
Controls
Education Group?                          Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Industry Mix                              N             2 Manuf            2 Manuf            2 Manuf            2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                    +Index             +Index             +Index             +Index
State Effects?                            N                 N                  Y                  Y                  Y
City Controls?2                           N                 N                  N                  Y                  Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                   N                 N                  N                  N                  Y
Data Source: Dependent variable and human capital -- 5% Public-use 1980(Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 Censuses of
Population, w hich are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and, for the dependent variable, x 5 education groups (high
school dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that are the units of observation
in the regressions. Sample used to compute human capital/raw labor, consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential
w ork experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, and not residing in group quarters. "Human
capital" is the sum of the interaction of hours w orked w ith years of education beyond 10 times 0.077, and "raw labor" is
1.423 times the sum of male hours w orked plus the sum of female hours w orked. The w age sample is the subsample w ho
are currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently enrolled in
school; dependent variable is the change in the adjusted w age gap betw een the average ln hourly w age of men and w omen
w ith the same broad education level, w here the adjustment are gender x education (x year) specific regressions on a
quartic in potential experience, linear education (for dropouts, some college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black,
Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after 1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups).
PCs per w orker computed from stacked 2000 and 2002 marketing surveys by Harte Hanks, w hich are regression adjusted
for 3 digit industry x employer size dummies. Instrument is 1980 human capital/raw labor. All regressions in table w eighted
by 1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be robust to arbitrary forms of
heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2)-(5) control for the share of employment in non-
durable and durable manufacturing their interactions w ith a dummy for being in the "some college" or low er broad education
group, and for a female demand "Index" w hich is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national female
employment shares by detailed industry using local employment by industry as w eights. This index is constructed
separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four years college and
advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories dropouts,
high school and some college) but entered as a single control variable. 2City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-
born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of the labor force. 3Female employment rates entered separately for
those w ith some college or less and four years college or more.
  Appendix Table A1b. Alternative Estimates of Change in Adjusted College-High School Wage Gaps,
     1980-2000, vs. Personal Computers Adoption Intensity, Dropping Change in Hum Cap Control

                                         (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)
                                             A. Ordinary Least Squares
Personal Computers/                    0.255          0.197          0.287                      0.246             0.246
 Worker, 2000                         (0.104)        (0.096)        (0.063)                    (0.079)           (0.081)

Root MSE                               0.044              0.042              0.031             0.030              0.030
R-squared                              0.095              0.171              0.576             0.589              0.591
                                              B. Instrumental Variables
Personal Computers/                    0.535           0.629          0.475                     0.561             0.592
 Worker, 2000                         (0.162)         (0.206)        (0.108)                   (0.143)           (0.165)

Root MSE                               0.047              0.047              0.032             0.032              0.032
Observations                           1,150              1,150              1,150             1,150              1,150
First Stage F-Stats
Personal Computers                     119.9              111.2              160.3              68.9               58.3
 p-value                               0.000              0.000              0.000             0.000              0.000
Controls
Education Group?                          Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Industry Mix                              N             2 Manuf            2 Manuf            2 Manuf            2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                    +Index             +Index             +Index             +Index
State Effects?                            N                 N                  Y                  Y                  Y
City Controls?2                           N                 N                  N                  Y                  Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                   N                 N                  N                  N                  Y
Data Source: Dependent variable and human capital -- 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 Censuses of
Population, w hich are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas. Sample used to compute human capital/raw labor, consists of
w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, and
not residing in group quarters. "Human capital" is the sum of the interaction of hours w orked w ith years of education
beyond 10 times 0.077, and "raw labor" is 1.423 times the sum of male hours w orked plus the sum of female hours w orked.
The w age sample is the subsample w ho are currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm
earnings and not currently enrolled in school; dependent variable is the change in the average of male and female ln hourly
w age gaps betw een college and high school w orkers, w here the adjustments are gender x education (x year) specific
regressions on a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for dropouts, some college, and advanced degree) and
dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after 1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same
three groups). PCs per w orker computed from stacked 2000 and 2002 marketing surveys by Harte Hanks, w hich are
regression adjusted for 3 digit industry x employer size dummies. Instruments is1980 human capital/raw labor. All
regressions w eighted by 1980 population. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be
robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2) and higher
control for a female demand "Index" w hich is the female share of employment obtained by averaging national female
employment shares by detailed industry using local employment by industry as w eights. This index is constructed
separately for "college equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four years college and
advanced degrees) and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories dropouts,
high school and some college) 2City controls are share black, Hispanic, and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and
the natural log of the labor force. 3Female employment rates entered separately for those w ith some college or less and four
years college or more.
     Appendix Table A2. Male-Female Wage Gaps vs. College-High School Wage Gaps,
             Estimated by Instrumental Variables (PCs/Worker as Instrument)

                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
Adj Coll-HS Wage                    -0.668          -0.940          -0.542          -0.500          -0.425
  Gap, 1980-2000                     (0.279)         (0.491)         (0.215)         (0.309)         (0.310)
Intercept                             0.006           0.058          -0.018          -0.027          -0.041
                                     (0.052)         (0.092)         (0.041)         (0.059)         (0.059)
Root MSE                              0.057           0.062           0.051           0.050           0.050
Observations                          1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150
Controls
Education Group?                        Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Industry Mix                            N           2 Manuf         2 Manuf         2 Manuf         2 Manuf
  x Broad Education?1                                +Index          +Index          +Index          +Index
State Effects?                          N               N               Y               Y               Y
City Controls?2                         N               N               N               Y               Y
F Emp Rate x Broad Ed?3                 N               N               N               N               Y
Data Source: 5% Public-use 1980 (Ruggles et al., 2010) and 2000 public use censuses of population, w hich
are aggregated to 230 metropolitan areas, and, for the dependent variable, x 5 education groups (high school
dropouts, graduates, some college <4 years, 4 years college, and advanced degree) that are the units of
observation in the regressions. Sample consists of w orkers age 16-65 w ith positive potential w ork
experience (age - years of education -6) and hours w orked last year, not residing in group quarters,w ho are
currently employed, w ith positive w age earnings but zero business and farm earnings and not currently
enrolled in school. Dependent variable is the gap (in panel A, or change in the gap, in panel B) betw een the
average ln hourly w age of men and w omen w ith the same broad education level, w here the adjustment are
gender x education (x year) specific regressions on a quartic in potential experience, linear education (for
dropouts, some college, and advanced degree) and dummies for black, Hispanic, foreign-born, and born after
1950 (w ith latter also interacted w ith years education for the same three groups). Independent variable is
the average of (simililarly adjusted) college-high school w age gaps for men and w omen. The instrument is
2000 adjusted PCs/w orker. Standard errors, in parentheses under slope estimates, are computed to be
robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and error correlation w ithin metropolitan area. 1Columns (2)-(5)
control for the share of employment in non-durable and durable manufacturing their interactions w ith a dummy
for being in the "some college" or low er broad education group, and for a female demand "Index" w hich is the
female share of employment obtained by averaging national female employment shares by detailed industry
using local employment by industry as w eights. This index is constructed separately for "college equivalents"
(w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories four years college and advanced degrees)
and "high school equivalents" (w hich is is used as the control for broad education categories dropouts, high
school and some college) but entered as a single control variable. 2City controls are share black, Hispanic,
and foreign-born; and the unemployment rate and the natural log of the labor force. 3Female employment rates
entered separately for those w ith some college or less and four years college or more.
