NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECLINING LABOR SHARES AND THE GLOBAL RISE OF CORPORATE SAVING
Loukas Karabarbounis
Brent Neiman
Working Paper 18154
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18154
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We thank Mark Aguiar, Martin Berka, Steve Davis, Gita Gopinath, Veronica Guerrieri, Bob Hall,
Chang-Tai Hsieh, John Huizinga, Erik Hurst, Chad Jones, Anil Kashyap, Pete Klenow, Randy Kroszner,
Guido Lorenzoni, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Douglas Skinner and seminar participants at Berkeley,
CEU, Chicago Booth, FRB New York, FRB Philadelphia, FRB San Francisco, HEC Montreal, NBER
Capital Markets, NBER EASE, NBER EFG, NBER Macro Perspectives, Princeton, Rochester, Stanford,
Tsinghua Macro Workshop, UAB, UCLA, and UTDT for helpful comments and discussions. Sophie
Wang, Bowen Yang, Anny Zhong, Michael Marvin, and Victor Lin provided excellent research assistance.
This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets and the Neubauer Family Foundation
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The Appendix that accompanies the paper
can be found on the authors' web pages. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Declining Labor Shares and the Global Rise of Corporate Saving
Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman
NBER Working Paper No. 18154
June 2012, Revised November 2012
JEL No. E21,E22,E25,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
The stability of the labor share is a key foundation in macroeconomic models. We document, however,
that the global labor share has significantly declined over the last 30 years. This decline was associated
with a significant increase in corporate saving, generally the largest component of national saving.
We relate the labor share to corporate saving empirically and theoretically using a model featuring
CES production and imperfections in the flow of funds between households and corporations. These
two departures from the standard neoclassical model imply that the labor share fluctuates and that
corporate saving affects macroeconomic allocations. We argue that it is important to study the labor
share and corporate saving jointly, and offer a unified explanation for their trends. A global decline
in the cost of capital beginning around 1980 induced firms to shift away from labor and toward capital,
financed in part with an increase in corporate saving.
Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
loukas.karabarbounis@chicagobooth.edu
Brent Neiman
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

At least since the work of Kaldor (1957), the stability of the labor share has been a fundamental feature of macroeconomic models, with broad implications for the shape of the production
function, inequality, and macroeconomic dynamics. We document that the global labor share has
significantly declined over the last 30 years. This decline was associated with a significant increase
in the flow of corporate saving, which is generally the largest component of national saving. We
relate the labor share to corporate saving empirically and theoretically, argue that it is important
to study both jointly, and offer a unified explanation for both trends. A global decline in the
cost of capital beginning around 1980 induced firms to shift away from labor and toward capital,
financed in part with an increase in corporate saving.
It is impossible to interpret these trends through the lens of the standard neoclassical growth
model because it features Cobb-Douglas production and perfect capital markets. First, the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas production function in a competitive environment implies that the
labor share is constant despite fluctuations in the cost of capital or the wage. Second, perfect
capital markets imply that a unit of saving is equally useful for financing investment, regardless
of whether it is supplied by corporations or households. As a result, corporate saving is not
well-defined. We develop a model which relaxes these two assumptions. Production combines
capital and labor with a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) that can differ from one, and
imperfections in the capital market restrict the flow of funds between households and corporations.
We start by documenting a 5 percentage point decline in the share of global corporate gross
value added paid to labor over the last 30 years. We demonstrate the robustness of the decline
in the labor share using a novel dataset we compile by combining country-specific data posted
on the Internet with sector-level national income accounting data from multilateral organizations
obtained digitally and collected from physical books. Of the 51 countries with more than 10 years
of data between 1975 and 2007, 36 exhibited downward trends in their corporate labor share. Of
the trend estimates that are statistically significant, 29 are negative while only 10 are positive.
Our findings on the labor share improve and expand upon earlier work such as Blanchard (1997),
Jones (2003), and Bentolila and Saint-Paul (2003).
The global shift from labor income to corporate profits was associated with an increase in
the share of total saving originating from the corporate sector, or the corporate saving share,
of more than 20 percentage points. Of the 44 countries with more than 10 years of data, 30
exhibited increasing trends in the share of saving due to the corporate sector. 22 of these trends
are statistically significantly greater than zero, while only 9 are significantly less than zero. Our

1

paper is the first to document this global trend, which is consistent with the country-specific
results in Hsieh and Parker (2006) for Chile, Bayoumi, Tong, and Wei (2010) for China, and
Armenter and Hnatkovska (2011) for the United States.
Our estimates of a 5 percentage point decline in labor share and 20 percentage point increase
in the corporate saving share represent averages across various specifications that account for
compositional changes in our unbalanced panel. Instead, in Figure 1, we plot the evolution of the
corporate labor share and corporate saving share for a global aggregate constructed by simply
summing data from all available countries in our sample. Figure 2 shows that both trends are
present in each of the largest four economies.
We develop a perfect-foresight general equilibrium model consisting of a continuum of corporations owned by an infinitely lived representative household that derives utility from consumption,
leisure, and the stock of household capital. Following Auerbach (1979), Poterba and Summers
(1985), and Gourio and Miao (2010, 2011), corporations make investment and debt and equity financing decisions to maximize shareholder wealth via dividend payments and equity repurchases.
Corporations must pay a flotation cost to raise external equity and face a binding collateral constraint on debt. These imperfections imply that corporate saving is the preferred source from
which to finance corporate investment. Equity repurchases are preferred to dividends since capital
gains are taxed less heavily than dividends, which allows us to depart from the dividend policy
irrelevance result of Miller and Modigliani (1961). However, repurchases are only allowed up to
a limit which increases with the capital stock. Therefore, in response to shocks that increase the
capital stock, corporate saving will increase both to fund increased corporate investment and to
pay for additional equity repurchases.
Our goal is to relate global trends in the labor share and corporate saving to the observed
global decline in the relative price of investment goods, an important component of the user cost
of capital. This requires calibrating the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor and
the strength of the financial frictions, our two departures from the neoclassical model. We do
so only using cross-country variation, which means that our parameters are calibrated without
the influence of the global trends we intend to explain. In particular, we use the cross-country
relationship between trends in corporate labor shares and trends in the relative price of investment
to calibrate the elasticity of substitution. This elasticity is important for determining desired
corporate investment in response to movements in the user cost of capital. In parallel, we use the
cross-country relationship between trends in corporate saving shares and trends in the relative
price of investment to calibrate parameters governing corporate financial policy which, in turn,
determine the strength of imperfections in the capital market. The strength of these imperfections
2

is important for determining the growth of the user cost of capital in response to shocks.
Following Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), and consistent with Hsieh and Klenow
(2007), we model evolutions in the relative price of investment as reflecting changes in the efficiency
of the investment good producing sector. We then feed into our calibrated model the observed
global decline in the relative price of investment goods.1 This decline in the relative price of
investment goods lowers the cost of capital relative to labor. With an elasticity greater than one,
firms increase their capital-labor ratios more than they would with Cobb-Douglas production,
leading to a decline in the labor share. The preference for internal financing implies an increase
in corporate saving to fund the increase in the capital stock. Further, the rise in corporate saving
exceeds that of corporate investment because the expanded capital stock relaxes the repurchase
constraint and saving is used to buy back additional shares. The observed decline in the relative
price of investment goods generates a significant movement from an initial steady state with a
high labor share and low corporate saving share to another steady state with a low labor share
and high corporate saving share. Quantitatively, the model accounts for more than half of the
global trends shown in Figure 1.
It is important to study corporate labor and saving shares jointly in one framework given
their relationship implied by accounting identities. We emphasize that these variables need not
mechanically move in opposite directions in response to shocks. The fact that they do in response
to a single investment price shock in our model corroborates our mechanism compared to others
that generate movements in only one of the two trends or that cause labor shares and corporate
saving to move in the same direction. Further, the joint determination of labor shares and corporate saving is interesting because of a quantitatively significant interaction between the elasticity
of substitution in the production function and the existence of capital market imperfections. The
importance of capital market imperfections increases with desired investment and, in response to
shocks that either lower the cost of capital or increase the marginal product of capital, desired
investment increases with the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. As a result, the
higher is the elasticity of substitution the more capital market imperfections impact the growth
in corporate investment.
To highlight this interaction, we compare the response of our model to the investment price
shock with the response of models that assume Cobb-Douglas production, perfect capital markets,
or both. The models with perfect capital markets share the same structure as our baseline model
but allow the planner to freely shift resources across sectors. The three alternative models ignore
1

The timing of our measured global shock is consistent with the decline in U.S. investment prices which
accelerated in the early 1980s as documented by Fisher (2006).

3

the information contained in, and cannot reproduce, at least one (if not both) of the trends in
Figure 1. We show that, in response to the global investment price shock, steady state to steady
state GDP growth in the Cobb-Douglas model differs by less than 1 percentage point between
the model with capital market imperfections and the model with perfect capital markets. In the
CES framework, however, GDP growth differs by roughly 4.5 percentage points between the two
models. The information contained in the two trends is also important for the economy’s response
to other shocks. For instance, in response to TFP shocks, long-run growth in a Cobb-Douglas
economy does not depend on whether capital markets are perfect or imperfect. By contrast, TFP
shocks in a CES economy imply different growth outcomes depending on the structure of capital
markets.
Countries experiencing larger declines in relative investment prices experienced larger labor
share declines, and this leads to our estimated elasticity of substitution between capital and labor
of 1.4.2 As discussed in Jones (2003), a balanced growth path with non-zero factor shares will
only emerge if technology growth is labor-augmenting, regardless of the production function, or if
the production function is Cobb-Douglas, even if technology growth is capital-augmenting. If real
wage growth or increases in the capital-to-labor ratio are caused by labor-augmenting technology
growth, there need not be movement in the labor share. If instead the large increases in wages or
capital-to-labor ratios seen in high growth countries such as the Asian Tigers followed from Hicksneutral technology growth, they would with our calibration imply a decline in the labor share.
Our elasticity is close enough to one, however, that even such large growth episodes would not
generate implausible predicted labor share movements.3 Our estimated CES production function
is also related to the work of Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000), which features
non-constant factor shares and studies how changes in the relative supply of skilled and unskilled
labor can account for variation in the skill premium.
Only recently have macroeconomists embedded the corporate sector in general equilibrium
environments, which is required to emphasize the feedback between household and firm saving and
investment decisions. Our model is related to those developed in Gourio and Miao (2010, 2011),
which study the long-run effects and the transitional dynamics of the 2003 U.S. dividend and
2

We also find an elasticity greater than one if we instead consider trends in other observable components of the
user cost of capital, such as the corporate income tax rate. Antras (2004) notes that, while estimates vary, most
empirical studies find the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor to be less than one. One reason our
approach may yield a different result is that we are focused on a more long-term elasticity measured over at least
10 years rather than the higher frequency adjustments captured in most empirical studies.
3
For example, Young (1995) measures a 7.1 percent annual growth rate in Taiwan’s capital-to-labor ratio from
1966-1990. In a static model with constant returns to scale, Hicks-neutral growth, and our elasticity estimate,
this implies a 10 percentage point decline in the labor share. This is a large decline, but does not stand out as
exceptional relative to the rest of our data.

4

capital gains tax reform on macroeconomic outcomes. Jermann and Quadrini (2012) document
the cyclical properties of financial flows in the United States and explore the effects of financial
shocks along the business cycle in a calibrated model with a corporate sector.4 Our model with
capital market imperfections builds on Gomes (2001), Hennessy and Whited (2005), and Riddick
and Whited (2009), who discuss issues of corporate financing in partial equilibrium environments.

2

Data Description and Empirical Results

We now describe how our data are constructed and review the national income accounting framework which relates the corporate labor share to corporate profits, dividends, and saving. We then
document the widespread decline in the corporate labor share and the rise in corporate saving
relative to total saving and GDP over the past three decades.

2.1

National Income Accounting Data

We obtain annual data at the national and sector levels by combining six broad sources: (i)
country-specific Internet web pages (such as that managed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) for the United States); (ii) digital files obtained from the United Nations (UN); (iii) digital
files obtained from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD); (iv)
a separate database compiled in the mid-1990s by researchers at the World Bank (see Loayza,
Schmidt-Hebbel, and Serven (2000)); (v) physical books published by the UN; and (vi) physical
books published by the OECD.5 Over time and across countries there are some differences in
methodologies, but our data generally conform to System of National Accounts (SNA) standards.
We refer the reader to the SNA Section of the United Nations Statistics Division and to Lequiller
and Blades (2006) for the most detailed descriptions of how national accounts are constructed
and harmonized to meet these standards.
The resulting dataset contains sector-level information on the income structure of 59 countries
for various years between 1975 and 2007, a significant increase in coverage relative to what is
readily downloadable from the UN and OECD. We start our analysis in 1975 because that is the
earliest year in which we have more than 6 countries with data on both the sectoral composition
4

See Turnovsky (1990) for some early work on the effects of tax policies on capital accumulation. See Bacchetta
and Benhima (2010) on global imbalances and corporate demand for liquidity.
5
Unless otherwise specified, we refer to gross saving and investment rather than net saving and investment.
We prefer the gross concepts since they offer better data availability and also relate most naturally to accounting
identities for GDP. For example, the 1993 System of National Accounts states that “In general, the gross figure is
obviously the easier to estimate and may, therefore, be more reliable...” Nonetheless, corporate net saving in our
sample also rises significantly both as a share of total net saving and as a share of net domestic product.

5

of saving and the corporate labor share. We end the sample in 2007 to avoid problems from
differential availability of data across countries after that point.
To merge the data, we begin by using any statistics we are able to obtain from the Internet.
This is our preferred source as it is the most likely to include any data revisions. We then rank
all remaining sources by the number of available years of data for each country and use these
sources (in order) when the preferred sources lack data. While there are some exceptions, this
procedure typically implies that one or two sources contribute the bulk of the data for any given
country. These key sources do, however, differ across countries. The Appendix, which can be
found on the authors’ web pages, contains a detailed description of our baseline algorithm for
obtaining a single dataset from these disparate sources. The Appendix also lists all countries
in our dataset that have complete sectoral saving data as well as the years in which they enter
and exit the dataset. In the Appendix, we demonstrate the robustness of our core conclusions to
several alternative methodologies for merging across datasets, such as rules on “smooth pasting”
or restricting to only a single data source.
The key national accounting concepts used in the analyses below are represented in Figure
3. Broadly speaking, economic activity is divided in the SNA into the corporate (C), household
(H), and government (G) sector. Our core findings are not sensitive to excluding the financial
sector from the corporate sector. The household sector includes unincorporated businesses, sole
proprietors, non-profits serving households, and the actual and imputed rental income accruing
to non-corporate owners of housing. Nominal GDP Y less taxes net of subsidies on products
equals the sum of sectoral gross value added (final output less intermediate consumption):
Y − Taxproducts = QC + QH + QG .

(1)

The aggregate labor share equals total compensation of labor across all three sectors divided
by GDP, or sL = wn/Y , where w equals the average wage and n equals hours worked. We
instead focus on labor share in the corporate sector, sL,C = wC nC /QC , because this object is
closely related to corporate saving.6 An added benefit is that labor share measured within the
corporate sector is not impacted by the statistical imputation of wages from the combined capital
and labor income earned by sole-proprietors and unincorporated enterprises, highlighted by Gollin
(2002) as problematic for the consistent measurement of the labor share.
6

According to the SNA, compensation of employees includes wages and salaries in cash, wages and salaries
in kind, and employers’ social contributions for sickness, accidents, and retirement (to social security funds and
insurance enterprises). Though the treatment of gains associated with the exercise of stock options is subject to
data availability and is not uniform across countries, most developed countries try to account for the value of stock
options granted to employees as part of labor compensation (Lequiller, 2002).

6

Corporate gross value added QC equals the sum of compensation paid to labor wC nC , taxes
net of subsidies on production, and a residual category capturing all payments to the capital
factor, which in the data is called gross operating surplus:
QC = wC nC + Taxproduction,C + Gross Operating SurplusC .

(2)

The sum of gross operating surplus and taxes on production is disaggregated into profits ΠC and
“other payments to capital” OP KC . Other payments to capital is the only category on the right
of Figure 3 that is not a category found directly in the national accounts. Rather, we use it
to bundle together a number of sub-categories including, for example, taxes on production and
interest payments on loans.7 To maintain consistency with standard measurements of aggregate
labor share, we allocate taxes on production entirely to OP KC . We note that allocating a share
of these taxes to labor compensation produces an even larger decline in the global labor share.
Profits ΠC equal the corporate gross value added that remains after subtracting all payments
to labor and capital:
ΠC = QC − wC nC − OP KC = dC + SC .

(3)

Using this notation, we define the profit share as sΠ,C = ΠC /QC and the share of other payments
to capital in the corporate sector as sK,C = OP KC /QC . As can be seen in Figure 3, sL,C + sK,C +
sΠ,C = 1. Profits that are not distributed as dividends dC constitute corporate saving SC .
We stress that equity repurchases are not included in the national accounts measure of distributed dividends dC and therefore they constitute a use, and not a source, of corporate saving
(identical to the retirement of debt). Our model will conform to this differential treatment. From
an economic point of view, dividends and equity repurchases are alternative means of transferring
value to corporate shareholders. In our model, these two forms of payouts are not perfect substitutes, partly due to differential tax treatment. As we explain below, this imperfect substitutability
is important for our inference from the rise of corporate saving.

2.2

The Global Decline in Labor Shares

Figure 1 plots the evolution of the labor share of the corporate sector. This global aggregate was
constructed using our unbalanced panel of countries as:
P
sL,C (t) =

i∈Ω(t)

P

wCi (t)niC (t)

i∈Ω(t)

7

QiC (t)

,

(4)

The share of “other payments to capital” is significantly smaller than what “capital share” often means in
macro models. This is because we separate other payments to capital from profits.

7

where i denotes the country and Ω(t) is the set of countries in our data with observations on
both wC nC and QC in year t. All variables are converted into U.S. dollars using the average
market exchange rate for that year. If we calculate total labor share instead of corporate labor
share in our data, we get a nearly identical time series, but shifted downward by approximately
10 percentage points (owing in part to the inclusion of taxes in the denominator).8
The calculation in equation (4) simply adds up labor compensation and gross value added
across countries, which clearly places more weight on larger countries like the United States
and China. Most countries in the world, however, experienced this decline. Figure 4 shows the
estimated coefficients on linear trends in corporate labor shares for all 51 countries with data
available for at least 10 years.9 The coefficients are scaled such that the units represent the
percentage point change in corporate labor share every 10 years. 36 countries exhibited labor
share declines compared to 15 which experienced increases. Of those 39 countries where the
trends were statistically significant at the 5 percent level, the corporate labor share declined in
29 of them. The largest 8 economies are highlighted in red, and with the United Kingdom as the
only exception, they all exhibit statistically significant declines.
The corporate labor share of the global aggregate plotted in Figure 1 declines by 8.1 percentage
points between 1975 and 2007. This estimate is larger than what we use as our baseline in part
because countries entering our dataset after 1975 have lower levels of corporate labor shares.
To control for this change in composition in our unbalanced panel, we consider the evolution of
time fixed effects estimated in regressions that also absorb country fixed effects. When we run
this regression on the total set of countries with at least 10 years of available data, we obtain a
decline in the corporate labor share of 6.0 percentage points from 1975 to 2007. When we limit
the regression to the eight largest economies in 2000, the estimated decline equals 5.4 percent. If
instead we weight these regressions by corporate gross value added, we obtain estimated declines
of 4.3 and 4.7 percentage points, respectively. Averaging across these specifications, we obtain
our baseline decline in global corporate labor share of 5 percentage points.
Our findings on labor shares are consistent with earlier work by Blanchard (1997), Jones
(2003), and Bentolila and Saint-Paul (2003), which focuses on the variability of labor shares over
the medium run, including the large declines seen during the 1980s in Western Europe. Harrison
8

There are a number of countries which lack the data required to calculate corporate labor share, but which
have data on the overall labor share. In such cases, we use the aggregate figures but scale them up by the global
ratio of corporate to overall labor share sL,C /sL found in the dataset.
9
In all cross-country plots and regressions in this paper, we winsorize the single largest and smallest data points
in each dimension, keeping them in the plots and regressions, but setting their levels to that of the second largest
or smallest data points. Given the small number of observations in the cross section of countries, we do this to
have a consistently applied rule that prevents large outliers from obscuring all other empirical variation.

8

(2002) and Rodriguez and Jayadev (2010) use UN data and are the broadest studies of trends in
labor shares. Harrison (2002) finds a decreasing trend in the labor share of poor countries but
an increasing trend in rich countries for 1960-1997. Rodriguez and Jayadev (2010) estimate a
declining average trend in labor shares using an equally weighted set of 129 countries and report
that within-country changes in industrial composition are not causing this decline.
Our results improve and expand upon this related literature. We capture significant movements in the labor share that start around 2000, include important non-OECD countries such as
China, and use exchange rates to aggregate across countries and examine the global labor share.
Further, by focusing on the labor share in the corporate sector, rather than the overall labor share,
our results are less subject to measurement problems caused by the imputation of labor earnings
in unincorporated enterprises and by shifts in economic activity across sectors. Finally, we offer
evidence that variation in the labor share is strongly correlated with variation in components of
the user cost of capital and corroborate the importance of this relationship by jointly studying
the trend in corporate saving.
Such large and broad trends in the labor share may reflect contributions from multiple factors,
but we now present evidence showing that labor share declines correlate with declines in the
relative price of investment within and across countries as well as over time at the global level.
Our baseline source of information on the price of private investment and private consumption
goods is the Penn World Tables (PWT, mark 7.0). Since the PWT data are converted using
purchasing power parity exchange rates, which is undesirable for our exercise, we follow Restuccia
and Urrutia (2001) and use the PWT’s relative investment good price in each country divided by
this same ratio in the United States. We then multiply this by the ratio of the investment deflator
to the personal consumption expenditure deflator for the United States, obtained from the BEA,
to calculate a relative price of investment measured at domestic prices. To corroborate the PWT
data, some of our analyses also look at trends in the ratio of the fixed investment deflator to
the consumer price index, where the data are obtained for each country from the Economist
Intelligence Unit (EIU).
Figure 5 plots changes over time in the global GDP-weighted averages of these measures
together with the global corporate labor share. All series clearly decline together starting around
the early 1980s.10 We generally start our analyses in 1975 because prior to that the sample includes
10
Our model assumes that the decline in the price of investment goods is driven by supply (e.g. increasing
openness to international trade and growth in the information and communication technology industry). While
we do not seek to explain the global or cross-country patterns in the relative price of investment, we note that
demand-driven declines in the price of investment goods would be associated with decreasing corporate labor
shares, saving, and investment. See Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), Fisher (2006), and Justiniano,
Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) for discussions of investment-specific technological change in the United States.

9

a significantly smaller set of countries and is meaningfully impacted by changes in composition as
countries enter. Though that caveat remains important, Figure 5 highlights that there is strong
positive comovement between the price of investment goods and the labor share at the global
level even when considering time series with 60 years of data.
These global patterns are suggestive, but we now turn to the cross-country relationship between trends in the relative price of investment goods and trends in the corporate labor share
from 1975-2007, which we will use to calibrate our model in Section 4.1. Figure 6 plots estimated
trends in labor shares against those in relative investment prices for all countries with at least 10
years of data, with the trend coefficients scaled to equal the average change per 10 years. The
plot shows a clear positive relationship with a slope coefficient equal to 0.207 and with a p-value
of 0.02. We use this cross-sectional relationship to estimate an elasticity of substitution between
labor and capital in the production function that exceeds unity.11
In the Appendix, we present various robustness exercises. First, we present evidence that
changing industrial composition cannot on its own explain the decline in the labor share as the
trend is found strongly within the manufacturing and trade, transport, and communications sectors, and is also found, to a smaller extent, within the finance and construction sectors. Second, we
repeat our cross-sectional regressions for the countries that have at least 15 years of data, which
restricts our sample to predominantly OECD countries. Third, we repeat our cross-sectional
regressions using investment price data from the EIU. Finally, we examine the cross-sectional
relationship between trends in labor shares and corporate income taxes (that have fallen significantly for many countries). All exercises yield results highly similar to our base results.
To summarize, labor shares in the corporate sector have been declining throughout the world
over the last 30 years. This has been true in the world’s largest economies such as the United
States, China, Japan, and Germany, but also holds true for most developing countries for which
we have data. We provide evidence that declining labor shares are related to declines in the
relative price of investment using both time series and cross-sectional variation.

2.3

The Global Rise of Corporate Saving

Trends in corporate saving shares, like trends in labor shares, have been broad-based. In Figure 7
we present the estimated coefficients on linear trends in corporate saving relative to total saving
11

This relationship is also found using within-country time series variation. We measure the semi-elasticity
of the labor share with respect to the relative price of investment for each country and find a median value of
0.26 with a bootstrapped p-value of 0.01. We prefer to calibrate the production function using the cross section
of trends as this allows for permanent differences in labor shares due to measurement practices or industrial
composition. However, we get similar results when we estimate the cross-sectional relationship between levels of
relative investment prices and labor shares. For instance, the slope is 0.12 in 1980 and 0.21 in 1990.

10

for all 44 countries with more than 10 years of data. 30 of these countries exhibited increases in
the share of corporate saving. Of the 31 countries with statistically significant trends, 22 of these
are positive, including all of the largest 8 economies highlighted in red.
The corporate saving share for the global aggregate plotted in Figure 1 increases by 16.1
percentage points between 1975 and 2007. This estimate differs somewhat from our baseline
estimate of a 20 percentage point decline in large part due to changes in country composition
of our dataset. To obtain our baseline estimate, we run the same four regressions with time
and country fixed effects as we did to obtain our baseline estimate of the change in the global
corporate labor share. The four specifications differ in their treatment of weights and countries
included in the sample, but produce estimates of the increase in corporate saving as a share of
total saving equal to 21, 23, 17, and 25 percentage points.
In our model, firms increase investment in response to declining investment prices, and the
degree to which investment is funded by corporate saving depends on the strength of capital market imperfections. In parallel to the cross-sectional relationship used to calibrate the production
function, Figure 8 plots trends in corporate saving as a share of total saving against trends in
relative investment prices, where we include all countries with at least 10 years of observations.
The plot shows a clear negative relationship with a slope coefficient equal to -0.46 and with a
p-value of 0.07.12 In our model, we use this relationship to calibrate imperfections in the capital
market. In the Appendix, we report the robustness of this cross-sectional relationship to alternative methods for constructing our dataset as well as to the use of alternative proxies for changes
in the user cost of capital such as EIU investment prices and corporate tax rates.
To relate changes in corporate saving more explicitly to the labor share, we decompose the
corporate saving rate as:
SC
QC ΠC
=
Y
Y QC





dC
QC
dC
1−
=
(1 − sL,C − sK,C ) 1 −
.
ΠC
Y
ΠC

(5)

Corporate saving will rise relative to GDP as the corporate sector increases as a share of economic
activity, as the labor or the capital share declines, and as dividends decrease relative to profits.
Note that corporate saving as a share of total aggregate saving SC /S can be similarly decomposed
because it simply equals the ratio in (5) divided by the global saving rate S/Y , which is largely
stable over the time period we consider. Equation (5) is an accounting identity, and therefore
the above analysis links the global decline in the labor share to the global rise in corporate
12

This relationship is also found using within-country time series variation. We measure the semi-elasticity of
the corporate saving share with respect to the relative price of investment for each country and find a median
value of -0.49 with a bootstrapped p-value of 0.01.

11

saving, regardless of the cross-country composition of these changes. Nonetheless, we note that
the majority of countries in our data either experienced both a decline in their labor share and a
rise in corporate saving or experienced the reverse.
We add all countries with data on each of the three terms in equation (5) and plot (in logs)
their evolution in Figure 9, where all series are normalized to zero in 1975. The solid line shows
a roughly 0.3 log point increase in global corporate saving relative to GDP, the left-hand-side of
equation (5). This increase, by definition, must equal the sum of log changes in corporate value
added relative to GDP (QC /Y ), corporate profits relative to value added (1 − sL,C − sK,C ), and
the share of corporate profits that are retained (1−dC /ΠC ). The dashed line shows that there was
essentially no change in corporate value added relative to GDP. The increase in corporate saving
resulted from the large increase in corporate profits, plotted with the long-dashed line, which
itself resulted in large part from the decline in the labor share. A decline in the capital share
also made an important contribution. Dividend payments increased, as shown by the declining
short-dashed line, but this increase did not fully absorb the increase in profits.
Studying labor shares and corporate saving jointly is important in part because it disciplines
the type of shocks that can explain their large movements in the data. Our decomposition in
equation (5) makes clear that corporate saving and labor shares are integrally related, but need
not mechanically move in opposite directions. For example, reductions in competition might
increase markups and generate a reduction in the labor share. This explanation, however, would
likely lower investment rates and increase dividends to an extent that the corporate saving share
would decline. The mechanism highlighted by our model generates movements in profit, labor,
and saving shares consistent with those plotted in Figure 9.
To summarize, corporate labor shares around the world declined over the last three decades.
The scale of the corporate sector relative to GDP has not changed, other payments to capital
have declined as a share of corporate value added, and there has only been a moderate increase in
dividends relative to profits. As a result, there has been a significant increase in corporate saving
relative to GDP and relative to total saving. Both trends were strongest in countries with larger
declines in the relative price of investment goods.

3

CES Production and Capital Market Imperfections

We develop a general equilibrium economy consisting of a representative household, a government,
and a unit measure of ex-ante heterogeneous corporations owned by the household. Time is
discrete and the horizon is infinite, t = 0, 1, 2, ... We present several details of the model (such as

12

first-order and equilibrium conditions, derivations, and the numerical procedure we followed to
solve the model) in the Appendix.
There is neither aggregate nor idiosyncratic uncertainty and all economic agents have perfect
foresight. Corporations are heterogeneous with respect to their productivity z which is constant
over time and distributed according to the density function π(z). All firms produce a homogeneous good and aggregate final output is allocated between the consumption expenditures of the
household and the government and the investment expenditures of the household and corporations. The household saves to smooth its consumption over time and to self-finance its investment
in household capital (e.g. housing) which yields utility. Corporations save to self-finance their
investment in corporate capital such as equipment or software, which yields output and profits
consistent with the maximization of the firm’s value to shareholders.
Two elements differentiate our model from the standard neoclassical growth model. First, we
calibrate a CES production function that results in fluctuations in the labor share. Second, capital
market imperfections that restrict the flow of funds between the household and corporations imply
that the sectoral composition of saving is informative about macroeconomic allocations.

3.1

Household Sector

The representative household chooses consumption ct , labor supply nt , corporate bonds bct+1 (z),
government bonds bgt+1 , holdings of corporate shares θt+1 (z), household investment xht , and housing
h
in order to maximize the discounted sum of utilities:
capital kt+1

max
g

h
∞
{ct ,nt ,bct+1 (z),bt+1 ,θt+1 (z),xh
t ,kt+1 }t=0

∞
X

β t U (ct ) − N (nt ; χt ) + H kth ; νt



,

(6)

t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. We let χt and νt denote exogenous shifts in the preference
for work and for household capital. Consumption is our numeraire.
Following Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), investment expenditures of xht units of
the final good yield xht /ξth units of capital. These units are used to augment the household capital
h
stock and to cover adjustment costs equal to Ψh (kt+1
, kth ). The exogenous variable ξth denotes the

efficiency of household investment, with lower ξth denoting a higher efficiency. Letting δ h denote
the depreciation rate of household capital, the capital accumulation equation is:
h
kt+1
= (1 − δ h )kth +

xht
h
− Ψh (kt+1
, kth ).
ξth

(7)

In equilibrium, the household owns all corporate shares, so θt (z) = 1 for all t and z. Let

13

pt (z) be the ex-dividend equity value of a corporation with productivity z during period t. In
period t, the corporation can issue new equity or repurchase existing shares with a value denoted
by et (z) (where et (z) < 0 for repurchases). Capital gains inclusive of the impact of dilution
and repurchases, pt (z) − pt−1 (z) − et (z), are taxed on accrual at a rate τtg . During period t the
household receives dividends dt (z) from ownership of a corporation of type z. Dividends are taxed
at a rate τtd . Therefore, the total dividend income tax liability of the household in period t from
holding shares of corporation z is τtd dt (z)θt (z).
The household earns a wage wt in a competitive labor market. Labor income is taxed at a rate
τtn . The household chooses to hold one-period corporate bonds bct+1 (z) and one-period government
bonds bgt+1 . All bonds cost one unit of the consumption good and pay a common risk-free interest
rate rt+1 in the next period. From the point of view of the household, corporate and government
bonds are perfect substitutes. Interest income is taxed at a rate τtk . The depreciation of household
capital is deducted from personal interest income taxes. Finally, the household receives lump sum
transfers Tt from the government. The household’s budget constraint is:
ct +

xht

+

bgt+1

Z
+
Z


pt (z)θt+1 (z) + τtg (pt (z) − pt−1 (z) − et (z)) θt (z) + bct+1 (z) π(z)dz =


(1 − τtd )dt (z) + pt (z) − et (z) θt (z) + (1 + rt (1 − τtk ))bct (z) π(z)dz +
(1 + rt (1 − τtk ))bgt + Tt + τtk δ h kth + (1 − τtn )wt nt .

3.2

(8)

Corporate Sector

Corporations produce final output Qt with labor nt and corporate capital ktc according to the
production function Q(ktc , nt ; At , z). Since corporations own the capital stock (instead of renting
it), Qt denotes corporate gross value added.13 We denote by z and At the firm-specific and
aggregate levels of factor-neutral productivity. When no ambiguity arises, we typically omit the
argument z in describing an individual firm’s problem.
Firms operate a CES production technology:
κσ
 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1  σ−1
σ−1
Qt = zAt αkκσ (ktc ) σ + αnκσ nt σ
,

(9)

where κ ≤ 1 is the returns to scale parameter, σ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor, and αk and αn are parameters which we later calibrate to match the average
labor share in corporate income. The choice of a CES technology with elasticity greater than
13

Qt in the model is what we called QC in the empirical analysis for the corporate sector. Similarly, we drop
the C subscript for dividends, profits, and all variables when it does not produce ambiguity.

14

one rather than a Cobb-Douglas technology (with an elasticity equal to one) is essential for
producing declines in the labor share in response to declines in the cost of capital relative to the
wage because firms increase their capital-labor ratios more than they would with Cobb-Douglas
production. The firm demands labor up to the point where the marginal product of labor equals
the wage, yielding a labor demand function. We define the corporate gross operating surplus yt as
the difference between output and payments to labor, yt = Q(ktc , nt ; At , z) − wt nt . The corporate
labor share is defined as sL,t = wt nt /Qt .
Corporate capital evolves identically to household capital, but with investment efficiency,
capital adjustment costs, and depreciation rates specific to the corporate sector:
c
kt+1
= (1 − δ c )ktc +

xct
c
− Ψc (kt+1
, ktc ).
c
ξt

(10)

We treat ξtc as representing the relative price of corporate investment. We calibrate its movement
using the empirical analyses reported in Figures 5, 6, and 8.
Following Gomes (2001) and Hennessy and Whited (2005), equity financing is costly because
of asymmetric information or transaction costs. Specifically, we assume that there exists an
intermediary firm (“bank”) that channels equity flows from the household to the firm. For each
unit of new equity raised (et > 0) in period t, only λet units actually augment the firm’s funds,
where λ ∈ [0, 1]. In other words, (1 − λ)et units are paid to the bank in “flotation costs.” We
write the equity raised or repurchased by a corporation as E(et ) = min{et , λet } and therefore
et − E(et ) represents flotation costs. Flotation costs are rebated back to the household.
In each period t, the flow of funds constraint for a corporation is:
xct + dt + (1 + rt )bct = (1 − τtc )yt + τtc (δ c ktc + rt bct ) + bct+1 + E(et ).

(11)

The left hand side of the flow of funds denotes the uses of funds. The corporation purchases
capital goods xct , distributes dividends dt , and repays principal and interest on its debt (1 + rt )bct .
The right hand side of the flow of funds denotes the sources of funds. The corporation earns
a gross operating surplus yt which is taxed at a rate τtc , issues debt bct+1 , issues or repurchases
equity E(et ), and receives a tax shield due to the expensing of capital depreciation and debt
interest payments. Profits equal gross operating surplus, less corporate taxes and equity flotation
costs, less debt interest payments, net of tax reductions from expensing interest payments and
depreciation:
Πt = yt (1 − τtc ) − (et − E (et )) − rt bct (1 − τtc ) + τtc δ c ktc .

(12)

Corporate saving equals corporate profits less dividends paid, Stc = Πt − dt . Combining
15

equations (11) and (12), we see that corporate investment, equity repurchases, and repayment of
debt are the three uses of corporate saving:

Stc = xct + (−et ) + bct − bct+1 .

(13)

Equivalently, corporate investment is funded by corporate saving, equity issuance, and new net
bond issuance.
Corporations are subject to the following financial constraints:
dt ≥ 0,

(14)

c
(1 + rt+1 )bct+1 ≤ ηkt+1
,

(15)


et ≥ − e0 + e1 ktc .

(16)

Constraint (14) requires that corporations cannot distribute negative dividends to increase corporate saving without limits. Constraint (15) limits debt with a collateral constraint as in Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997) and Hennessy and Whited (2005). Given the tax shield on corporate debt, the
collateral constraint always binds. Corporations may not default on their debt.
The crucial constraint in our model is (16). As we discuss below, firms prefer transferring
value to shareholders with equity buybacks rather than by dividends because the dividend tax is
higher than the capital gains tax. For this reason, some repurchases by U.S. firms may lead the
Internal Revenue Service to treat them as dividends. As such, we follow Poterba and Summers
(1985) and Gourio and Miao (2011) and introduce a lower bound on et to limit repurchases and
capture this regulatory constraint. While we call negative values of et equity repurchases, we
think of et < 0 more broadly as capturing all pre-dividend distributions or transactions affecting
the net lending position of the corporate sector. For instance, issuance of corporate debt net of
purchases of government bonds in steady state can be thought as being captured by et .
When the parameter e0 in the constraint (16) increases, the level of corporate saving increases
because a larger amount of these alternatives to dividend payments are allowed. We calibrate e0 to
match the dividend to profit ratio (which affects the level of corporate saving). As can be seen from
equation (13), when e1 increases, the difference between corporate saving and investment increases
in response to a given decrease in the cost of capital that expands the capital stock. At the same
time, an increase in e1 lowers the user cost of capital and increases desired investment. As a result,
through constraint (16), corporate saving becomes informative about corporate investment. We
calibrate e1 to match the cross-sectional relationship between trends in corporate saving shares

16

and trends in the relative price of investment goods.
In each period t a corporation of type z chooses labor demand {ns }∞
s=t , an investment policy
c
∞
∞
∞
{xcs }∞
s=t , a debt policy {bs+1 }s=t , a dividend policy {ds }s=t , and an equity policy {es }s=t that

maximize the value of shares owned by the existing shareholders in the beginning of period t,
including the concurrent after-tax distribution of dividends. To value the corporation we use the
fact that the household is willing to hold equity only if the after-tax return to equity equals the
after-tax return to other uses of funds. The value of the firm Vt can be expressed as:
Vt =

∞
X

max

c
,xs }∞
{ns ,ds ,es ,bcs+1 ,ks+1
s=t

βsc



s=t

1 − τsd
1 − τsg




ds − es ,

(17)

where we define:
c
βt+s

= Qs

1

j=0 Γt+j


, Γt+s = 1 +

k
1 − τt+s
g
1 − τt+s



rt+s , and βtc = 1, ∀s > 0,

subject to the capital accumulation constraint (10), the flow of funds constraint (11), and the
financial policy constraints (14)-(16). We let βtc qt , βtc µdt , βtc µbt , and βtc µet be the period-t multipliers
on the capital accumulation constraint, the dividend constraint, the debt constraint, and the
equity repurchase constraint respectively. The coefficient on dividends in the objective function
of the corporation reflects the fact that with differential dividend and capital gains tax rates,
shareholders do not value a unit of dividends equally to a unit of equity repurchases. To produce
well-defined solutions to corporate financial policy, we assume that τtd > τtg . Note here that βtc
evolves endogenously and captures the important general equilibrium element that households
will value payouts more in some periods and less in others.
We let Qk,t+1 (.) denote the marginal product of capital in period t + 1 and define the firm’s
user cost of capital as:
c
ut+1 = (1 − τt+1
)Qk,t+1 .

(18)

To summarize the most important intuitions of corporate investment and financial policy, here
we assume that there are no adjustment costs, no corporate bonds, no taxes on corporate profits,
capital gains, or interest income, that dividend taxes and the price of investment goods are
always constant, and that the equity repurchase constraint is et ≥ −e0 . Under these simplifying
assumptions, the optimal corporate capital stock is determined by the condition:

Qk,t+1 = (1 + rt+1 )

1 − τ d + µdt
1 − τ d + µdt+1



− (1 − δ c ) .

(19)

If the multiplier on the dividend constraint were constant, the optimal next-period capital
17

c
stock kt+1
would also be constant at a level such that the marginal product of capital Qk,t+1

equals the user cost (rt+1 + δ c ). Intuitively, in the absence of financial constraints and without
any capital adjustment costs, the firm always chooses its investment to hit some target capital
stock that is determined by the interest rate, depreciation, and technology. Figure 10 shows the
firm’s decision rules as a function of initial capital stock ktc under our simplifying assumptions.
c
The left panel shows that the policy function for kt+1
is not completely flat, revealing that the

dividend multiplier µdt changes as we vary ktc .
As shown in the middle panel of Figure 10, our model embodies a “pecking order” for sources
of corporate finance. When the firm starts with a low capital stock ktc (region A in the figure),
it will issue equity to invest and reach a higher level of capital stock as determined by equation
(19). Note that in this region, the multipliers are such that µdt > µdt+1 > 0, which raises the user
cost of capital relative to the case in which the firm always pays dividends. At some levels of the
capital stock (region B), the firm is rich enough that, to avoid paying flotation costs, it finances
higher investment with internal funds rather than with new equity. The optimal capital stock
c
therefore increases in ktc , as shown in the left panel of the figure.
kt+1

As ktc increases further (region C), the firm distributes resources back to the shareholders.
We assume that dividends have a tax disadvantage relative to capital gains, τ d > τ g . Therefore,
the firm uses each additional unit of output from operating the capital stock ktc to purchase back
its equity (et < 0) until the equity repurchase constraint −e0 binds. When dividend taxes are
sufficiently high, there is another region (region D) in which additional units of capital ktc are
c
invested in increasing the physical capital stock kt+1
, before the firm distributes any dividends.

Finally, when the firm is very rich, each additional unit of output is distributed as dividends to
c
is determined as the solution to the equation
the shareholders (region E). In this region, kt+1

that sets the marginal product of capital equal to the user cost of capital (rt+1 + δ c ), as in a
model without any financial constraints. The right panel of Figure 10 shows that the relationship
between corporate saving and investment differs across the five regions and therefore depends on
the constraints governing corporate financial policy.

3.3

Equilibrium

We denote government’s spending by Gt . The government’s budget constraint is:
Z


τtd dt (s) + τtg (pt − pt−1 − et ) + τtk rt bct + τtc yt + et − E(et ) π(z)dz =
Z
g
g
Gt + Tt + (1 + rt )bt − bt+1 + (τtc δ c ktc + τtc rt bct ) π(z)dz + τtk δ h kth − τtk rt bgt .

τtn wt nt

+

18

(20)

The government taxes at a rate of 100 percent the revenues of the bank from intermediating
equity flows and rebates the proceeds lump-sum to the household.
We define an equilibrium for this economy as a sequence of prices and quantities such that,
given a sequence of exogenous variables: (i) taking prices as given, household policies maximize
household’s utility (6) subject to the budget constraint and the capital accumulation constraint;
(ii) taking prices as given, corporate policies maximize the value of the firm (17) subject to the
flow of funds, the capital accumulation constraint, and the financial constraints; (iii) government
transfers adjust to always satisfy the budget constraint (20); and (iv) labor, bond, equity, and
goods markets clear in every date. We define a steady state as an equilibrium in which all variables
are constant over time.

3.4

Perfect Capital Markets and Composition Neutrality of Saving

It is straightforward to evaluate the impact of the CES production function by comparing our
results to the results in a model with Cobb-Douglas production. To evaluate the impact of
capital market imperfections, we now develop a model with perfect capital markets. With perfect
capital markets, an integrated unit, the “planner,” maximizes household utility and operates firms’
technologies by shifting resources freely across the two sectors. Comparing our model to the model
with perfect capital markets illustrates the conditions under which the composition of saving
between the corporate and household sectors is informative about macroeconomic outcomes. We
refer to this concept as the “composition non-neutrality of saving.”
In the perfect capital markets model, the planner is allowed to transfer resources Rt (z) without
cost between the corporate and household sectors. This implies that there is a single resource
constraint:14
ct +
Z

xht

Z
+

xct (z)π(z)dz + bgt+1 − (1 + rt (1 − τtk ))bgt − Tt − τtk δ h kth =

((1 − τtc ) (Qt (ktc (z), nct (z)) − wt nct (z)) + τtc δ c ktc (z)) π(z)dz + (1 − τtn )wt nht .

(21)

The planner’s problem in the economy with perfect capital markets is to choose the allocations
to maximize household’s utility (6) subject to the household capital constraint (7), the corporate
capital constraint for each firm (10), and the planner’s resource constraint (21).
Note that in the absence of capital market imperfections, this model – like the standard
neoclassical growth model – does not admit a well defined notion of “corporate” and “household”
14

The planner chooses separately the supply nht and the demand nct for labor. This allows us to fix the
government-induced distortions to be similar across the two models.

19

saving. The variable Rt (z) can be thought of either as corporate saving (or corporate gross
disposable income) or as dividends distributed back to the household and therefore part of the
household’s gross disposable income. The sectoral composition of saving is not informative about
macroeconomic outcomes because multiple possible observed compositions of national saving yield
identical allocations in the economy.
In Section 4, we explore the quantitative importance of the composition non-neutrality of
saving and its relationship to the underlying parameters that summarize the imperfections in
the capital market. Here, we summarize analytically the difference between our model and the
alternative model with perfect capital markets by comparing the user cost of capital in the two
models. For any corporation z in the model with perfect capital markets the user cost is:
uP,t+1 =

ξtc

1+ 1−

k
τt+1





rt+1 (1 +

Ψc1,t )

−

c
ξt+1





c
τt+1
c
c
1− 1− c
δ − Ψ2,t+1 ,
ξt+1

(22)

while in our baseline model with capital market imperfections, the user cost is:

uI,t+1



1−τtd




d
k
+ µt

1 − τt+1
1−τ g
 1 + Ψc1,t − ηµbt −
= ξtc 1 +
rt+1  1−τ d t
g
t+1
1 − τt+1
+ µdt+1
g
1−τt+1




c
µe e1
τt+1
c
c
c
δ − Ψ2,t+1 − 1−τ d t+1
.
ξt+1 1 − 1 − c
t+1
ξt+1
+ µd
g
1−τt+1

(23)

t+1

Comparing equation (22) to (23), and fixing tax rates to be constant over time, we see that
capital gain taxes (τtg ), evolving dividend multipliers (µdt 6= µdt+1 ), binding debt constraints (µbt > 0
and η > 0), and binding equity repurchase constraints (µet+1 > 0 and e1 > 0) introduce a wedge
between the user cost of capital in the economy with imperfect capital markets and the user cost
of capital in the economy with perfect capital markets. When user costs differ, the allocations
between the two models will differ. As a result, in the model with imperfect capital markets
corporate saving is not only well-defined but also informative about macroeconomic allocations.

4

Quantitative Results

In this section, we calibrate the model and present our quantitative results.

4.1

Calibration

Each period in the model corresponds to a year. Whenever possible we calibrate the model to
match moments of the global aggregate observed in our 1975-2007 sample. We summarize the
20

calibrated parameters in Table 1. We remove time subscripts to denote steady state values of
time-varying exogenous or endogenous variables. Here we describe the calibration of the key
parameters, αk and σ in the production function (9) and e0 and e1 in the equity repurchase
constraint (16). The calibration of all other parameters is standard and discussed in the Appendix.
The four parameters are calibrated to jointly match four moments in our global dataset.
Two of the moments are associated with the labor share and the other two with corporate saving.
Specifically, we target: (i) a steady state corporate labor share sL = 0.614, which equals the global
average of the corporate labor share in Figure 1; (ii) a cross-sectional relationship between trends
in corporate labor shares and trends in the log of investment prices d (sL ) /d (log ξ c ) = 0.207,
equal to that documented in Figure 6; (iii) a steady state dividend to profit ratio of d/Π = 0.279,
which equals the global average underlying the construction of corporate saving as a share of total
saving in Figure 1; and (iv) a cross-sectional relationship between trends in corporate saving as
a share of total saving and trends in the log of investment prices d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ) = −0.460,
equal to that documented in Figure 8. To generate the cross-sectional relationships in our model,
we introduce a negative shock to the investment price ξ c and examine steady state to steady state
changes in corporate labor shares and corporate saving shares. This yields the values αk = 0.1329,
σ = 1.422, e0 = −0.0002, and e1 = 0.0123.

4.2

Steady State Results

The first column of Table 2 summarizes the steady state of the model with capital market imperfections.15 As shown in Row (ii) of the table, corporations account for 66 percent of aggregate
gross investment in the economy, a number close to the average value of 69 percent in our sample
(after subtracting government investment). Row (iii) shows that the model produces a composition of saving that is more tilted towards corporations (roughly 80 percent) than what we observe
in the data (around 55 percent). Similarly, the model exhibits an elevated level of corporate saving to GDP. These differences are to be expected, however, because our model does not contain
unincorporated businesses nor do we have an elaborate description of the government sector.
Instead, we focus on successfully reproducing the relevant terms of the decomposition in
equation (5), which expressed corporate saving relative to GDP as the product of three terms: the
share of economic activity produced in the corporate sector QC /Y , the profit share 1−sL,C −sK,C ,
and the fraction of corporate profits that are retained 1 − dC /ΠC . Our model matches the
data closely on both the profit share and the dividend to profits ratio. Therefore, differences in
15

After calibrating our baseline model (CES model with imperfect capital markets), we rescale productivity A
in the Cobb-Douglas model so that the Cobb-Douglas model and the CES model share the same initial steady
state under imperfect capital markets.

21

corporate saving shares in our model relative to the data appropriately reflect the fact that in the
model almost 95 percent of GDP is produced within the corporate sector while the corresponding
number in the data is only around 65 percent.
Row (xiii) shows that the steady state user cost of capital in the model with capital market
imperfections is 7.2 percent, which is 16 percent higher than the user cost of capital in the
model with perfect capital markets. Quantitatively, capital gains taxes account for most of
this difference, since the equity buyback constraint tends to lower the user cost in the model
with capital market imperfections and the dividend constraint matters only when it binds along
the transitional dynamics. The increased user cost of capital explains the lower capital stock,
consumption, investment, and GDP in the model with capital market imperfections relative to
the model with perfect capital markets.
The second column of Table 2 reports steady state values in the CES model with capital
market imperfections relative to the CES model with perfect capital markets. Similarly, the third
column reports relative steady state values in the Cobb-Douglas model. As columns 2 and 3
show, the steady state gap between imperfect and perfect capital markets is larger in the CES
model relative to the Cobb-Douglas model. This is because the higher user cost of capital under
imperfect capital markets implies a larger decline in the steady state capital-to-labor ratio when
the elasticity of substitution σ is higher. A higher capital-to-labor ratio in our model generally
implies higher GDP, corporate investment, and consumption.16

4.3

Negative Investment Price Shock

Having characterized the steady state of the calibrated model, we now consider how this steady
state changes in response to a negative investment price shock. We focus on steady state to steady
state comparisons because this requires no assumptions about agents’ expectations regarding the
in-sample and future path of the shock, the timing with which those expectations change, and
the function for adjustment costs in capital accumulation. In the Appendix, we present the full
transition path for the investment price shock and for the other shocks considered below.17
We feed into the model a decline in the price of investment ξ c from 1 in the initial steady state
to 0.79 in the final steady state, which is consistent with the GDP-weighted average change in
16

Labor productivity is a function of the capital-to-labor ratio. Our preferences imply that substitution and
income effects on labor supply from wage changes cancel out. Therefore, labor productivity is closely related to
output.
17
In general, we find that along the transition from 1975 to 2007, the model generates roughly half of the
responses that the steady state to steady state comparisons generate. It is not surprising that responses are muted
relative to the steady state to steady state comparisons given that the model’s transition to the final steady state
takes significantly more than 33 years.

22

the relative price of investment observed over time in the PWT data. We compare the response
to this shock in four models. The models either feature Cobb-Douglas or CES production and
either have perfect or imperfect capital markets. Our two-sector version of the neoclassical growth
model features Cobb-Douglas production and has perfect capital markets. The baseline model
presented above departs from the neoclassical model both because of CES production and because
of capital market imperfections. The two other models introduce separately our two departures.
The last column of Table 3 shows the steady state to steady state change in key variables of
our baseline model with CES production and capital market imperfections following the ξ c shock.
Our model produces a 5.3 percentage point decrease in the labor share. The CES model without
capital market imperfections, shown in the penultimate column, generates a 5.8 percentage point
decline in the labor share because the relative input price (the wage divided by the user cost
of capital) increases by even more than in our baseline model. By contrast, in the two models
with Cobb-Douglas production, the labor shares are constant. Corporate saving in our model
increases by 11.8 percent as a share of total saving, significantly more than the 7.2 percentage
point increase in the Cobb-Douglas model with capital market imperfections.
Table 3 highlights the important interaction between the non-unitary elasticity of substitution and capital market imperfections introduced jointly in one model. For example, Row (xi)
shows that in the Cobb-Douglas economy, the corporate capital stock increases by only 0.019 log
points more in the model with perfect capital markets relative to the model with capital market
imperfections. By contrast, in the CES economy the corporate capital stock increases by 0.059
log points more in the model with perfect capital markets relative to the model with capital
market imperfections. As a result, differences in consumption and GDP growth between the two
Cobb-Douglas economies equal 0.001 and 0.008 log points, whereas in the two CES economies
they differ by 0.025 and 0.045 log points. In Section 4.5 we highlight that the interaction between
capital markets imperfections and the shape of the production function applies more broadly in
response to other shocks.
The comparison between the four models in Table 3 quantifies the effect of ignoring the
information contained individually or jointly in the two key global trends documented in Figure
1. Our baseline results are from a model calibrated to a cross-sectional slope between trends in
labor shares and trends in log investment prices equal to d (sL ) /d (log ξ c ) = 0.207 and a crosssectional slope between trends in corporate saving shares and trends in log investment prices
equal to d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ) = −0.460. We now instead consider how the economy’s response
would change if we hypothetically observed and calibrated our model to different cross-sectional
relationships in these trends in our data.
23

Figure 11 shows the steady state to steady state growth in GDP for the various calibrations of
our model in response to the same negative investment price shock as in our baseline results.18 We
plot GDP growth for these hypothetical calibrations relative to growth in calibrations targeting
d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ) = −0.460. This allows us to highlight the quantitative interaction of the two
calibrated moments. Consider first the solid line which represents the Cobb-Douglas calibration
(σ = 1) that we would choose if we hypothetically observed no cross-sectional relationship between
labor shares and investment prices. In response to the negative investment price shock, this
economy generates GDP growth that is 1.2 percentage point higher when also calibrated to match
our actual estimated relationship between corporate saving and investment prices than when
calibrated to target a hypothetical lack of correlation between corporate saving and investment
prices in the cross section. By contrast, consider the models represented along the bottom line
in the plot, which are calibrated to match a hypothetical cross-sectional relationship between
labor shares and investment prices equal to d (sL ) /d (log ξ c ) = 0.414 (corresponding to σ roughly
equal to 1.8). This model generates 2.2 percentage points more GDP growth when calibrated
to match our actual estimated relationship between corporate saving and investment prices than
when calibrated to target a hypothetical situation in which corporate saving and investment prices
are uncorrelated in the cross section. On the other hand, as Figure 11 shows, there seems to be
negligible variation in GDP growth across different labor share and investment price relationships
as we calibrate the models to target slopes of corporate saving on investment prices that exceed
our benchmark estimate of -0.46.
To summarize, these exercises corroborate our central point that declines in the labor share and
increases in the corporate saving share were both driven in large part by declines in the relative
price of investment. Further, information contained in these trends matters quantitatively for
understanding the economy’s response to these declines.

4.4

Can Our Model Reproduce the Global Empirical Patterns?

Our general equilibrium model allows us to assess how household saving and investment decisions
respond to shocks in the corporate sector and vice-versa. In our model household saving do not
offset one-to-one higher corporate saving to stabilize total saving to GDP. The reason is that,
in response to the decline in the price of investment goods, total investment to GDP increases
which requires an equal increase in total saving to GDP. The total investment rate increases
both because corporate investment increases relative to GDP in response to the lower price of
18

In all calibrations, we simultaneously vary all four parameters αk , σ, e0 , and e1 , to target a steady state labor
share of 0.614, a steady state dividend to profit ratio of 0.279, and various combinations of d (sL ) /d (log ξ c ) and
d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ).

24

investment goods and because household investment increases relative to GDP in response to the
higher household wealth generated by the lower price of investment goods. The fourth column of
Row (vii) of Table 3 shows that, in response to the decline in the price of investment goods, total
saving relative to GDP grows by 4 percentage points.
In the data, however, household saving as a share of global GDP decreased and total saving
as a share of global GDP remained roughly constant between 1975 and 2007. (In fact, the global
saving rate declined slightly over this period, but for our purposes here it is sufficient and clearer
to focus on its relative stability.) Interpreted through our model, this implies that there were
additional shocks beyond just the reduced investment price influencing these trends. In this subsection, we emphasize the cross-sector feedback in our general equilibrium model and assess the
extent to which our model can match the changing composition of saving observed in the data
while maintaining a stable level of total saving to GDP.
To generate the reduction in household saving rates found in the data and needed to stabilize
the total saving rate, we now add additional shocks to the ξ c shock described above. The first
column of Table 4 again lists how key statistics of our model change in response to the ξ c shock.
The second column shows steady state to steady steady changes if, in addition to the ξ c shock,
we introduce a negative shock to the depreciation rate on household capital δ h . Since households
save in part to replenish depreciated capital, we calibrate a change in δ h to offset the increase in
aggregate saving coming from the decline in ξ c . Alternatively, one can think that the household’s
discount factor β decreased. This experiment is reported in the third column. In this exercise we
also reduce the tax on interest payments τ k to reverse the resulting increase in the real interest
rate (the real interest rate also does not exhibit a trend in our global data from 1975-2007).
Rows (i) and (ii) show that both experiments produce movements in the corporate labor share
and corporate saving share consistent with the movements in the global aggregate constructed
in our data and listed in the final column.19 The discount factor shock is different from the
depreciation shock because the former also affects the corporate user cost of capital. With the
household depreciation shock, the labor share declines by 5.3 percentage points and the corporate
saving share increases by 23.8 percentage points. With the discount factor shock, the labor share
declines by 3.3 percentage points and the corporate saving share increases by 11.4 percentage
points. In all these experiments, total saving relative to GDP and the real interest rate are by
construction held constant.
19

We consider changes for this “global aggregate” to be appropriate benchmarks because our global shocks are
similarly constructed and ignore the impact of changing composition in our dataset. We remind the reader that our
baseline results from fixed effects regressions offer an alternative benchmark for comparison and imply a decline
in global labor share of 5 percentage points and a rise in global corporate saving share of 20 percentage points.

25

In addition to the price of investment goods, other components of the user cost such as
corporate income taxes τ c , dividend taxes τ d , and capital gain taxes τ g have all declined globally
over the last 30 years. Therefore, in the fourth column of Table 4, we introduce the ξ c shock
simultaneously with a reduction of the corporate income tax rate of roughly 10 percentage points,
as calculated from OECD data. In the fifth column we further add 30 percentage point declines
in dividend and capital gains tax rates, as is consistent with the OECD data. As before, in both
cases we add shocks to the discount factor and the tax rate on interest income to stabilize total
saving as a share of GDP and the real interest rate.20 In all cases, the decrease in the user cost
of capital produces even larger declines in labor shares and larger increases in corporate saving
shares. Detailed analyses of the transition path in response to all shocks given in each column of
Table 4 can be found in the Appendix. We interpret these results as confirming that our model
can indeed reproduce the global patterns focused on in Figure 1 and discussed above.

4.5

Broader Macro Implications

The information contained in trends in labor shares and corporate saving shares allows us to
calibrate the production function and capital market imperfections which govern the economy’s
response to shocks. Thus far we have focused on the relevance of this information for understanding the response to the global investment price shock experienced over the last 30 years.
Now, we generalize our analysis to highlight that the information contained in trends in labor
and corporate saving shares is important for the economy’s response to a broader class of shocks.
As before, we compare the response of the four models listed in Table 3 (CES or Cobb-Douglas,
and perfect or imperfect capital markets). This allows us to quantify the effects of capital market
imperfections on the growth of various macroeconomic objects such as GDP, consumption, and
welfare as a function of the shape of the production function. In our model the growth in these
objects is closely related to the growth in the capital-to-labor ratio. For this reason, we now
explicitly relate growth from the initial steady state in the capital-to-labor ratio in the model
with imperfect capital markets (denoted by I) to growth in the capital-to-labor ratio in the
model with perfect capital markets (denoted by P ):
d (kIc /nI ) / (kIc /nI )
=
d (kPc /nP ) / (kPc /nP )

!




uσ−1
−
1
(1
−
s
)
1
σ (duR /uR )
L,I
R
1−
1−
,
sL,I
sL,P
d (kPc /nP ) / (kPc /nP )
(24)

20

We prefer adding a discount factor shock to the depreciation rate shock because the latter produces a decline
in dividends relative to profits whereas the former produces an increase in dividends relative to profits. Figure 9
shows that dividends increased relative to profits in the data.

26

where uR = uI /uP > 1 denotes the ratio of user costs in the models with imperfect capital markets
relative to the models with perfect capital markets, and sL,I and sL,P denote initial steady state
values of the labor share in the models with imperfect and perfect capital markets respectively.21
A special but interesting case of equation (24) is obtained when shocks do not change the ratio
of user costs (duR = 0), which implies that the term in brackets equals one. For example, TFP
shocks do not change uR from one steady state to another. As an illustration, we first consider
an unanticipated and permanent increase in TFP by 20 percent relative to its initial steady state
level. The dashed line in Figure 12(a) shows the cumulative difference between the growth in
GDP with perfect capital markets and that with imperfect capital markets in the Cobb-Douglas
economy (σ = 1). Substituting duR = 0 and σ = 1 into equation (24) yields that long-run growth
in capital-to-labor ratios – and therefore cumulative growth in GDP – is not impacted by capital
market imperfections for the Cobb-Douglas economy. Indeed, the dashed line converges to zero.
The solid line in Figure 12(a) plots the same difference in response to the same TFP shock
but for the CES economy with our estimated elasticity σ = 1.42. In contrast to the CobbDouglas economy, the line always remains positive and indicates that market imperfections hinder
the response of GDP to the shock. The result can be corroborated analytically by substituting
duR = 0 into equation (24). The term in parenthesis captures an interaction between the elasticity
of substitution in the production function and the level of capital market imperfections. This
term is less than one when σ > 1 which causes the capital-to-labor ratio to change in magnitude
by proportionately less under imperfect capital markets. Therefore, in response to TFP increases,
GDP growth under perfect capital markets exceeds GDP growth under imperfect capital markets.
Further, equation (24) shows that, in response to shocks that increase the capital-to-labor ratio,
as σ increases the capital-to-labor ratio in the model with perfect capital markets grows by more
relative to that in the model with imperfect capital markets.
Figure 12(b) considers the same comparison but in response to a decline in TFP of 20 percent.
Capital market imperfections continue to have no effect on the long-run response of GDP in the
Cobb-Douglas economy. In the CES economy, GDP declines more with perfect capital markets
than with imperfect capital markets. Equation (24) shows that, in response to shocks that
decrease the capital-to-labor ratio, as σ increases the capital-to-labor ratio in the model with
perfect capital markets declines by more relative to that in the model with imperfect capital
markets.
21

In the Appendix we show how to derive this equation under the simplifying assumptions of constant returns
to scale and a representative firm. We emphasize that the conclusions drawn below using equation (24) may apply
more broadly than in our model because they reflect forces which emerge in any framework where frictions impact
the level and growth of the user cost of capital.

27

Finally, consider the more general case in which shocks change the ratio of user costs (duR 6= 0).
The term in brackets will no longer equal one and the term σ(duR /uR ) shows explicitly the
interaction between the elasticity of substitution in the production function and the growth of
capital market imperfections. Various shocks change the ratio of user costs from one steady state
to another. Examples include changes in household’s discount factor β, changes in the corporate
depreciation rate δ c , changes in parameters related to capital markets imperfections such as e1
and η, and changes in the price of investment ξ c . In the case of the ξ c shock focused on in
the above sections, the ratio of user costs increases (duR > 0). In this case, as the elasticity σ
increases, growth in the capital-to-labor ratio with perfect capital markets increases even more
relative to that with imperfect capital markets.

5

Conclusion

For three decades, corporate labor shares have declined throughout the world. Declines of the
labor share were associated with a profound and equally pervasive shift in the supply of global
saving from households to corporations. Whereas in 1975 a majority of global investment was
funded by household saving, in recent years global investment is funded primarily from corporate
saving.
Standard macro models have little to say about these broad trends because they typically
assume a stable labor share and do not admit a well-defined notion of corporate saving. By
contrast, we write a model in which these two trends emerge in response to declines in the
relative price of investment goods, consistent with cross-country and time-series variation in the
data. We use the model to demonstrate that the joint behavior of the labor share and corporate
saving is qualitatively and quantitative informative for how the economy will respond to a wide
class of shocks, with additional implications for such issues as the importance of capital market
imperfections, inequality, and the identification of the shocks driving macroeconomic dynamics.

28

References
Antras, P. (2004): “Is the U.S. Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New Estimates
of the Elasticity of Substitution,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 4(1).
Armenter, R., and V. Hnatkovska (2011): “The Macroeconomics of Firms’ Savings,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 12-1.
Auerbach, A. J. (1979): “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 93(3), 433–46.
Bacchetta, P., and K. Benhima (2010): “The Demand for Liquid Assets, Corporate Saving,
and Global Imbalances,” Working Paper, Universite de Lausanne.
Bayoumi, T., H. Tong, and S.-J. Wei (2010): “The Chinese Corporate Savings Puzzle: A
Firm-level Cross-country Perspective,” NBER Working Paper No. 16432.
Bentolila, S., and G. Saint-Paul (2003): “Explaining Movements in the Labor Share,” The
B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 3(1).
Blanchard, O. (1997): “The Medium Run,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 89–158.
Fisher, J. D. (2006): “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413–51.
Gollin, D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 458–
74.
Gomes, J. F. (2001): “Financing Investment,” The American Economic Review, 91(5), 1263–85.
Gourio, F., and J. Miao (2010): “Firm Heterogeneity and the Long-run Effects of Dividend
Tax Reform,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1), 131–68.
(2011): “Transitional Dynamics of Dividend and Capital Gains Tax Cuts,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 14, 368–83.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
Investment-Specific Technological Change,” The American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–62.
Harrison, A. (2002): “Has Globalization Eroded Labor’s Share? Some Cross-Country Evidence,” Working Paper, University of California at Berkeley.
Hennessy, C. A., and T. M. Whited (2005): “Debt Dynamics,” The Journal of Finance,
60(3), 1129–65.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2007): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” The American Economic Review, 97(3), 562–85.
29

Hsieh, C.-T., and J. A. Parker (2006): “Taxes and Growth in a Financially Underdeveloped
Country: Evidence from the Chilean Investment Boom,” NBER Working Paper No. 12104.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,” The
American Economic Review, 102(1), 238–71.
Jones, C. (2003): “Growth, Capital Shares, and a New Perspective on Production Functions,”
Working Paper, Stanford.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2011): “Investment Shocks and the
Relative Price of Investment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 101–21.
Kaldor, N. (1957): “A Model of Economic Growth,” The Economic Journal, 67(268), 591–624.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
211–48.
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Rios-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): “Capital-Skill
Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1029–
1053.
Lequiller, F. (2002): “Treatment of Stock Options in National Accounts of Non-European
OECD Member Countries,” Working Paper, OECD.
Lequiller, F., and D. Blades (2006): Understanding National Accounts. OECD.
Loayza, N., K. Schmidt-Hebbel, and L. Serven (2000): “What Drives Private Savings
Across the World?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(2), 165–81.
Miller, M. H., and F. Modigliani (1961): “Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of
Shares,” Journal of Business, 34(4), 411–33.
Poterba, J. M., and L. H. Summers (1985): “The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation,”
NBER Working Paper No. 1353.
Restuccia, D., and C. Urrutia (2001): “Relative Prices and Investment Rates,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 47, 93–121.
Riddick, L. A., and T. M. Whited (2009): “The Corporate Propensity to Save,” The Journal
of Finance, 64(4), 1729–66.
Rodriguez, F., and A. Jayadev (2010): “The Declining Labor Share of Income,” Human
Development Reports Research Paper 2010/36.
Turnovsky, S. J. (1990): “The Effects of Taxes and Dividend Policy on Capital Accumulation
and Macroeconomic Behavior,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 14, 491–521.
30

Value

Parameter

Value

Parameter

Value

Preferences

γ
χ

1.0000
1.0000

ρ
β

1.0000
0.9723

φ
ν

1.0000
0.1218

Investment Technology

δh
δc
ξh

0.0600
0.0600
1.0000

x̄h
x̄c
ξc

0.0600
0.0600
1.0000

ψh
ψc

1.0800
1.0800

Government

G
τn

0.0000
0.2920

bg
τd

0.0000
0.4550

τc
τg = τk

0.4400
0.3680

Production Technology

A
αk

0.1000
0.1329

αn
σ

1.0000
1.4220

κ

0.9610

Firm Heterogeneity

z1
π1

1.0895
0.2000

z2
π2

0.9776
0.8000

Capital Market Imperfections

e0
λ

-0.0002
0.9720

e1
η

0.0123
0.2548

31

Parameter

Table 1: Calibration
Notes: The table shows the parameter values of our baseline model with CES production function and imperfect capital markets. See
Section 4.1 and the Appendix for details on the calibration.

Statistic

Steady State

CES: Imperfect / Perfect

CD: Imperfect / Perfect

32

(i)

Total Saving / GDP

0.230

0.872

0.909

(ii)

Corporate Investment / Total Investment

0.660

0.921

0.942

(iii)

Corporate Saving / Total Saving

0.798

—

—

(iv)

Dividends / Profits

0.279

—

—

(v)

Corporate Labor Share

0.614

1.038

1.000

(vi)

Corporate Debt / Capital

0.239

—

—

(vii)

Equity Repurchases / Profits

0.125

—

—

(viii)

Consumption

0.255

0.925

0.938

(ix)

GDP

0.359

0.884

0.909

(x)

Household Capital

0.468

0.925

0.938

(xi)

Corporate Capital

0.907

0.710

0.778

(xii)

Household / Corporate Capital

0.516

1.302

1.205

(xiii)

User Cost of Capital

0.072

1.166

1.166

(xiv)

Wage

0.274

0.920

0.922

Table 2: Steady State Results
Notes: The first column lists steady state values in the model with imperfect capital markets. Steady state values with capital market
imperfections coincide between the Cobb-Douglas and the CES models by appropriately normalizing the parameter A in the CobbDouglas economy. The second column shows the ratio of steady state values with imperfect capital markets to steady state values with
perfect capital markets in the CES model. The third column shows the ratio of steady state values with imperfect capital markets to
steady state values with perfect capital markets in the Cobb-Douglas model.

33

Production Function:

CD

CD

CES

CES

Capital Market Imperfections:

No

Yes

No

Yes

(i)

∆ Corporate Labor Share

0.000

0.000

-0.058

-0.053

(ii)

∆ Corporate / Total Saving

—

0.072

—

0.118

(iii)

∆ Corporate Saving / GDP

—

0.031

—

0.064

(iv)

∆ Corporate / Total Investment

0.031

0.029

0.065

0.066

(v)

∆ Corporate Investment / GDP

0.023

0.018

0.058

0.044

(vi)

∆ Corporate / Total Capital

0.075

0.078

0.102

0.110

(vii)

∆ Total Saving / GDP

0.021

0.016

0.053

0.040

(viii)

∆ log GDP

0.202

0.194

0.317

0.272

(ix)

∆ log Consumption

0.174

0.173

0.242

0.219

(x)

∆ log Labor

0.015

0.011

-0.012

-0.017

(xi)

∆ log Corporate Capital Stock

0.561

0.542

0.823

0.764

(xii)

∆ log Wage

0.189

0.184

0.230

0.202

(xiii)

∆ log User Cost

-0.357

-0.347

-0.357

-0.347

(xiv)

Welfare Equivalent Consumption

0.204

0.205

0.321

0.290

Table 3: Response to a Negative Investment Price Shock (Steady State to Steady State)
Notes: The table shows the change in steady state values across the four models following the same shock to the relative price of
investment goods ξ c .

(ξ c )

∆ in Response to the Following Shocks:
(ξ c ; δ h ) (ξ c ; β, τ k ) (ξ c , τ c ; β, τ k ) (ξ c , τ c , τ d , τ g ; β, τ k )

∆ in Data
1975-2007

(i)

Corporate Labor Share

-0.053

-0.053

-0.033

-0.036

-0.044

-0.081

(ii)

Corporate / Total Saving

0.118

0.238

0.114

0.143

0.215

0.161

(iii)

Corporate Saving /GDP

0.064

0.055

0.026

0.033

0.050

0.039

(iv)

Corporate / Total Investment

0.066

0.161

0.062

0.085

0.146

0.091

(v)

Corporate Investment / GDP

0.044

0.037

0.014

0.020

0.034

0.025

(vi)

Total Saving / GDP

0.040

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

≈0

34

Table 4: Explaining Declining Labor Shares and Rising Corporate Saving
Notes: The table shows the change in steady state values of the model with CES production and imperfect capital markets following the
various shocks described in Section 4.4. “∆ in the Data” refers to the change in the global aggregate constructed by simply summing
all variables in our data without correcting for changes in composition.

.66
.64

.65

.62

.6

.6

.55
.5
.4

.56

.45

.58

35

1975

1985

1995

2005

Global Corporate Saving / Total Saving (left axis)
Global Corporate Labor Share (right axis)

Figure 1: Global Decline in The Labor Share and Increase in Corporate Saving, 1975-2007
Notes: The figure shows the global corporate labor share and the share of global corporate saving in global total saving. We use market
exchange rates to aggregate data from all available countries. We have an unbalanced panel. The declines implicit in the figure therefore
differ from our baseline estimates of a 5 percentage point decline in labor share and a 20 percentage point increase in the corporate
saving share.

1985

1995

.65

.8

2005

.6
.55

.4
.2

.6

.6
.55

.65

.8
.7
.6
.5
1975

.7

Japan
.7

United States

1975

1995

2005

.7
.65
.6
.55

.4
.35
1985

2005

.35 .4 .45 .5 .55

.45

.45
.4
.35

36

1975

1995

Germany
.5

China

1985

1975

1985

1995

2005

Corporate Saving / Total Saving (left axis)
Corporate Labor Share (right axis)
Figure 2: Country-Specific Declines in The Labor Share and Increases in Corporate Saving, 1975-2007
Notes: The figure shows the corporate labor share and corporate saving as a share of total saving for the four largest economies in the
world. Japan does not have the data required to calculate a corporate labor share and therefore we plot Japan’s overall labor share,
scaled by the ratio of corporate to overall labor shares in the rest of the dataset.

GDP (Y)

Corporate Gross
Value Added (QC)

Taxes on
Products

37

Government Gross
Value Added (QG)
Household Gross
Value Added (QH)

Corporate Gross
Value Added
(QC)

Corporate
Saving (SC)
Dividends (dC)

sɅ͕QC
(Profits)

Other Payments
to Capital (OPKC)

s<͕QC

Compensation
of Labor
(wC nC)

s>͕QC

Figure 3: Key National Accounting Concepts
Notes: This schematic shows the breakdown of GDP into four categories in the national accounting data. Corporate gross value added
includes three categories taken from the data, plus a fourth category called “Other Payments to Capital” which we define to capture
all remaining items. This residual category primarily includes interest payments on borrowing and taxes on production. The sum of
corporate saving and dividends is what we call profits.

USA
CAN
JPN

CHN
ITA
FRA
DEU

GBR

.15
-.15

Percentage Point Trend per 10 Years
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

38

Countries with at least 10 Years of Data
Figure 4: Estimated Trends in Corporate Labor Shares
Notes: The figure shows estimated trends in the corporate labor share for all countries in our dataset with at least 10 years of data (and
using the scaled overall labor share if the corporate labor share is unavailable). Trend coefficients are reported in units per 10 years (i.e.
a value of -0.05 means a 5 percentage point decline every 10 years). The largest and smallest values are winsorized to equal the second
largest and smallest values. The largest 8 economies are highlighted in red.

-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Cumulative Change (in Percentage Points)

.1
0
-.1
-.2
-.3

Cumulative Change (in Logs)

39

1947

1967

1987

2007

PWT Investment Price (left axis)
EIU Investment Price (left axis)
Corporate Labor Share (right axis)

Figure 5: Global Movements in the Corporate Labor Share and Relative Investment Prices, 1947-2007
Notes: The figure shows the GDP-weighted-average relative price of investment from the PWT and the EUI, and the global corporate
labor share. All series are normalized to 0 at their earliest point. The investment prices are measured along the left axis in log points
while the labor share is measured along the right axis in percentage points.

.2

ESP
SEN

UKR
CHE
ICE
EGY

LTH

CYP
BLR
THA
COL

NLDPRT
GBR SNG
SWE JPN
CAN
USA
TWN
ROM
DNK DEU MRC
CZE
AUS
FRA BEL
ITA LUX
CHN
AUT
SVK FIN NOR
NZL
HUN
MEX
ZAF
SVN
LTV
CHL

EST
POL

IDO

SAR

NGR

-.2

40

Trend in Corporate Labor Share
-.1
0
.1

PHL

-.4

-.2
0
.2
Trend in Log Relative Price of Investment

.4

Figure 6: Estimated Trends in Labor Share and the Relative Price of Investment
Notes: The figure shows estimated trends in corporate labor shares against estimated trends in relative investment prices. It includes
all countries in our dataset with at least 10 years of data along both dimensions. The largest and smallest values in each dimension of
each plot are winsorized to equal the second largest and smallest values. Trend coefficients are reported in units per 10 years (i.e. a
value of -0.05 for the corporate labor share means a 5 percentage point decline every 10 years).

JPN

ITA

USA
FRA
CAN
GBR

CHN

DEU

.4
-.2

Percentage Point Trend per 10 Years
0
.2

41

Countries with at least 10 Years of Data
Figure 7: Estimated Trends in Corporate Saving / Total Saving
Notes: The figure shows estimated trends in corporate saving relative to total saving for all countries in our dataset with at least 10
years of data. Trend coefficients are reported in units per 10 years (i.e. a value of -0.05 means a 5 percentage point decline every 10
years). The largest and smallest values are winsorized to equal the second largest and smallest values. The largest 8 economies are
highlighted in red.

.3

EST

PHL

ROM

HUN
POL
SVK
JPN
LTH

UKR

ITA

TWNCZE
PRT
CAN GBR

COL
FIN

USA
AUS SWE
KOR

CHN

SVN
DNK
NZL
LTV

IND

FRA
NLD
MEX
BEL
DEU
AUT
NGR
CHE
NOR
ESP
MRC

CHL

BLR
ZAF

-.2

42

Trend in Corporate Saving / Total Saving
-.1
0
.1
.2

EGY

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
Trend in Log Relative Price of Investment

.1

Figure 8: Estimated Trends in Corporate Saving Share and the Relative Price of Investment
Notes: The figure shows estimated trends in corporate saving shares against estimated trends in relative investment prices. It includes
all countries in our dataset with at least 10 years of data along both dimensions. The largest and smallest values in each dimension of
each plot are winsorized to equal the second largest or smallest values. Trend coefficients are reported in units per 10 years (i.e. a value
of -0.05 for the corporate saving share means a 5 percentage point decline every 10 years).

.6
-.4

Log Change (1975=0)
-.2
0
.2
.4

43

1975

1985

1995

2005

Corporate Saving Share of GDP
Corporate Value Added Relative to GDP
Corporate Profits Relative to Value Added
Share of Corporate Profits that are Retained

Figure 9: Disaggregation of the Rise in Corporate Saving, 1975-2007
Notes: The figure plots the log of the three terms in the disaggregation in equation (5) and the log of corporate saving as a share of
GDP. All variables are measured at the global level. We only include countries with data available on all four terms and we use market
exchange rates to aggregate across countries. All series are normalized to 0 in 1975.

A

B

C

D

E

4.5

1

Dividends
Equity

0.8

4

1

Saving
Investment

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

−0.2

−0.2

kct+1

3.5
3

44

2.5
2
1.5
2

3c
kt

4

−0.4

2

3c
kt

4

−0.4

2

3c
kt

4

Figure 10: Policy Functions
Notes: The figure shows the policy functions of the corporation in a simplified version of the model without adjustment costs, corporate
debt, or taxes.

45

d log GDP ( X ) − d log GDP ( X = −0.46 )

d ( sL ) / d (log ξc) = 0.000

0.01

d ( sL ) / d (log ξc) = 0.104

0.005

d ( sL ) / d (log ξc) = 0.207

0

d ( sL ) / d (log ξc) = 0.414

−0.005
−0.01
−0.015
−0.02
−0.7

−0.6

−0.5

−0.4
−0.3
c
X = d ( S / S ) / d (log ξc)

−0.2

−0.1

0

Figure 11: Informativeness of Cross-Sectional Sensitivities to Investment Price Shock
Notes: The x-axis shows the target moment d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ). The y-axis shows the steady state to steady state change in log GDP
following the negative price of investment shock for four different values of the target moment d (sL ) /d (log ξ c ). All steady state to
steady state changes in log GDP are normalized to 0 at the value d (S c /S) /d (log ξ c ) = −0.460.

Cumulative GDP Growth (Percent)

2
1.5
CES Difference (Perfect − Imperfect)
CD Difference (Perfect − Imperfect)

1
0.5
0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Cumulative GDP Growth (Percent)

(a) Positive TFP Shock

0
−0.5
−1
−1.5

CES Difference (Perfect − Imperfect)
CD Difference (Perfect − Imperfect)

−2
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

(b) Negative TFP Shock

Figure 12: Responses to TFP Shocks
Notes: The figure shows impulse responses to a positive productivity A shock (upper panel)
and a negative productivity A shock (lower panel). The paths show the cumulative difference in
the percent GDP growth between the model with perfect capital markets and the model with
imperfect capital markets for the CES model and the Cobb-Douglas model.

46

