NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A THEORY OF DEBT MATURITY:
THE LONG AND SHORT OF DEBT OVERHANG
Douglas W. Diamond
Zhiguo He
Working Paper 18160
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18160

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, and NBER. The authors gratefully acknowledge
research support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago Booth. Diamond gratefully
acknowledges support from the Nation Science Foundation. We thank two referees, seminar participants
at MIT Sloan, OSU Fisher, Chicago Booth, Columbia, Yale, Harvard, UCLA, NBER 2010 Corporate
Finance meeting in Chicago, AFA 2011 in Denver, Nittai Bergman, Hui Chen, Gustavo Manso, Gregor
Matvos, Victoria Ivashina, Henri Pages, Raghu Rajan, Berk Sensoy, Jeremy Stein, Rene Stulz, Sheridan
Titman and especially Stewart Myers and Charles Kahn for insightful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Douglas W. Diamond and Zhiguo He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Debt Maturity: The Long and Short of Debt Overhang
Douglas W. Diamond and Zhiguo He
NBER Working Paper No. 18160
June 2012
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
Debt maturity influences debt overhang: the reduced incentive for highly- levered borrowers to make
real investments because some value accrues to debt. Reducing maturity can increase or decrease
overhang even when shorter-term debt’s value depends less on firm value. Future overhang is more
volatile for shorter-term debt, making future investment incentives volatile and influencing immediate
investment incentives. With immediate investment, shorter-term debt typically imposes lower overhang;
longer-term debt can impose less if firm value is more volatile in bad times. For future investments,
reduced correlation between the value of assets-in-place and profitability of investment increases the
overhang of shorter-term debt.

Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper studies the effects of the debt maturity on current and future real investment decisions
of an owner of equity (or a manager who is compensated by equity). Our analysis is based on
debt overhang first analyzed by Myers (1977), who points out that outstanding debt may distort
the firm’s investment incentives downward. A reduced incentive to undertake profitable
investments when decision makers seek to maximize equity value is referred to as a problem of
“debt overhang,” because part of the return from a current new investment goes to make existing
debt more valuable.
Myers (1977) suggests a possible solution of short-term debt to the debt overhang problem.
In part, this extends the idea that if all debt matures before the investment opportunity, then the
firm without debt in place can make the investment decision as if an all-equity firm. Hence,
following this logic, debt that matures soon--although after relevant investment decisions, as
opposed to before--should have reduced overhang.
However, short-term debt is known to have several disadvantages. For firms without access
to outside funds to meet debt repayments, short-term debt can lead to early firm closure and
liquidation (e.g., Diamond (1991), Gertner and Scharfstein (1991)). More relevant to our paper,
Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) show that, conditional on ex-post financial distress, making a
fixed promised debt payment due earlier (i.e., shorter-term) raises the market value of the debt
and thus the firm’s market leverage, leading to more debt overhang ex-post. In addition, certain
drawbacks of short-term debt have also been suggested by some quantitative models (Titman and
Tsyplakov (2007), Moyen (2007)) that focus on equity holders’ differential abilities and
incentives to adjust leverage in response to new information given different debt maturity
structures.1
Our paper aims to provide a thorough analysis on the effects of debt maturity on the equity
incentives to undertake both current and future investments, and, more importantly, to identify
the forces that determine overhang. We show why the ideas based on Myer’s suggestion have
merit, and show how and why they can be reversed under different settings. Throughout, we first
illustrate our results via simple examples; these results are then generalized in the context of
standard models used by practitioners and researchers, allowing us to establish their generality
and introduce more complicated issues.
1

For more details, see literature review at the end of the introduction.

2

We stress the importance of the relative timing of investment decisions, debt maturity, and
news about the prospect of the firm’s existing assets (including past investment). In a nutshell,
shorter-term debt--because of earlier repayment and less risk sharing—usually receives less
benefit from an immediate investment, leading to a lower overhang. This is consistent with the
ideas in Myers (1977). However, for firms with future investment opportunities, the future
prospects and value of existing assets fluctuate before investment decisions, and the sharing of
less risk by shorter-term debt implies more volatile equity value and hence more volatile debt
overhang. Shorter-term debt thus imposes stronger overhang especially in bad times, and this
result is related to Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) and Titman and Tsyplakov (2007).
The first setting that we analyze is the one with immediate investment decisions that are
made right after the issuance of the debt but before any new information is released. Extending
the logic of Myers (1977), shorter-term debt would impose less overhang on immediate
investment, and we illustrate this result by simple examples. There, a shorter maturity makes the
debt market value less sensitive to changes in the firm value, and equity holders’ investment
incentives are distorted (downward) exactly by the increased value of claims other than equity.
However, this intuitive idea is incomplete, as we further show that the effect of maturity could
reverse, depending on the timing of investment decisions and the way that uncertainty is resolved
over time (i.e., state-dependent volatility).
Moving from examples to standard model frameworks, Proposition 1 in Section 3 proves that,
holding the debt value and hence the firm’s leverage constant,2 shorter-term debt imposes less
overhang on immediate investment in the classic setting based on Black and Scholes (1973) and
Merton (1974). To our knowledge, this analytical result is new to the literature, and appears to be
the basis for the logic extending Myers (1977).
In the Black-Scholes-Merton setting, the asset volatility is constant. With covariation of
volatility and the value of assets-in-place, especially when the timing of resolution of uncertainty
leads to sufficiently increased remaining uncertainty after bad outcomes, shorter-term debt may
have a stronger overhang even for immediate investment decisions. We show this by an example
in Section 2.5, more formally by adding state dependent volatility to the Black-Scholes-Merton

2

Holding constant the borrower’s leverage has not been stressed in previous studies about the effect of maturity on
debt overhang, e.g., Gertner and Scharfstein (1991).

3

model in Section 3.3. These results produce new implications for the effect of debt maturity on
immediate investment incentives.
In the second setting that we analyze, firms have many investment opportunities in the
present and the future. With future investment opportunities, the distribution of debt overhang in
the future is relevant because the incentive to invest depends on the overhang prevailing at the
time of future investment. In addition, debt overhang influences the equity’s decision to default
on debt,3 and default implies that investment opportunities thereafter are not taken. In general,
exactly because shorter-term debt is less sensitive to changes in firm value, it leads to more
volatile future equity value and hence more volatile future overhang: Equity has weak
investment incentives and is more likely to default after poor performance of the firm’s assets-inplace, and has strong investment incentives after good performance. Examples in Section 2.4
illustrate this logic and some of its implications. For firms with investment opportunities in the
future, a balance of maintaining investment incentives in future good and bad states leads to an
optimal interior maturity structure. This mechanism is formally illustrated in Section 4 where we
study a dynamic model that generalizes Leland (1994b, 1998) to include a series of future
investment opportunities.
We further show that when investment opportunities are positively correlated with the firm’s
assets-in-place, it is beneficial to have a shorter debt maturity, which imposes lower (higher) debt
overhang in times with high (low) values of assets-in-place and hence better (worse) investment
opportunities. This result offers a new perspective on the empirical predictions regarding growth
firms and debt maturity. For growth firms with uncertain investment opportunities where
existing investment projects have realizations that are positively correlated with the value of new
investment opportunities, shorter-term debt is preferred. However, for a growth firm with known
future opportunities or the one where realized asset returns are not very informative about future
opportunities, investment incentives are more efficient with longer-term debt. On the other
extreme, mature firms that require timely maintenance to replace unexpectedly high depreciation
in times of low cash flows should choose even longer-term debt. This perspective is different
from the existing idea that firms with substantial future investment opportunities should choose
shorter-term debt.

3

The interpretation of endogenous default given debt burden as “underinvestment” due to debt overhang, is
mentioned in, for example, Lambrecht and Myers (2008) and He (2011).

4

In our dynamic setting with multiple investment opportunities, today’s investment benefit is
positively related to future investment policies. Because shorter-term debt triggers earlier default
which eliminates future growth opportunities, this negative force may feed back to today and
undermine current investment incentives. Intuitively, if future growth extending today’s
investment will not occur, it makes current investment less attractive. Interestingly, in contrast to
a static setting where riskless debt cannot impose any overhang, Section 4.4 shows that in our
dynamic setting a policy of (almost) riskless ultra-short debt may cause strong overhang on
current investment.
Our framework focuses on decisions during the period before debt refinancing and thus fits
well with the empirical literature in which short-term debt is often classified as that with maturity
within three years (e.g., Johnson (2003)). Indeed, empirical work on debt maturity based on the
hypothesis of reduced overhang of shorter-term debt, which implies the use of more short-term
debt by “growth” firms with large investment opportunities, has had mixed success for reasons
related to our findings in this paper. 4
Short-term overhang is related to, but distinct from, the idea that shorter-term debt maturity
increases the control rights of lenders to discipline management, e.g., Benmelech (2006),
Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Diamond (1991), Diamond and Rajan (2001a), Flannery (1994), and
Leland (1998).5 Short-term debt provides discipline in part because short-term lenders do not sit
idly while a borrower misbehaves--they demand payment on maturity. This is closely related to
our point that short-term debt can have severe overhang when firm value declines after the debt
was issued. From this perspective, our paper extends the results in Gertner and Scharfstein (1991)
that for a given total promised (but risky) payment to debt holders, ex-post debt overhang is
made worse if more of the fixed amount is due sooner. Making a fixed payment due earlier raises
the market value of the debt and thus the firm’s market leverage, increasing ex-post overhang.
Our paper emphasizes the timing of investment, and examines ex-ante effects of maturity on debt
overhang for a given initial leverage to isolate it from the pure leverage effect.6 As a result, our
4

For instance, Barclay and Smith (1995) and Guedes and Opler (1996) document a negative relation between
maturity and growth opportunities, while Stohs and Mauer (1996) and Johnson (2003) find a positive relation once
controlling for firm leverage.
5
It also differs from theories of maturity structure where short-maturity debt is attractive to borrowers with private
information that their future credit rating may improve, e.g., Flannery (1986) and Diamond (1991), or the idea that
short-term debt entices runs due to coordination issues, e.g., Diamond and Dybvig (1983), He and Xiong (2011).
6
We study the effect of maturity on debt overhang by fixing the leverage exogenously for an additional reason. Tax
based theories suggest leverage increases when current and future investment opportunities become more profitable,

5

paper reconciles the result in Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) that shorter-term debt has more
ex-post overhang, with the suggestion in Myers (1977) that shorter-term debt has less ex-ante
overhang.
We describe several important effects of debt maturity that have not received much
formal analysis in the literature. We have new results on the effect of debt maturity on debt
overhang with an immediate investment in the Black-Scholes-Merton setting, holding
leverage constant. Our result on the effects of reduced volatility when firm value is low has
not been suggested previously. We argue in the conclusion that this result applies especially
well to financial institutions such as banks. Our analytical study for the case of dynamic
investment opportunities in the Leland setting is related to existing quantitative studies on the
effect of debt overhang. These studies focus on leverage adjustments to trade off the tax
shield against physical costs of default, and each adds some other frictions. Both of them
suggest that short-term debt is not a perfect solution to overhang. Titman and Tsyplakov
(2007) use a model based on Leland (1998) but with costs of adjusting leverage, and find that
short-term debt improves investment incentives but triggers earlier default. Relative to
Titman and Tsyplakov, our paper with a simpler setting provides analytical results, and
further points out that with inter-temporally linked investment incentives short-term debt
may hurt current investment decisions due to earlier default in the future. In another closely
related paper, Moyen (2007) studies the effect of debt maturity on overhang directly but
focuses on an assumed asymmetry in leverage adjustment, i.e., the leverage cannot be
adjusted if there is long-term debt, but can be adjusted every period if short-term debt is
issued. Moyen finds that, compared to long-term debt, a firm with short-term debt has higher
(lower) leverage in good (bad) times, but the overall overhang effect is similar across both
maturity structures. In contrast, we follow Leland (1994b, 1998) where the debt burden is
fixed to focus only on maturity.
Our analysis of dynamic investment opportunities is based on Leland (1994b, 1998) so
that the debt refinancing rate (which is inversely related to the firm’s debt maturity structure)
is fixed at a constant. The dynamic adjustment of debt maturity is beyond our paper, and we
provide some discussion in Section 4.6

while control and pecking order theories suggest the opposite. There is not an agreement in empirical studies about
these determinants of dynamic adjustments to firm leverage (see e.g., Fama and French (2002)).

6

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We give a series of examples in Section 2 to
illustrate the key ideas of this paper. Section 3 provides a model with a single investment
decision based on the Black-Scholes-Merton setting, and Section 4 provides a dynamic Lelandtype model with many future investment decisions. In Section 5 we conclude.

2.

Debt Overhang: Assumptions and Examples
We first describe debt overhang and related assumptions, and then provide numerical

examples to illustrate the main insights delivered by this paper.
2.1

Debt Overhang and Key Assumptions
Debt overhang, first formalized by Myers (1977), captures the insight that investment often

leads to external benefits that accrue to the firm’s debt claims. These external benefits
consequently lead equity holders (or equivalently managers who are paid in equity) who make
investment decisions to internalize only part of investment benefits, and hence to underinvest
relative to the level that maximizes the total value of the firm.
To study debt overhang, we will make the following assumptions throughout.
1. We examine standard debt contracts with two characteristics: promised face value and
maturity.
2. We assume that at time 0 the firm has to raise a certain amount of financing through debt.
Our analysis fixes the initial market value of the debt, because we study debt maturity for a given
amount of leverage. However, we do not specify the particular reasons for why firms use debt.
This is partly because all reasons for using debt must take account of the potential effect on
investment incentives, and partly because there is no empirical consensus on the relative merits
of various reasons (e.g., tax or managerial incentives for decisions other than investment; see
footnote 6).
3. We assume that it is equity holders who control the firm and who carry out investment.
This captures the idea that corporate decisions are delegated to those in control, rather than
decided by a consensus of outside investors. Investment opportunities are lost during bankruptcy,
and we impose no exogenous bankruptcy cost otherwise.

7

24
1/2

State G
1/2

1/3
1/6
12

1/6
1/2

1/3
State B
1/2
0

t=0

t=1

t=2

Figure 1: Time line for numerical examples, with conditional probabilities denoted on each path. As shown, the conditional
distribution given state G is {1/2,1/3,1/6}. We will consider an alternative conditional distribution of {1/3,2/3,0} given state G.

4. We assume that debt cannot be renegotiated to bribe managers to make alternative
decisions. This assumption is especially relevant to debt with many holders, as opposed to a
single bank or individual.7
5. We focus on investment projects that are subject to “debt overhang” only, i.e., projects
that weakly increase or leave unchanged the value of each of its debt and equity claims. We do
not consider “risk shifting” where a large increase in the risk profile of existing assets may cause
a redistribution of value across equity and debt claims, as described in Jensen and Meckling
(1976). Throughout this paper we focus on incremental investments which have less chance of
introducing the possibility of “risk shifting.”
6. To focus on maturity only, debts with different maturities are assumed to have same
seniority during bankruptcy.8
2.2

Example Setting
We begin by showing our results via numerical examples. We later will show similar results

based on standard Black-Scholes-Merton and Leland models.
Assets-in-place. As in Figure 1, the firm has assets-in-place which bring final cash flows at date
2, with three potential outcomes {24, 12, 0} each occurring with probability 1/3 from the
perspective of date 0. There are no cash flows on other dates. The discount rate is zero.

7

Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) show that debt that cannot be renegotiated (especially if short-term) can impede
renegotiation of other debt. In that sense, even renegotiation is subject to overhang.
8
This is related to the dilution effect when firms refinance their maturing debt in a dynamic model. We rule out
dilution by adopting the Leland (1994b, 1998) setting in Section 4. For dilution issues, see Diamond (1993),
Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2011), and Hackbarth and Mauer (2011), and related discussion in Section 4.6.2.

8

Information. At date 1 some public information arrives. At state B which occurs with
probability 1/2, the news is bad, and the conditional probabilities to reach the final outcomes
become {1/6,1/3,1/2}. Symmetrically, good news arrives at state G with a probability of 1/2, and
the conditional probabilities for three outcomes become {1/2,1/3,1/6}.
Debt face values and maturities. Suppose that the firm needs to raise 8.25 at date 0. The debt
can be either long-term (repaid at date 2) or short-term (repaid at date 1), and they have face
values of FL = 12.75 and FS = 8.5 , respectively, to lead to the target date-0 market value of 8.25:

1
1
1
1
1
× 12.75 + × 12 + × 0 = 8.25 = × 8.5 + × 8.
3
3
3
2
2
The left hand side describes the payoffs to long-term debt, which is only paid in full (i.e., 12.75)
with probability 1/3 at the outcome of 24. The right hand side describes the short-term debt: with
probability ½, the firm in state G pays debt holders the full face value 8.5; while with probability
½ the firm in state B defaults, and short-term debt holders recover the assets-in-place with a
value of 8 = 24 (1/ 6) + 12 (1/ 3) .
Investment opportunities. For ease of illustration we only consider infinitesimal investment

which improves the final payoff of the assets-in-place by ε>0. We do not specify the investment
cost because debt overhang can be measured by the investment benefit that is captured by debt.
The investment decision will be made only if its net present value exceeds the debt overhang.
Investment timings. We consider two different timings of investment. The first is that the firm

invests at date 0 before the realization of state G or B; and the second is that the firm invests only
at date 1 after the realization of the news about the assets-in-place (state G or B) but before the
short-term debt matures. We believe both timing assumptions are empirically relevant.
2.3

Date-0 Investment before Assets-in-place News: A Benchmark Result

We first consider the case of single investment at date 0, immediately after raising the debt.
Many of the exiting ideas based on the discussion in Myers (1977) consider the effect of maturity
on debt overhang in this particular setting.
We calculate the overhang as the expected benefit from the new investment that is captured
by the debt with given maturities. Because the long-term debt face value FL = 12.75 exceeds the
intermediate outcome 12 but below the highest outcome 24, the overhang occurs in both the
middle and low states and thus is 2/3ε (equity gets 1/3ε). For short-term debt, in state B the firm
9

value 8 is below the face value of short-term debt FS = 8.5 . Short-term debt imposes an overhang
of 1/2ε as it captures all of the gain at state B from the date-0 investment. If the investment cost
at date 0 is between 1/3ε and 1/2ε, then this investment will be taken if and only if the firm uses
short-term debt. In this example, long-term debt imposes more overhang than short-term debt
does, consistent with the discussion of Myers (1977). We will formally show this result in
Section 3 using a model based on Black-Scholes (1973) and Merton (1974).
This intuitive result relies upon two assumptions, which we will study in the following
subsections. The first is about investment timing; we show that if equity holders make
investment decision at date 1 after the news about assets-in-place, then the optimal maturity will
depend on the details of the investment opportunities. The second is about the cash-flow
distribution, and we show that even for date 0 investment, short-term debt may impose stronger
overhang in a distribution featuring higher volatility following bad news.
2.4

Future Investment: Date-1 Investment after News about Existing Assets

Now suppose that investment opportunities are available only at date 1, so that equity holders
make investment decisions after the realization of the interim state but before the short-term debt
matures. Consider the case of long-term debt first. At state G, the benefit from an infinitesimal
investment that goes to debt holders is 1/2ε (equity also gets 1/2ε); put differently, equity
recovers the benefit from investment only at the outcome 24 which occurs with a conditional
probability of ½. A similar argument implies that at state B the long-term debt overhang is 5/6ε
(equity gets 1/6ε). Hence, long-term debt imposes some overhang in both states, but it is never so
severe that equity holders recover nothing from new investment. If the cost of investment is less
than 1/6ε, for example, then there will be investment in both states.
In contrast, short-term debt is a hard contract that does not share as much risk with equity due
to its requirement of full payment whenever possible on its short maturity. As a result, in state G
short-term debt imposes no overhang; but in state B it imposes the most extreme overhang,
which is ε so that short-term debt holders capture the entire benefit of investment. To see this, the
short-term debt becomes riskless at state G (the firm value 16 exceeds the debt face value 8.5)
and therefore will not capture any gain from new investment. However, at state B, the
deteriorating assets-in-place with a value of 8 fall below the face value 8.5, so that equity holders
will default at state B. There, the debt overhang is the entire investment benefit ε, because if
equity holders were to invest right before the short-term debt matures, debt holders would
10

receive every dollar that new investment generates. If the cost of investment is less than 1/6ε, for
example, then there will be investment only in state G while there would be investment in both
states with long-term debt.
There are two lessons that we learn from this example with date 1 investment. First, it shows
that when the firm’s assets-in-place fluctuates, a shorter-term debt generates a more countercyclical overhang (higher overhang for low values of the firm, or weak investment incentives in
future bad times). Hence, when the firm’s investment opportunities are present in the future, the
optimal debt maturity that minimizes overall overhang will depend on the details of future
investment opportunities in different states. This idea will be formally analyzed in the dynamic
model in Section 4.
Second, we can relate the state-dependent conditional overhang in this example back to the
average date-0 overhang calculated in Section 2.3. Indeed, the date 0 long-term debt overhang
2/3ε, is just the average of the overhangs conditional on state G (5/6ε) and on state B (1/2ε).
Similarly, the date-0 short-term debt overhang 1/2ε is the average of the conditional overhang in
state G (0) and in state B (ε). Short-term debt imposes more volatile conditional overhang, but it
turns out that given the particular distribution in this example, once taking the average at date 0,
short-term debt has a lower average overhang than long-term debt. The next example shows that
it is possible to reverse the relative ordering of date-0 overhang by twisting the cash-flow
distribution, based on the idea that conditional volatilities can affect conditional overhang at
different states.
2.5

Date-0 Investment with Conditional Volatility

Consider the date 0 investment setting as in Section 2.3, but modify the distribution to reduce
the conditional variance of cash flows in state G. Let the new conditional probabilities given G
be {1/3, 2/3, 0}; the old conditional distribution of {1/2,1/3,1/6} in Figure 1 is a mean-preserving
spread over the new conditional distribution. Due to symmetry between states G and B in the old
distribution, the new distribution features a lower variance conditional on state G than state B.
Given the new cash-flow distribution which implies the date-0 probabilities over final cash
flows to be {1/4,1/2,1/4}, we calculate the new face values needed to raise 8.25, i.e., the longterm debt face value is reduced to FL = 11 while the short-term face value is unchanged at

FS = 8.5 .

11

In this new example, the short-term overhang remains at 1/2ε, because the short-term debt
value 8.5 is unaffected, and the firm value 8 in state B still leads to default as in the previous
benchmark example in Section 2.3. In fact, it is not surprising to have short-term debt overhang
unchanged. To see this, note that conditional variances prevailing on date 1 govern the
distribution of date 2 cash flows conditional on date 1 information, and as a result cannot affect
the payoff of short-term debt at all. 9 In contrast, the long-term overhang is reduced to 1/4ε
because the new long-term debt face value FL = 11 is below the intermediate outcome 12. Here,
although short-term debt shares less risk from the jump down in value at of date 1,10 the shortterm debt ends up taking more of the future return from date-0 investment, and hence a more
severe overhang.11
What is the reason? As shown, the date-0 overhang is the average of future levels of
overhang at different states. We observe from Section 2.4 that the relative severity between longand short-term overhang is state dependent, in that long- (short-) term debt imposes stronger
(weaker) overhang in good states. Thus, the average overhang at date 0 depends on the
magnitude of overhang conditional on future states.
Adjusting volatilities conditional on future states affects the relative magnitude of conditional
overhang for debt with different maturities. As mentioned above, because short-term debt gets
repaid at date 1, the short-term overhang is not affected by date 1 conditional volatilities.
However, for long-term debt, either a lower volatility in state G or a higher volatility in state B
reduces overhang in the corresponding state. A lower volatility in the good state implies that
there is little chance of default for a long period afterwards; in our new example, the firm with
long-term debt never defaults in state G (there is zero probability to have the outcome 0),
implying zero overhang. A higher volatility in state B implies that, despite a low current value,
the assets-in-place are more likely to increase sufficiently to repay creditors before long-term
debt matures, which reduces overhang as equity can recover benefits from investment in these

9

For instance, the increased volatility conditional on state B does not affect overhang for a small incremental
investment. As long as the value of assets-in-place (after investment) is below the face value of short-term debt due
before further resolution of uncertainty, all investment benefit following state B goes to short-term debt holders.
10
The market value of short-term debt is 8.5 (8) in state G (B), while the market value of long-term debt is 11 (5.5)
in state G (B). Hence the short-term debt still shares less risk than long-term debt.
11
One cannot construct such an example with stronger short-term overhang under the old “symmetric” distribution.

12

states. In this new example, the overhang in state B is 1/2ε.12 Averaging out these levels of
conditional overhang, the date 0 long-term overhang is 1/4ε.
In sum, volatility that is higher in the bad state or lower in the good state reduces long-term
debt overhang for both states at date 1, which helps average out to a lower long-term debt
overhang at date 0. In contrast, the change in volatility after short-term debt matures has no
effect on its overhang. This result and associated intuition will be further illustrated in Section
3.3 in the Black-Scholes-Merton framework.
2.6

Plan of the Rest of the Paper

So far we have used simple numerical examples to illustrate our main results. The rest of the
paper formalizes these results using models that are commonly used by researchers and
practitioners in corporate finance. In Section 3 we use the Black-Scholes-Merton model to study
the maturity effect of debt overhang on immediate investment, which corresponds to the results
shown in Section 2.3 and Section 2.5. We then adopt the Leland framework to study the role of
debt maturity on overhang when the firm with fluctuating values of assets-in-place has access to
investment opportunities over time. This analysis corresponds to the setting in Section 2.4 where
a firm chooses investment after the realization of news about its assets-in-place.

3

Immediate Investment in the Black-Scholes-Merton Model
Much of the intuition that shorter-term debt enhances the incentive for investment decisions,

such as Myers (1977), comes from the Black and Scholes (1973) model and the study of risky
corporate debt in Merton (1974) where equity is a European call option with a strike price equal
to the debt face to be repaid on its maturity date. This section analyzes the effect of maturity on
debt overhang in a Black-Scholes-Merton setting. Although many have discussed the effect of
maturity on debt overhang based on the discussion in Myers (1977), we are unaware of any
existing formal analysis in the Black-Scholes-Merton setting.
3.1

The Black-Scholes-Merton Setting

The firm has some existing assets in place, with current market value denoted by V0 . The
asset value follows a log-normal diffusion, and its value at any future time t > 0 is

 σ2

Vt = V0 exp  − t + σ Z t  ,
 2

12

In this example there is another indirect effect of a lower long-term debt face value under the new distribution.

13

where Z t  N ( 0, t ) , and the volatility σ is a constant. Later we introduce state dependent
volatilities. Without loss of generality we set the risk-free rate to be zero.
Following Merton (1974), the firm has a zero-coupon debt issue that matures at time t with a
face value Ft , and this is the firm’s only debt. At time t , if the firm value Vt is below Ft , debt
holders take the defaulted firm to obtain Vt ; otherwise, debt holders are repaid in full by Ft .
Because Vt follows a martingale, a shorter maturity of debt can equivalently be viewed as a debt
to be repaid after a smaller amount of resolution of uncertainty about the firm’s assets. Finally,
recall that we rule out physical bankruptcy costs (i.e., the asset can be liquidated any time for its
value Vt ) and renegotiation of the debt in return for a changed investment decision.
As in our numerical examples before, we consider a single investment opportunity at date 0
modeled as a small scale expansion of existing assets.13 We examine the effect of debt maturity
on debt overhang by varying t , the time horizon to a single debt maturity. To focus on maturity
only, our analysis controls for the firm’s initial leverage. More specifically, we adjust the face
value Ft to hold constant the time-0 market value of debt when we vary t .
3.2

Stronger Short-Term Debt Overhang with Constant Volatility

We first establish a benchmark result under constant volatility: Longer-term debt imposes
stronger overhang on the time-0 investment for a given market leverage.
It is well-known in this setting that the payoff to equity holders will be reduced by debt
overhang, which can be measured by the increase in the value of existing debt as a result of the
scale expansion of V0 . How does debt maturity affect the amount of overhang?
Consider short-term (long-term) debt with face value F1 ( F2 ), with maturity m1 ( m2 ), where

m2 > m1 . The standard Black-Scholes calculation gives the corresponding date-0 debt value as

(

)

D (V0 ; Fi , mi ) = V0 (1 − N ( d i ) ) + Fi N d i − σ mi , where d i ≡

13

ln (V0 F i ) + 0.5σ 2mi

σ mi

, i = 1, 2.

In the Black-Scholes-Merton setting with time-0 investment only, the firm’s refinancing policy at time- t , i.e.,
whether the firm refinances existing debt with newly issued equity or newly issued debt, is irrelevant. Recall that the
debt in consideration is the only debt that the firm has, which implies that the firm will refinance this debt at
maturity date t without existing claims (other than equity). Because the net present value of the date-0 investment
undertaken will be known on date t , and future investors break even, equity holders will recover any gain from the
investment, except those going to debt holders existing at date 0.

14

Debt overhang is measured by DV ≡ ∂D (V0 ; F , m ) ∂V0 , which captures the impact of a change in
firm value on the value of existing debt. We study the wedge between two debt overhangs:

ΔDV ≡ DV (V0 ; F1 , m1 ) − DV (V0 ; F2 , m2 ) ,

(1)

where face values F2 > F1 are chosen to hold constant the initial firm leverage:
D (V0 ; F1 , m1 ) − D (V0 ; F2 , m2 ) = 0.

Proposition 1 formally states that ΔDV in Eq. (1) is negative. Intuitively, given the same date-0
market debt value, shorter-term debt always gains less from any marginal increase of the time-0
assets-in-place V0 , resulting in better equity holders’ investment incentives.
Proposition 1. Under the Black-Scholes-Merton setting, we have DV (V0 ; F1 , m1 ) < DV (V0 ; F2 , m2 )
whenever D (V0 ; F1 , m1 ) = D (V0 ; F2 , m2 ) . This implies that for a given initial debt market value,
long-term debt imposes stronger overhang than short-term debt.14

Both the example in Section 2.3 and the Black-Scholes-Merton setting in Proposition 1 have
state-independent volatility, i.e., uncertainty resolves at the same rate in good and bad states. The
next subsection relaxes this assumption.
3.3

Stronger Short-Term Overhang with State-Dependent Volatility

Recall that in the example in Section 2.5, even with a single initial investment, conditional
volatilities that increase in bad states can reverse the result that shorter-term debt imposes less
overhang. Following this idea, we now show that a state-dependent volatility (more specifically,
higher volatility given low assets-in-place state) in the Black-Scholes-Merton setting can lead to
a stronger short-term debt overhang.
Consider the following simple modification of the Black-Scholes-Merton model, where
short-term debt (long-term debt) will mature at m1 = 1 ( m2 = 2 ). Suppose that the firm’s assets-

)

(

in-place value at the end of period 2 is V2 = V0 exp z 1 − 0.5σ 12 + z 2 − 0.5σ22 , where z 1 and z 2 have
zero mean and follow the normal distribution with variances σ 12 and σ22 , respectively. Thus, the

(

)

assets-in-place value on date 1 is V1 = V0 exp z 1 − 0.5σ 12 .

14

All proofs are in the appendix.

15

To introduce state-dependent volatility, we allow the volatility σ22 to be dependent on date 1
assets-in-place z 1 . Particularly, for some constant Q we set
 σ
σ 2 =  L
σ H

when z 1 > Q
when z 1 ≤ Q

where σ L ≤ σ H . This formulation implies that the asset volatility is higher in low value states (or,
a negatively skewed distribution). In fact, this pattern can be generated by the existence of
volatility that is not scaled with the asset value.15 It is also a natural result when the borrower’s
assets are debt contracts, for example a bank, where volatility falls in good states when debt

assets become default free.

(

)

We set the long-term debt face value F2 = V0 exp Q − 0.5σ12 , so that the contingent volatility
is lower (higher) for regions of V1 being above (below) F2 . We have the following proposition.
Proposition 2. We adjust F1 such that D (V0 ; F1 ,1) = D (V0 ; F2 , 2 ) , and suppose that ε > 0 is
sufficiently small.
Example 1. If σ L = σ H = ε > 0 , i.e., without contingent volatility, long-term debt imposes
stronger overhang than short-term debt;
Example 2. If σ H = ε > 0 = σ L , i.e., with contingent volatility, short-term debt imposes
stronger overhang than long-term debt.

With two contrasting examples, Proposition 2 shows that the conditional volatility could lead
to stronger short-term debt overhang for date-0 investment. In example 2, the asset displays
state-contingent z 2 volatility, a pattern that is in sharp contrast to example 1 with constant z 2
volatility (which is a special case of Proposition 1). The intuition is similar to that which we
provide in Section 2.5. For short-term debt that is refinanced at date 1, whether the volatility of

z 2 is contingent or not does not affect its overhang. In contrast, for long-term debt, the volatility
of z 2 matters. To see this, after the bad realization z 1 = Q − η , the risk of z 2 reduces overhang (as
equity holders can recover some investment benefits), and this force is present in both cases with
contingent and constant volatilities (the same volatility σ H = ε ). However, after the good
15

For instance, consider randomness in the fixed cost; then a fixed absolute volatility becomes a larger percentage of
volatility when asset values are decreased.

16

realization z 1 = Q + η , the case of contingent volatility has a lower long-term debt overhang. It is
because with contingent volatility σ L = 0 , the date-2 firm value V2 stays constant at

V1 = V0 exp ( Q + η − 0.5σ 12 ) which is above F2 = V0 exp (Q − 0.5σ12 ) , hence zero overhang
without future default; but with constant volatility σ L = ε the firm value may deteriorate at date 2,
leading to potential overhang. These comparisons result in a stronger short-term debt overhang in
Proposition 2.
Proposition 2 illustrates how state-dependent volatility (higher volatility in worse states) in
the Black-Scholes-Merton setting could lead to stronger shorter-term debt overhang. However,
the existence of state-dependent volatility is not sufficient for stronger shorter-term overhang.
What is general and shown in the proof of Proposition 2 is that this state-dependent volatility
reduces the difference between long-term and short-term overhang. Moreover, Proposition 2
demonstrates that this effect can be sufficiently strong to overturn the positive long-short
overhang wedge established in Proposition 1.
3.4 Debt Maturity, State-Contingent Overhang, and Conditional Volatility

In this subsection we offer another insightful way to understand the role of conditional
volatility. As suggested by the numerical example in Section 2.4, the relative severity of longand short-term overhang depends on the future state of firm value, and longer-term debt imposes
more (less) overhang in good (bad) states. The average of these future state-dependent overhang
severities determines the time-0 investment incentives, and Proposition 1 shows that in the
Black-Scholes-Merton constant volatility setting, once controlling the time-0 market debt value,
the average long-term debt overhang always exceeds the average short-term overhang.
Conditional volatility is a way to twist the state-dependent overhang to potentially deliver a
greater date-0 average short-term overhang, thus reversing Proposition 1. In the Black-ScholesMerton setting the effective debt maturity is inversely related to the speed of resolution of
uncertainty, which is also asset volatility. From this perspective, the conditional volatility allows
us to twist the effective debt maturities given different states. In Example 2 with contingent
volatility in Proposition 2, at date-1 good states, the zero date-2 volatility implies no difference
between long-term debt (that matures at date-2) and short-term debt (that matures at date-1).
This minimizes the (positive) wedge: the excess of long-term over short-term overhang. In
contrast, at date-1 bad states, short- and long-term debts differ given the positive date-2 volatility,
17

which preserves the negative wedge between long- and short-term overhang. In sum, higher
conditional volatilities at lower assets-in-place states can reduce the positive excess of long-term
overhang over short-term overhang in good times while preserving the negative difference in bad
times. For the single initial investment, this increases date-0 average overhang of short-term debt
compared to long-term.

4 Debt Overhang with Dynamic Investment
To examine the long horizon effects of debt maturity, we need a tractable framework with
dynamic investment opportunities that goes beyond the Black-Scholes-Merton model. We have
two goals for this dynamic analysis. First, we would like to study debt overhang for a firm with
stochastic values of assets-in-places and with access to future investment opportunities. This will
generalize the examples in Section 2.4 where investment is made after the realization of news
about asset values. Second, all of our previous examples and Black-Scholes-Merton models have
had refinancing (if any) occurring at a time where there is no other existing debt outstanding.
When debt is refinanced, the incentives to refinance or default are influenced by the maturity of
existing outstanding debt on that date, which is another form of debt overhang. As we show,
these two crucial features (which are missing from static models) lead to interesting implications
about short-term debt overhang.
4.1

The Setting and Valuations

Models with multiple debt issues and dynamics in the value of assets are difficult to analyze,
and the most tractable existing framework is based on Leland (1994b, 1998) which takes as fixed
parameters both the frequency of refinancing and the total amount of promised repayments of
debt. There, equity holders always have access to funds to cover the investment costs or losses at
refinancing. Default then occurs only when their incentive to inject more funding is insufficient.
This allows us to eliminate issues of limited liquidity (e.g., Diamond, 1991) and focus instead on
debt overhang by examining the equity holders’ incentive to inject funds into the firm.
4.1.1

Firm assets

Consider a firm that generates cash flows at a rate of X t . We interpret X t as assets-in-place
which evolve as follows:
dX t 
= it dt + σ dZ t .
Xt

18

(2)

Here, σ is the constant volatility, and {Z t : 0 ≤ t < ∞} is the standard Brownian motion. Differing
from standard Leland settings, in Eq. (2) the growth rate it is the endogenous investment
decision controlled by equity holders. For simplicity, we assume that i ∈ {0, i} takes a binary
value, i.e., equity holders can decide to invest or not. The investment cost is modeled as λ X t it dt
because the investment benefit scales with X t as well.
We assume a constant interest (discount) rate r > 0 in this infinite horizon model. If equity
holders always invest, then the present value of the firm, given the current value of assets-inplace X t , is

t   e
 t
∞

− r ( s −t )

( X s − λiX s ) ds  =

1 − λi
Xt.
r −i

(3)

Comparing this value to the value X t / r without investment at all, we assume that λ r < 1 which
ensures that investment at every instant would maximize the total value of the firm.
Denote the investment policy by i ( X ) which depends on current assets-in-place X . In
Proposition 3 we will show that in equilibrium equity holders use a simple threshold policy, i.e.,
invest whenever the value of assets-in-place exceeds a critical level X i :

i X ≥ Xi
i( X ) = 
.
0 X < X i

(4)

As mentioned in Section 2.1, investment can be only taken by equity holders, and future
investment opportunities are lost when debt holders take over the firm from bankruptcy. This
leads to an endogenous cost of financial distress. Unlike Leland’s models, we impose no other
exogenous costs of financial distress.
4.1.2

Stationary debt structure

The firm has one unit of debt with a constant aggregate principal face value of P . As in
Leland (1994b, 1998), we take a simple refinancing policy which governs the firm’s maturity
structure. Under this framework with refinancing frequency f , at each instant a constant fraction
of debt, fdt , becomes due and must be refinanced to keep the amount of total debt outstanding

19

constant. This isolates the effect of maturity from changes in the amount of debt. 16 This
stationary debt structure describes a firm which smoothes out interest and principal payments to
avoid spikes in refinancing activity. One immediate application of the constant refinancing rate is
analysis of borrowers who for some exogenous reason have a particular debt maturity. For
example, banks issue short-term deposits and have a very short debt maturity. More generally,
the stationary debt structure is assumed for tractability, but is a sensible place to start. For
detailed discussion about this refinancing policy, see Section 4.6.
One can show that the average debt maturity is m ≡ 1 f . The higher the rollover frequency

f , the shorter the debt maturity. To the extreme, if f goes to infinity (so m goes to zero), then
the debt represents zero maturity demandable debt that matures immediately after the issuance.
The advantage of this setting is that, because each bond is retired exponentially, at any point
of time the firm’s existing bonds--including those just newly issued--are identical. Besides
tractability, we adopt this framework because the overall refinancing rate is the most relevant
variable to characterize a firm’s debt maturity structure, and we treat this refinancing rate as a
parameter. For understanding overhang, this is a reasonable treatment because the refinancing
rate is essentially the frequency of repricing, and repricing to reflect the benefits of new
investment is central to the equity holders’ incentives to invest. Thus, this framework preserves
the key difference between long- and short-term debt in regard to overhang due to wealth
transfer to debt holders. Interestingly, in addition to the usual positive force of repricing to
reduce overhang on investment, we will see another offsetting effect where shorter-term debt
leads equity to default earlier in bad times, which exacerbates overhang. The latter effect is
closely related to rolling over debt, to which we turn next.
4.1.3

Rolling over debt

The market value of the firm’s debt is denoted by D ( X t ) . In refinancing, the firm issues

(1 m ) dt units of new bonds to receive total proceeds of ( D ( X t ) m ) dt , paying ( P

m ) dt to retire

maturing bonds. The market price of newly issued bonds fluctuates with assets-in-place X t ,
leading to net payments to bond holders which we refer to as rollover gains/losses of

16

“Debt retirement” in this fashion is similar to a sinking fund that continuously buys back debt at par with a
constant rate of repayment.

20

1
 D ( X t ) − P  dt. 17 Equity holders are the residual claimants of the rollover gains or losses:
m
any gain will be immediately paid out to equity holders and any loss will be paid off by issuing
more equity at its market price. Thus, the net cash flow to equity holders is

1
X t dt − λ X t it dt +  D ( X t ) − P  dt.
m
The first term is the firm’s cash flows, the second term is the investment cost, and the third term
is the rollover loss. As emphasized by He and Xiong (2012), when the assets-in-place X t
deteriorate in value, equity holders absorb the rollover loss by issuing additional equity to
prevent bankruptcy, and this loss is amplified by the rollover frequency f = 1 m . Equity holders
are willing to inject cash to repay the maturing debt holders as long as the option value of
keeping the firm alive (and hence choosing to default later) justifies the expected rollover losses.
This leads to default when the equity value drops to zero, which occurs when the firm’s assetsin-place X t drops to an endogenously determined threshold X B .
4.1.4

Valuations and optimal policies

The debt value satisfies the following equation:
rD ( X ) = i ( X ) D ′ ( X ) +

σ2
2

D ′′ ( X ) +

1
( P − D ( X )) .
m

(5)

The left-hand side is the required return for the debt, which equals the expected increment in the
debt value on the right-hand side. The first two terms capture the fluctuation in X t in Eq (2). The
third term is the change of the debt value due to retirement: a (1 m ) dt fraction of debt matures,
with the valuation change being the principal payment P minus the bond value before retiring.
We need boundary conditions to solve Eq.(5). Firms with extremely profitable assets-inplace X = ∞ never default and the default-free debt value is p ≡ P (1 + mr ) . From now on we
treat the default-free debt value p as the primitive parameter (instead of the stated principal value

P ). On the other hand, equity defaults when X = X B , and debt holders receive the firm with a

17

Because of zero-coupon debt, discounting implies the firm always incurs rollover losses. Rollover gains could
occur if we instead assumed a bond issued at par by setting a coupon rate higher than r . Whether rollover gains are
possible or not is not essential to our analysis. As shown in He and Xiong (2012), the key is that increased rollover
losses for lower values of the assets-in-place increase equity holders’ incentive to default.

21

value of D ( X B ) = X B r without future investment (there is no exogenous bankruptcy cost).
One can formally show that p > X B r , i.e., on the date of default there is a loss to debt holders.18
Equity holders’ value E ( X ) satisfies the following equation:

1
1
rE ( X ) = max X + it XE ′ ( X ) + σ 2 X 2 E ′′ ( X ) − λit X − ( P − D ( X ) )
it ∈{0,i}
m
2

(6)

We have omitted the optimal default policy here; equity holders default at some endogenous
level X B and receive zero. The optimization in Eq. (6) with respect to it leads to an investment
policy in Eq. (4). The next proposition verifies the optimality of the threshold investment
strategy, and gives equity and debt values as solutions to Eq. (5) and Eq. (6), respectively.
Proposition 3. There exists a unique X i with E ′ ( X i ) = λ so that the optimal investment policy is

given by Eq. (4). Given X i and X B the equity value is

X (1 − λi )

− p + B1 X −γ 3 − A1 X −γ 1

r
−
i
E(X ) = 
 X − p + B X −γ 4 + B X δ 4 − A X −γ 2 − A X δ 2
2
3
2
3
 r

X ≥ Xi
,
X B < X < Xi

and

p + A1 X −γ 1
D(X ) = 
−γ 2
δ2
 p + A2 X + A3 X

if X ≥ X i
if X B < X < X i

where constants γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 , γ 4 , δ 2 , δ 4 , A1 , A2 , A3 , B1 , B2 , and B3 are given in the Appendix.
The expression for equity value is intuitive. When the firm invests X ≥ X i , the equity value
is the firm value that would prevail if the firm always invested, X (1 − λ i ) ( r − i ) in Eq. (3),
minus the default-free debt value p , with the adjustment for potential future default and stopping
investment (at least temporarily). Outside the investment region X B < X < X i , the equity value is
the firm value without investment X r minus the default-free debt value p , taking into account
both potential future default and coming back to the investment region.
18

This can be seen by a standard real option argument. Suppose that X B ≥ rp ; then D ( X B ) = p and the debt is

riskless. With the option to default, equity holders must incur strictly negative cash flows at X B . From Eq. (6), since
equity holders can set i = 0 , at X B the cash flow for equity is at least XB − ( P − p) / m = XB − rp > 0 , contradiction.

22

Finally, the endogenous investment threshold X i satisfies E ′ ( X i ) = λ , and the endogenous
default boundary X B satisfies the smooth-pasting condition E ′ ( X B ) = 0 . The detailed equations
and steps in solving for these two endogenous variables are given in the Appendix.
4.2

Optimal Debt Maturity

Recall that the example in Section 2.4 illustrated the following idea. For future investment
opportunities, short-term debt hurts the firm’s incentives to invest especially in bad times.
However, long-term debt imposes a less state-contingent overhang, and reduces the firm’s
Firm Value

Optimal Default and Investment Policies
0.92
11.95

0.9
0.88

11.9

0.86

Optimal maturity m*=14
11.85

0.84

Default Boundary X

0.82

Investment Boundary X

B
i

11.8

0.8
11.75

0.78
0.76

11.7
0.74
0.72
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

11.65
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Maturity m=1/f

Maturity m=1/f

Figure 2: Optimal default policy (solid line) and investment policy (dashed line) and firm values for different debt
maturities. The parameters are r=10%, σ=15%, i=7%, λ=9, X0=1, and D0=10.

investment incentives especially in good times (relative to short-term debt). As we illustrate now,
this trade-off generally leads to an interior optimal maturity choice.
We choose r = 10% , σ = 15% , i = 7% , and λ = 9 . We normalize the date-0 assets-in-place
to X 0 = 1 , and set the target date-0 debt value D0 = 10 . The left panel of Figure 2 graphs the
optimal investment and default policies, and the right panel graphs the date-0 firm value; both
are plotted against debt maturity m . As before, to fix date-0 debt value D0 , when varying
maturity m we search for the default-free debt value p so that D0 = 10 always.19
In this model, because shorter-term debt requires equity holders to absorb greater rollover
losses (incurring higher financing costs) once the firm’s assets-in-place deteriorate, equity
holders default earlier as they refuse to subsidize debt holders, a symptom of debt overhang. This
19

Though not reported, in our example
associated with longer-term debt.

p is increasing in debt maturity to compensate for the greater default risk
23

result can also be seen by observing that, because shorter-term debt does not share as much risk,
it leads to more volatile equity value and hence equity holders’ default option falls “into the
money” more often. Graphically, in the left panel of Figure 2 we observe that default boundary

X B rises (hence earlier default) for shorter debt maturity m . As default destroys future
investment opportunities, earlier default caused by short-term overhang hurts the firm value.
Now focus on investment policy. In the left panel of Figure 2, we find that the investment
threshold X i first decreases with debt maturity for m that is below about 2, then increases with
debt maturity afterwards. We will devote Section 4.4 to discuss the range of very short maturity
debt (i.e., m below about 2) where shorter maturity reduces investment incentives. In this section,
we only focus on the increasing region where shorter debt maturity improves investment
incentives.
For debt maturity m being above about 2, equity holders are more reluctant to invest (a
higher threshold X i ) facing debt with longer maturity (a greater m ). Relative to short-term debt,
although the long-term debt holders--due to less frequent repricing--share more losses with
equity holders when the assets-in-place deteriorate, they also share more gains given good news.
Consequently, as more investment benefit goes to debt holders (increased overhang), equity
holders will set a higher investment threshold X i with longer-term debt.
The combination of these two forces (one on default policy, and the other on investment
policy) leads to an interior optimal maturity choice ( m* = 14 ) that maximizes the initial firm
value, as shown in the right panel of Figure 2. To further illustrate the mechanism, Figure 3 plots
the marginal impact of the firm’s assets-in-place on equity value, i.e., E ′ ( X ) for m = 5 (thin solid
line), m = 14 (thick solid line) and m = 30 (thin dashed line). We can directly compare the
equity holders’ investment incentive E ′ ( X ) to the investment cost λ (flat dotted line). Firms with
shorter debt maturity m = 5 have the steepest E ′ ( X ) curve: they invest early once E ′ ( X ) crosses

λ , but also default early when E ′ ( X ) hits zero. As shown, the flatter equity holders’ investment
incentive E ′ ( X ) under a longer debt maturity m = 30 gives the opposite effect: the firm invests
late and defaults late. The curve m = 14 balances these two forces and delivers the highest firm
value.

24

E'(X): Impact of Assets-in-place on Equity Value
12
10
8
6

m=5, steepest
optimal maturity m=14

4

m=30, flattest
λ =9, investment threshold

2
0
0.7

0.8

0.9
1
Assets-in-place X

Figure 3: The impact of assets-in-place on equity value

1.1

1.2

for debt maturities m=5 (thin solid line), m=14 (thick solid

line), and m=30 (thin dashed line). The investment cost
is also plotted (flat dotted line) so that the investment
threshold
satisfies
. The parameters are r=10%, σ=15%, i=7%, λ=9, X0=1, and D0=10.

Underlying the pattern of “the shorter the debt maturity, the steeper the equity holders’
investment incentives” is the insensitivity of short-term debt value with respect to the firm value,
due to more frequent repricing. This translates to a greater volatility of debt overhang of shortterm debt, a result consistent with the example in Section 2.4. As shown in Figure 3, equity
holders with m = 5 have lower E ′ ( X ) for low values of assets-in-place and therefore default
earlier, but also have higher E ′ ( X ) for high values of assets-in-place which fosters efficient
investment. Hence, although not sharing gains makes short-term debt better at preserving
equity’s incentive to invest in good times, not sharing losses in bad times pushes equity holders
to default, eliminating future investment opportunities. In contrast, equity holders with m = 30
have worse investment incentives in good times, but they are also willing to hold on longer to
retain future investment opportunities, since long-term debt shares more losses in bad times.
Before we move on to the next subsection, recall that in the left panel of Figure 2, for very
short maturity (below about 2 years), both the investment and default thresholds decrease with
debt maturity. In this range, an even shorter-term debt presents a double evil--firms are not only
more likely to default but also less likely to invest. This result is related to the assumption of
inter-temporally linked investment, a topic that we discuss in Section 4.4.

25

4.3

State-Dependent Investment Opportunities

The discussion of the higher volatility of investment with shorter-term debt suggests a role of
state-dependence of investment opportunities. Because short-term debt is better at preserving
equity holders’ investment incentives in good times, a firm with sufficiently good investment
opportunities in good times should use shorter-term debt for better investment incentives. This
section further explores this idea.
4.3.1

Fixed investment cost and optimal policies

Keep the same binary investment technology (either invest or not) as in Section 4.1, but
modify the investment cost as a combination of fixed cost part ρ and variable cost part Δ :

λ ( X t ; ρ , Δ ) = ρ + Δλ iX t .

(7)

We can broadly interpret the case of ρ < 0 as fixed investment benefit, as by investing the firm
receives −ρ as a flow benefit. When ρ = 0 and Δ = 1 we are back to our base model studied above
with a pure variable cost. To isolate state-dependence of investment opportunities from overall
profitability, we posit a cost structure so that on average the firm value remains unchanged; for
instance, ρ > 0 and Δ < 1 .
The structure in (7) allows us to use the fixed investment cost part ρ > 0 to proxy for the
state-dependence of investment opportunities. To show this, we demonstrate that a higher ρ
implies a higher correlation between investment opportunities and assets-in-place. Recall that we
always keep the investment benefit to be purely variable, i.e., X t grows at a rate of i by investing.
Therefore, the net present value (NPV), of investing always from now on, is (using the similar
calculation as in Eq. (3))
X
ρ
 X
 ΔλiX ρ  i (1 − Δλ )
−  −
+ =
X− .

r
r (r − i)
r
 r −i r 
 r −i

(8)

Investment benefit Investment cost

On the left hand side, the first parenthesis is the increment of the firm present value by investing
always, and the second parenthesis is the present value of total investment cost. The difference is
the NPV of investment (always) given on the right hand side.
Eq. (8) suggests that, relative to the base case of ρ = 0 and Δ = 1 , the case of ρ > 0 and Δ < 1
makes the investment NPV more sensitive to X t , i.e., a higher correlation between investment
opportunities and assets-in-place. The similar but exactly opposite reasoning implies that the
26

Firm Value with Different ρ's

12

Optimal Debt Maturity
22

m*=14

11.95

20

11.9

18

11.85

16
ρ=0, baseline case
ρ=0.05, higher correlation between
investment opportunity and assets-in-place

11.8

14

11.75

12

11.7

10

11.65
0

5

10
15
20
debt maturity f=1/m

25

8
-0.05

30

0

correlation ρ

0.05

0.1

Figure 4: Optimal debt maturity as a function of state-dependence of investment opportunities. The left panel plots the firm
value against debt maturity, for both the baseline case (ρ=0, dashed line) and the case with a higher correlation between
investment opportunities and assets-in-place (ρ=0.05, solid line). The right panel plots the optimal debt maturity as a
function of ρ. The parameters are r=10%, σ=15%, i=7%, λ=9, X0=1, and D0=10.

firm with ρ > 0 and Δ < 1 has worse investment opportunities for lower assets-in-place.20 Hence,
from now on we refer to ρ as the measure of correlation between firm’s assets-in-place and
investment opportunities. The higher the ρ , the better the investment opportunities in good times.
In the Appendix we give the valuations and optimal policies for this extension.
4.3.2 Optimal debt maturity and state-dependent investment opportunities

The insight developed in Section 4.2 suggests that the firm should use shorter-term debt if its
investment opportunities are better for higher values of the assets-in-place, i.e., a higher ρ . The
logic is simple. In Figure 3 we have shown that shorter-term debt leads to lower overhang for
higher values of assets-in-place. Therefore, it is particularly good at motivating equity holders to
invest in good times, if indeed the firm has good investment opportunities around that time.
To illustrate this point, we start with the base model with a pure variable cost (i.e., ρ = 0 and

Δ = 1 ), and find the optimal maturity m* which achieves the highest firm value V * . We then
consider a positive ρ > 0 , and control the total firm value by adjusting downward the variable
cost part Δ appropriately. Call the resulting variable cost Δ ρ . As shown in the left panel of
Figure 4, this requires that the new firm value (as a function of debt maturity m , the solid line)

(

)

under the cost structure Δ ρ , ρ crosses the baseline firm value curve (the dashed line) at m* .
20

With only a fixed cost, even an all-equity firm stops investing when the variable investment benefit goes below

the fixed cost for sufficiently low assets-in-place (e.g, for Xt close to zero).

27

(

)

We are interested in the optimal maturity that maximizes the firm value under Δ ρ , ρ with

ρ > 0 . Because the firm value has a negative slope at the original optimal maturity m* in the left
panel of Figure 4, the optimal maturity with a higher ρ > 0 must be shorter than m* (with ρ = 0 ).
Denote the resulting optimal maturity, as a function of ρ , by m * ( ρ ) . The procedure
described above allows us to graph the optimal maturity m * ( ρ ) in the right panel of Figure 4. As
expected, when the firm has greater investment opportunities for high assets-in-place, the longerterm debt overhang hurts the firm value more severely, and as a result the firm should adjust its
optimal debt maturity toward shorter-term.
This result has important empirical implications. The debt of a growth firm should be
shorter-term, only if we define a growth firm as one with substantial uncertainty about its
investment opportunities and that the value of its existing investment projects is highly
correlated with the value of new investment. In comparison, if future opportunities are known
and current asset returns are not very informative about them, then for a given amount of
leverage, the firm value is higher with longer-term debt. Firms with investment opportunities that
are most important in bad times, such as mature firms where maintenance investment is needed
to replace unexpectedly high depreciation and there is little learning about other aspects of
profitability, will maximize value with even longer-term debt. This is very different from the
idea that firms with substantial future investment opportunities should choose shorter-term debt.
4.4

Short-term Debt Overhang and Inter-Temporally Linked Investment

At the end of Section 4.2 we pointed out that, in the left panel of Figure 2, short-term debt
may be doubly evil: for maturity below 2, firms with shorter-term debt may default earlier and be
less likely to invest.
To understand this result, we stress one important property of our investment technology. In
our dynamic setting laid out in Section 4.1.1, Eq. (2) implies that investment benefits are intertemporally linked. Consider the hypothetical situation that starting from next period the firm may
lose its future investment opportunities with an exogenous probability π ∈ [ 0,1] , but will keep
investing in the future with probability 1 − π . One can interpret π as the firm’s exogenous default
probability.

28

Investment today improves the current value of assets-in-place X t to X t (1 + idt ) at the end of
today; but what about the market value of assets-in-place? Because the value is

1 − λi
X t (1 + idt ) with future investment while only X t (1 + idt ) / r otherwise (recall Eq. (3)), the
r −i
firm value at the end of today, given the exogenous default probability π , is
1 − λi 
 1
π r + (1 − π ) r − i  X t (1 + idt ) .

(9)

Importantly, this value is decreasing in the default probability π . In our setting with log-normal
structure, investment decisions at all periods enter the total firm value in a multiplicative fashion,
and hence a high future investment policy boosts the equity holders’ investment incentive today.
The positively connected investment incentives across periods are natural, and particularly
relevant in situations with staged investments.
In our model, the probability of future default π is endogenous, and moreover, increasing in
the equity holders’ default threshold X B . In the left panel of Figure 2, the ultra-short debt
maturity leads equity holders to set a high default threshold X B . Hence, current investment that
will not be made to grow in the future becomes less profitable. Put differently, short-term debt
and associated default eliminates future firm growth, which reduces the total payoff of current
investment.
In Section 4.2 we have seen another opposite force, through which short-term debt improves
equity holders’ investment incentives due to more frequent repricing. Which force prevails
depends on parameters. In the following proposition, we consider the limiting case where debt
approaches demandable debt with zero maturity, and provide a sufficient condition under which
the effect of eliminating future growth dominates.
As we point out in the Appendix, this sufficient condition always holds for low but positive
investment cost, i.e., when λ

is sufficiently small. To see this, recall that E ′ ( X i ) = λ while

E ′ ( X B ) = 0 ; hence λ also captures the distance between investment and default. If this distance

is close, then the effect of eliminating future growth dominates. By interpreting investments that
should be made even when close to default as maintenance, this result essentially says that the
shorter the debt maturity, the sooner the firm defaults, and the earlier the firm stops maintaining
its assets.
29

Proposition 4. Fix the date-0 market value of debt, and let debt maturity approach zero, i.e.,
m → 0 . We have the following results:

1. The default threshold X B converges to rp .
2. When the primitive parameters satisfy the sufficient condition provided in the Appendix,
the investment threshold X i is higher (making the firm likely to invest) for shorter debt maturity.
Proposition 4 establishes that debt overhang can exist even if firms issue a sequence of
demandable debt contracts. Moreover, note that X B / r is the limit of firm value recovered at
default by debt holders. Then, the first result in Proposition 4 says that for ultra-short-term debt,
what debt holders recover in fact converges to the bonds’ default-free value p .21 Therefore, these
debt securities are almost riskless, but still impose overhang!
This result is interesting because, from the standard static model with a single investment
opportunity, the logic of Myers (1977) implies that riskless debt leads to no overhang. However,
in our dynamic model with inter-temporally dependent investment incentives, these almost riskfree debt securities impose strong overhang on equity holders. What drives this result?
The key mechanism is truncation of future investment opportunities in (future) bad states
where the borrower chooses to default. Although lender losses are very small, this truncation
hurts today’s investment incentives of equity holders, given inter-temporally linked investment
opportunities. In a static model, truncation is just payment default and necessarily implies risky
debt. In a dynamic investment model, the significance of truncation of future investment is not
related to whether debt holder losses are large. In fact, if anything, safer debt securities require
more truncation, because to maintain safety debt holders should take over the firm at a higher
value of assets-in-place. This is closely related to an extreme situation considered in Leland
(1994), where the firm issues “protected debt” contracts whose holders can take over the firm
whenever the firm value drops to the debt default-free value. By definition the debt is risk-free;
however, one can show that equity holders’ investment incentive right before default is
E ′ ( X ) = 1 / r (setting π = 1 in Eq. (9)), which is below the first-best investment incentive

1 − λi
.
r −i

As a result, protected riskless debt imposes overhang on inter-temporally linked investment.

21

A similar result for ultra-short-debt is obtained by Leland and Toft (1996) in a model without investment
opportunities but with bankruptcy costs.

30

4.5

What if the Investment Opportunity is Only in the Future?

We have seen one drawback of short-term debt, i.e., inefficiently early default which
eliminates future investment opportunities. To study this effect in isolation, we consider the
simplified model without interim investment, i.e., i = 0 . Instead, the firm is waiting for a second
stage for expansion, after which there is no future uncertainty. This expansion stage arrives as a
Poisson event with intensity ξ > 0 for equity holders to improve the assets-in-place X t to θ X t at
no cost, with θ > 1. We set the expansion cost to be zero so that equity holders are always willing
to expand. This eliminates debt overhang in the expansion stage, and allows us to focus only on
the debt overhang effect of default before the expansion stage.
Because default at X B eliminates the future investment opportunity, our modeling is
isomorphic to a standard (exogenous) bankruptcy cost as in Leland (1994). Hence, maximizing
the firm value is equivalent to inducing default as late as possible, i.e., minimizing the default
boundary X B . The derivation of debt value, equity value, and endogenous default boundary is
standard (see Appendix). The endogenous default boundary can be derived in closed-form:
XB =

rpγ 5 ( m )

γ 5 ( m ) − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )

r + ξθ
r +ξ

(10)

where γ 5 ( m ) and γ 6 are given in Eq. (13) in the Appendix. We further show that all else equal, X B
is increasing in p , as equity holders default earlier for a greater debt burden; and all else equal,

X B is decreasing in maturity m so that shorter-term debt leads to earlier default. The next
proposition gives a stronger result that X B is decreasing in maturity m , even if taking into
account that the firm adjusts the promised debt value p to control for leverage D0 .
Proposition 5. Fix target date-0 debt value. Equity holders always choose p so that the date-0

debt value is increasing in p (i.e., ∂D0 ∂p ≥ 0 ), and the default boundary X B is decreasing in m .
Hence extremely long-term debt (i.e., m = ∞ ) is preferable.
Proposition 5 notes that at the optimum, the market value of debt always increases in the
promised payment p . This excludes what might otherwise happen due to a debt “Laffer curve,”
where raising an already excessive promised payment reduces the debt value by inducing
excessively earlier default. Equity holders who maximize date-0 firm value will avoid this wrong
31

side of debt “Laffer curve,” 22 and with the aid of this observation we are able to prove that
dX B dm < 0 , i.e., equity holders default later with longer-term debt.

This result formalizes the intuition that “long-term debt is better at preserving firm’s
incentives to stay alive for future investment.” Also, one can show that, in the similar spirit of
Section 3 with immediate investment, if the investment opportunity is only present at date-0,
then shorter-term debt is preferable in reducing overhang (the proof is upon request). These two
extreme cases (one only with future investment, the other only with immediate investment) are
the forces behind the trade-off shown in Section 4.2 for firms with interim investment
opportunities.
4.6

Discussion of a Changing Refinancing Policy

Refinancing policy, which affects future overhang when issuing new debt, is one of the
natural ingredients of an optimal debt maturity structure. Following Leland (1994b, 1998) and
for tractability, we have performed our analysis based on a stationary debt structure with
constant refinancing rate f = 1 / m . Because the option to default and repricing are the reasons
that maturity influences debt overhang, this dynamic framework with stochastic values of assetsin-place captures important issues of how debt maturity influences the equity holders’ incentives
to invest over time. 23 Moreover, our analysis applies to the situation where the firm’s debt
maturity structure is largely determined by other considerations (e.g., commercial banks with
demand deposits).
What if firms have flexibility in adjusting their refinancing policies, instead of a constant
refinancing policy? Determining a desirable policy with a variable debt maturity requires
knowledge of the effects of a fixed maturity. A full analysis of the case of flexible refinancing
policies is intractable using existing models and beyond the scope of this paper.24 Nevertheless,
22

That is, there exists some default-free debt value p that produces a maximum market value of the date-0 debt.
Equity holders would never promise debt holders more than p because they could raise the same amount by
promising them less and defaulting less (both of which increase the payoff of equity holders).
23
The convenient feature of this setting is that looking forward the model is always identical, because the firm keeps
the total amount of promised payments constant over time. What varies is the amount raised from this promise (and
this leads to a time varying shortfall of funds which is larger when default risk is higher). In practice, this is
primarily about units of measurement of default premia. Whether the default premia are represented by a larger
shortfall or higher future promises is not responsible for our qualitative results.
24
Existing studies of dynamic adjustments to leverage by firms with investment decisions assume that debt maturity
is fixed. Moyen (2007) assumes that long-term debt can never adjust its future payments while short-term debt can
and will always adjust to its optimal leverage. Titman and Tsyplakov (2007) follow Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner
(1989) to assume that a firm has to call back its entire outstanding debt whenever adjusting its capital structure. This

32

we provide some discussion which may be helpful in understanding the robustness of our results
to other refinancing policies.
4.6.1

Robustness of state-contingent short-term debt overhang

Our key result that short-term debt imposes more (less) overhang in bad (good) times should
be qualitatively robust. Take our model, but suppose that the firm can freely set the refinancing
rate f for newly issued bonds as the assets-in-place value X t fluctuates. If this were possible, the
firm could, as part of an explicit contract, adjust its debt maturity structure dynamically. For
better investment/default incentives, we expect the refinancing rate f for newly issued bonds to
be increasing in the assets-in-place X t ,25 so that the firm is targeting a move toward a shorter(longer-) term maturity structure when the value of assets-in-place is high (low) on average.
Having said that, because the firm’s assets-in-place fluctuates unexpectedly, and it takes time to
fully adjust the firm’s overall debt maturity, having short- (long-) term debt only in good (bad)
times is not achievable. Moreover, the unexpected fluctuation of X also implies that it is not
optimal to take some extreme refinancing policies, say f ( X ) → 0 for sufficiently low X . For this
reason, the qualitative result that short-term debt imposes more (less) overhang in bad (good)
times should remain in the more general model.
The above discussion suggests that debt with state-contingent maturities, especially bonds
with automatically reset longer maturity in bad times and shorter maturity in good times, will be
value-improving. In practice, we do observe this favorable state-contingency in the call feature
of some long-term debt.26 Hence, firms with state independent future investment opportunities
can improve investment incentives by using callable debt.
4.6.2

Dilution issue when lengthening maturity in bad times

Another important issue relates to dilution, such as transfers to other debt holders if equity
holders were to choose to lengthen the maturity of new debt during bad times. Fixing the amount
to be promised in the future, lengthening maturity today with existing debt in place increases
today’s rollover losses to equity--simply because longer-term debt has a lower price than shorter(fairly strong) assumption is needed for tractability, by eliminating the chance to dilute existing debt, but may not be
close to reality. The next section describes the importance of potential dilution.
25
The refinancing rate of newly issued bonds may also depend on the maturity structure of the firm’s exiting debt.
26
Bodie and Taggart (1978) suggest that callable long-term debt can alleviate overhang. However, the authors still
deem it as a puzzle why firms do not simply roll over short-term debt, which suggests that they do not realize that
rolling over short-term debt may worsen overhang in some states. An earlier draft of our paper examined callable
bonds and cash holdings (in a setting where managerial incentives were impaired by large cash holdings).

33

term debt with the same face value. This also says that moving to longer maturity subsidizes
existing soon-to-mature debt (by equity holders), as the policy gives existing debt holders
effective seniority (i.e., the timing of receiving money back) relative to new incoming debt
holders with longer maturity. 27 The greater rollover losses in bad times in turn increases equity
holders’ default incentives for firms close to default, suggesting that dynamic policies of
lengthening debt maturity and increasing rollover losses during bad times may be neither
desirable nor in the ex-post interest of equity. In fact, for similar reasons, Titman and Tsyplakov
(2007) find that equity holders may lack incentives to downward adjust firm leverage in bad
times, although it is optimal to do so from the firm’s perspective. See Diamond (1991), Diamond
and Rajan (2001b) and Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2011) for models where debt becomes
shorter-term in bad times with higher probability of default, which would further increase its
overhang.
This argument that equity is averse to increasing debt maturity (at market prices) in bad times
also lends support to the generality of the result that the policy of (a sequence of) ultra-short
riskless debts imposes overhang on inter-temporally linked investment opportunities (see Section
4.4). However, without formal analysis, it is hard to be more precise about what will happen
once we allow for flexible refinancing policies. We await future research on this topic.
4.6.3

Flexibility of short-term debt

Myers (1977) proposes that short-term debt could provide “for continuous and gradual
renegotiation, in which the firm can in principal shift at any time back to all-equity
financing.” This suggests that short-term debt offers flexibility for the firm to adjust its
capital structure to avoid overhang. The benefit would be the shorter time for all or most debt
to mature before either switching to all-equity, or negotiating with lenders for the benefits
that equity holders obtain from injecting more cash. A related result is presented in a model
by Brunnermeier and Yogo (2009) where the risk-free short-term debt allows the firm, at
maturity, to switch to long-term debt financing, which reduces the risk of costly bankruptcy.
This result holds because long-term debt defers bankruptcy and very long-term debt is not
allowed in their model. Thus, continuing to issue short-term debt until the long term debt is
27

This dilution is analyzed in Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2011) in a model with no investment after debt is issued,
implying that long-term debt is efficient. Under certain conditions, equity holders prefer to issue a unit of new shortterm debt, which should be priced at a higher level than a unit of otherwise equal long-term debt. In essence, this
new short-term debt dilutes the value of existing long-term debt holders.

34

needed allows a longer effective maturity than the longest possible maturity available to the firm
initially.
As examples of dynamic adjustment of maturity, both ideas rely on the assumption that there
exists a time so that some news about investment opportunity or future default risk arrives before
existing debt suffers any risk of default. Otherwise, as analyzed in our model with interim
investment opportunities, short-term debt that is about to mature soon will impose overhang,
which reduces the equity’s incentives to invest or change to longer maturity--to the extreme,
equity may even default. In addition, if the merit of short-term debt is to allow firms to get back
to all-equity financing as quickly as possible, then the primitive reason for the firm to raise debt
in the first place becomes important. Indeed, thorough calibration, Moyan (2007) finds that in a
setting where firms raise short-term leverage to shelter taxes from improved profits before
investment decisions, short-term debt leads to overhang as strong as that of long-term debt
despite the fact that the firm can adjust short-term debt every period. What our analysis adds is
that in an uncertain economy it can be very risky to rely on short-term debt to provide increased
flexibility in future refinancing decisions.

5 Conclusion
Debt maturity influences investment incentives in a more nuanced way than suggested by
existing analysis. By definition, investment incentives are weak (and debt overhang is severe)
when very little of the return from investment accrues to equity. For a single immediate
investment, we show in a Black-Scholes-Merton model that shorter maturity debt is less sensitive
to increased firm value from a new investment. This provides an intuition why shorter-term debt
may impose less overhang, because the difference between the total return from investment and
the part accruing to equity is the change in the value of debt. When investment opportunities are
present in the future, this intuition is incomplete. Less risk shared with existing shorter-term debt
makes equity values and debt overhang more volatile, which affects future investment incentives.
We illustrate three ways in which shorter-term debt can impose stronger overhang. First,
when volatility of firm value is sufficiently higher in bad times than good times, shorter-term
debt can lead to higher overhang even for a single immediate investment decision taken just after
the debt is issued. Second, in a dynamic setting with future investment opportunities, the
reduction in equity value (and increased market leverage) due to the combination of bad times
and shorter-term debt is so large that equity holders’ investment incentives suffer greatly, and
35

they may choose to default earlier. Third, because shorter-term debt induces earlier future default
and elimination of future growth, it hurts equity holders’ incentives to invest (maintain) today
when investment benefits are inter-temporally linked.
There is an interesting application combing all of our results. For reasons other than the
effects on debt overhang, banks and other financial institutions issue short-term debt such as
deposits, matching well with our exogenous constant refinancing structure, and fund debt
contracts such as loans, implying high asset volatility in bad times. Our model then suggests that
the effects of debt overhang in bad times will be extremely large for banks. This is for different
reasons than the risk of runs and asset illiquidity leading to severe short-term debt overhang in
Diamond and Rajan (2011). Adding our results to theirs suggests that the debt overhang problem
for banks may be very severe.
The link between investment incentives and debt maturity is important for firms where future
investments are important. Besides offering several testable implications for future empirical
research, our paper suggests that managers who understand only one part of effect of debt
maturity on investment incentives could make poor choices of debt maturity structure.

36

References
Barclay, M., and C. Smith, Jr., 1995, The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt, Journal of Finance 50,
609-632.
Benmelech, E., 2006, Managerial Entrenchment and Debt Maturity: Theory and Evidence, Working paper,
Harvard University.
Billett, M., T. King, and D. Mauer, 2007, Growth Opportunities and the Choice of Leverage, Debt
Maturity, and Covenants. Journal of Finance 62, 697-730.
Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes,1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 637–654.
Bodie, Z. and R. Taggart, 1978, Future Investment Opportunities and the Value of the Call Provisions on
a Bond. Journal of Finance 33, 1187-1200.
Brunnermeier, M., and M. Oehmke, 2011, The Maturity Rat Race, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Brunnermeier, M. and M. Yogo, 2009, A Note on Liquidity Risk Management, American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 99, 578--583.
Calomiris, C., and C. Kahn, 1991, The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal Banking
Arrangements, American Economic Review 81, 497-513.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106, 709-737.
Diamond Douglas W., 1993, Seniority and maturity of debt contracts, Journal of Financial Economics 33,
341-368.
Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig, 1983, Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity, Journal of Political
Economy 91, 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas W., and R. Rajan, 2001a, Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial Fragility: A
Theory of Banking, Journal of Political Economy 109, 287-327.
Diamond, Douglas W., and R. Rajan, 2001b, Banks, short-term debt and financial crises: theory, policy
implications and applications, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 54, 37-71.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, Testing Trade Off and Pecking Order Predictions
About Dividends and Debt, Review of Financial Studies 15,1-33.
Fischer, E., R. Heinkel, and J. Zechner1989, Dynamic Capital Structure Choice: Theory and Tests,
Journal of Finance 44, 19-40.
Flannery, Mark, 1986, Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance 41,
19-37.
Gertner and Scharfstein, 1991, A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of Reorganization Law, Journal of
Finance 46, 1189-1222.
Guedes, J., and T. Opler, 1996, The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues, Journal of
Finance 51, 1809-1834.
Hackbarth, D., and D. Mauer, 2011, Optimal Priority Structure, Capital Structure, and Investment, Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
He, Z., 2011, A Model of Dynamic Compensation and Capital Structure, Journal of Financial Economics
100, 351-366.
He, Z., and W. Xiong, 2011, Dynamic Debt Runs, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
He, Z., and W. Xiong, 2012, Rollover Risk and Credit Risk, Journal of Finance 67, 391-429.
Jensen, M., and W. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
37

Johnson, S., 2003, Debt Maturity and the Effects of Growth Opportunities and Liquidity Risk on
Leverage, Review of Financial Studies 16, 209-236.
Lambrecht, Bart M. and Stewart C. Myers, 2008, Debt and managerial rents in a real-options model of the
firm, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 209-231.
Leland, H., 1994a, Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Structure, Journal of
Finance 49, 1213-1252.
Leland, H., 1994b, Bond prices, yield spreads, and optimal capital structure with default risk, Working
paper, UC Berkeley.
Leland, Hayne, and Klaus Bjerre Toft, 1996, Optimal capital structure, endogenous bankruptcy, and the
term structure of credit spreads, Journal of Finance 51, 987–1019.
Leland, H., 1998, Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Capital Structure, Journal of Finance 53, 12131243.
Merton Robert C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates. Journal
of Finance 29, 449-470.
Moyan, N., 2007, How Big is the Debt Overhang Problem?, Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control
31, 433-472.
Myers, S., 1977, The Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-175.
Stohs, M. and D. Mauer, 1996, The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity Structure, Journal of
Business 69, 279-312.
Titman, S. and S. Tsyplakov, 2007, A Dynamic Model of Optimal Capital Structure, Review of Finance
11(3): 401-451.

38

Appendix
Proof for Proposition 1
For simplicity denote V0 by V , and without loss of generality we set σ = 1 (which amounts to an absolute
time change). Given m and F , it is easy to calculate the second derivative with respect to V as (we use
n (  ) to denote the density function for normal distribution)

DF (V , F , m ) =

n (d )

F m

> 0, Dm (V , F , m ) = −

Vn ( d )
m

< 0,

(11)

And

 ( ln (V F ) + 0.5m )2 
1

exp  −
2m


2π
n (d )

 < 0.
(12)
=−
DVV (V , F , m ) = −
V m
V m
For short-term debt with maturity m1 and long-term debt with maturity m2 where m2 > m1 , Eq. (19) implies
that, to maintain the date-0 debt value, we must have F2 > F1 . Define the difference between these two
debt values as ΔD (V ) ≡ D (V , F1 , m1 ) − D (V , F2 , m2 ) which, due to Eq. (20), satisfies

ΔDVV (V ) = −

 ( ln (V F ) + 0.5m )2 
1
1
1

exp  −
2m1


2π

+
V m1

 ( ln (V F ) + 0.5m )2 
1
2
2

exp  −
2 m2


2π

.
V m2

It is easy to verify that
ΔD ( ∞ ) = F1 − F2 < 0, lim x → 0 ΔD ( x ) = 0, lim x → 0 ΔD ′ ( x ) = 0.

Given these results we now show that if Δ D (V ) = 0 admits positive solutions, then Δ D (V ) only

crosses zero at most once from above; note that this result implies that ΔDV (V ) < 0 whenever

ΔD ′ (V ) = 0 , which is the desired result. Suppose that Δ D (V ) crosses 0 from above at some Vˆ > 0 .

( )

Since ΔDV Vˆ < 0 while Δ DV ( ∞ ) = 0 , there must exist a region for V > Vˆ so that Δ D (V ) is convex,

which implies that ΔDVV is positive there. The following lemma is useful.
Lemma 1. Aside from V = 0 , ΔDVV , as a function of V , can be zero at most twice.

Proof. For ΔDVV = 0 we need

 ( ln (V F ) + 0.5m )2 
 ( ln (V F ) + 0.5m )2 
1
2
1
2
 exp  −

exp  −
2m1
2m2





=


m1
m2
Rearrange, we reach a quadratic equation for lnV . The result follows easily. QED.
Given this lemma, we now have three cases to consider.
1. Suppose that ΔDVV = 0 has no root, which implies that ΔDVV > 0 . But this cannot be true because

( )

it is inconsistent with Δ DV ( 0 ) = 0 but ΔDV Vˆ < 0 .

39

2. Suppose that there exists only one root for ΔDVV = 0 , which implies that Δ DVV (V ) is initially

negative and then turns positive. Therefore, Δ D (V ) is always concave before it turns convex.

This implies that there will not exist another solution V ′ < Vˆ so that Δ D (V ′ ) = 0 .To see this,

note that Δ D ( 0 ) = 0 ; then before the earlier solution V ′ at which Δ D (V

)

crosses 0 from below,

we must have ΔD < 0 (the bottom point somewhere between 0 and V ′ ) so that ΔD is convex.
This convex part takes place before the concave part between V ′ and Vˆ , contradiction.
3. Suppose we have two roots for ΔDVV = 0 . Then it must be first positive, then negative, then
positive; i.e., Δ D (V ) is convex first, concave then, and finally turns convex. In words, Δ D (V )

can only be concave in one interval. Now since it is easy to show that Δ DV ( 0 ) = 0 , the initial

convexity implies that Δ D (V ) is positive for V = 0 + . Then, for Δ D (V ) to have two solutions

after zero, we must have Δ D (V ) to become concave, convex, and then concave again. This
contradicts with restriction that Δ D (V ) is concave only in one interval.

Proof for Proposition 2
The first result follows from Proposition 1. For the second case, without loss of generality set
Consider V = V exp z 1 − 0.5 + z 2 − 0.5σ2 so that
2

(

0

2

)

Q = 0.

when z 1 > 0
when z 1 ≤ 0

 0

σ 2 = 
σ = ε

where ε is sufficiently small. When σ = 0 , the second period adds no risk, and long-term debt is identical
to short-term debt with the same value and overhang. We set F2 = exp ( − 0.5 ) , so that potential second
period noise occurs exactly when the long-term debt is at the money.
We consider a perturbation from σ = 0 to σ = ε > 0 , and comparing the change of overhang effects
on each debt. By adjusting F1 to ensure that both debts have the same value, we aim to show the
following term (where we denote debt overhang by OHt = Dt′ ) is positive

dOH1 dOH 2 dOH1 dF1 dOH 2 dOH1 dD2 dσ dOH 2
−
=
−
=
−
.
dσ
dσ
dF1 dσ
dσ
dF1 dD1 dF1
dσ
We will show that raising σ from 0 has no first order effect on long-term debt value D2 , i.e.,

dD2
dσ

= 0 while
σ =0

dOH 2
dσ

< 0 . Therefore, since dD1 dF1 > 0 , we obtain our result. To show these
σ =0

results, we have (note that Q = ln F2 + 0.5 )

40

 − x + σ
∞

  y1
1+ σ 2
 y  1 
+ y  n   dy + F2  σ 2 n   dy  n ( x ) dx
D2 (σ ) = F2  n ( x ) dx +    2 exp  x −
−∞
0
0− x +
2
 σ  σ 
2

 σ σ
 −∞


 ( y − σ 2 )2 
σ2
∞
− x+
∞
0 
1
y1 

2


dy +  σ 2 n   dy  n ( x ) dx
= F2  n ( x ) dx + F2  exp ( x ) 
exp −
−∞
−∞
− x+
0

2σ 2 
2πσ
σ σ 
2




2

∞

let t =

0

y −σ 2

=

x σ
∞
0 
− −
∞

F2  n ( x ) dx + F2  exp ( s )  σ 2 n ( t ) dt +  x σ n ( t ) dt  n ( x ) dx
−∞
−∞
− +
0
σ 2



σ

Therefore

0 
dD2 (σ )
 x σ  x 1 
 x σ   x 1 
= F2  exp ( x ) n  − −   2 −  − n  − +   2 +   n ( x ) dx
−∞
dσ
2
2 
 σ 2  σ
 σ 2  σ


0  
x σ  x 1 
 x σ   x 1 
= F2   n  − +   2 −  − n  − +   2 +   n ( x ) dx
−∞
2
2 
 σ 2 σ
  σ 2  σ
0
0
σ
 x σ

= − F2  n  − +  n ( x ) dx = −σ F2  n  −u +  n (σ u ) du
−∞
−∞
2
 σ 2

which is zero when σ = 0 . However, since
∞
0
∞
0
0
∞
 y1
OH 2 (σ ) = 1 −  n ( x ) dx −   σ 2 n   dyn ( x ) dx =  n ( x ) dx −   x σ n ( t ) dtn ( x ) dx
0
−∞ − x +
−∞
−∞
−
+
σ σ
σ 2
2

And the first order effect on overhang by raising σ is

dOH 2 (σ )
dσ

x σ
let t = +
σ 2

=



σ

2
−∞

0
0
1
 x σ  x 1 
 x σ  x σ 
=  n  − +   2 +  n ( x ) dx =  n  − +   +  n ( x ) dx
−∞
−∞
σ
2
 σ 2  σ
 σ 2  σ 2 


σ 2  let σ =0 1
n ( −t + σ ) tn  σ t −
< 0.
 dt = −
2 
2π


Therefore we proved our second result. QED.
Proof for Proposition 3
Define the following constants:

γ1 =
γ2 =
γ4 =

i − 0.5σ 2 +

(i − 0.5σ )

2 2

+ 2σ 2 ( r + f )

σ2

−0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2σ 2 ( r + f )

σ2
−0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2rσ 2

σ2

> 0, γ 3 =

> 0, δ 2 =

> 0, δ 4 =

i − 0.5σ 2 +

(i − 0.5σ )

2 2

+ 2rσ 2

σ2

0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2σ 2 ( r + f )

σ2

0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2rσ 2

σ2

> 1.

> 0,

> 1.

(13)
We need three conditions to determine three constants. They are value matching conditions at X i and X B :

p + A1 X i−γ1 = p + A2 X i−γ 2 + A3 X iδ2 ,
p + A2 X B−γ 2 + A3 X Bδ2 =
41

XB
;
r

and the smooth pasting condition at X i which gives −γ 1 A1 X i− γ 1 −1 = −γ 2 A2 X i− γ 2 −1 + δ 2 A3 X iδ 2 −1 . Solving
these three (linear) equations gives the three constants:

A3 =

XB r − p

γ 1 + δ2 γ
X
γ 2 − γ1 i

2 +δ 2

X

−γ 2
B

δ2

+ XB

, A2 = A3

γ 1 + δ2 γ
X
γ 2 − γ1 i

2 +δ 2

, and A1 = A2 X iγ 1 −γ 2 + A3 X iγ 1 +δ 2 .

(14)

Now we move on to equity. First we show the optimality of threshold investment strategy. Recall the
condition that 1 > λ r so that investment is optimal in the first-best scenario. Because at X B the smooth
pasting condition implies that E ′ ( X B ) = 0 , while E′ ( X ) →

1 − λi
> λ as X → ∞ (the first best level
r −i

with constant default-free debt value), there must exist a solution to E ′ ( X i ) = λ . Suppose that we have
multiple solutions. Take the smallest one; to prove the optimality of the threshold strategy, it suffices to
show that, given the constructed equity value based on the threshold strategy, we must have
E ′ ( X ) > λ for X > X i , where E ( X ) solves the following ODE for X > X i :

1
1
rE ( X ) = X (1 − λi ) + iXE ′ ( X ) + σ 2 X 2 E ′′ ( X ) − ( P − D ( X ) ) ,
2
m

(15)

and D ( X ) = p + A1 X − γ 1 is given in Proposition 2. Suppose not; then there at least exist two other
solutions X 1 , X 2 > X i so that E ′ ( X 1 ) = λ and E ′′ ( X 1 ) < 0 ; E ′ ( X 2 ) = λ and E ′′ ( X 2 ) > 0 . We can find
some intermediate point X 3 ∈ ( X 1 , X 2 ) satisfying E ′ ( X 3 ) ≤ λ , E ′′ ( X 3 ) = 0 and

E ′′′ ( X 3 ) > 0.

Geometrically, X 3 is the bottom point of E ′ ( X ) so that the function E ′ ( X ) is flat and convex at X 3 . But
by taking another derivative of the ODE (15) we have

1
1
( r − i ) E′ ( X ) − 1 + λi = ( i + σ 2 ) XE′′ ( X ) + σ 2 X 2 E′′′ ( X ) + D′ ( X ) .
2

m

Evaluating this equation at X 3 , D′ ( X 3 ) > 0 (the constant A1 < 0 in Proposition 3) implies that

( r − i ) E ′ ( X 3 ) − 1 + λi > 0 . However, from E′ ( X 3 ) ≤ λ , we have a contradiction:
( r − i ) E ′ ( X 3 ) − 1 + λi ≤ ( r − i ) λ − 1 + λi = λ r − 1 < 0 .
Now we derive equity value. The firm value V ( X ) satisfies
 X (1 − λ i )
+ B1 X −γ
X ≥ Xi

V (X ) =  r −i
3

 X + B X −γ 4 + B X δ 4
2
3
 r

X B < X < Xi

We solve for the constants Bi ’s based on the value matching conditions and smooth pasting conditions:

i (1 − λ i ) γ 4 +1
Xi
r (r − i)
i (1 − λ i ) X i1+γ 3
γ 4 +δ 4
B3 =
,
B
=
−
B
X
,
an
d
B
=
+ B2 X iγ 3 −γ 4 + B3 X iγ 3 +δ 4 .
2
3 B
1
δ 4 +γ 4
γ 4 +δ 4
r (r − i)
(γ 3 + δ 4 ) X i − (γ 3 − γ 4 ) X B

(1 + γ 3 )

Then we get equity value E ( X ) = V ( X ) − D ( X ) .

Appendix for Section 4.1.4
Based on both E ′ ( X i ) = λ and E ′ ( X B ) = 0 , one can reach the nonlinear equation for y = X i X B :

42

1= γ3

− γ −δ
i 1 − δ 4 − (1 + γ 4 ) y 4 4
r γ 3 + δ 4 − (γ 3 − γ 4 ) y −γ 4 −δ 4

i (1 − λ r )


γ 1 (1 + γ 3 )
(γ 4 + δ 4 ) 

r (r − i)
 γ1 +

δ4
−γ 4
γ
δ
γ
γ
ry
+
y
−
−
y


( 3 4)
( 3 4)
r − i γ 2 + δ2
+


γ +δ
1 − λr γ 2 − γ1 
γ 2 1 2 y γ 2 − δ 2 y −δ 2

γ 2 − γ1







(16)

Now given the solution y , the default boundary is given by

γ2
X B = rp

γ1 + δ2
+ y −δ
γ 2 − γ1

2 −γ 2

γ 1 + δ2
− δ 2 y −δ
γ 2 − γ1

2 −γ 2

i (1 − λ r )
y (1 + γ 3 )
(γ 4 + δ 4 )
 γ1 + δ2

γ +δ
r −i
+
+ y −δ 2 −γ 2 
+ γ 2 1 2 − δ 2 y −δ 2 −γ 2
−γ 4
δ4
γ 2 − γ1
 γ 2 − γ1
 (γ 3 + δ 4 ) y − (γ 3 − γ 4 ) y

(17)

which further gives X i = yX B .
Appendix for Section 4.3.1
With the investment cost specification in Eq. (7), the equity holders’ optimal strategy still features
two thresholds ( X B , X i ) : The firm invests whenever X t ≥ X i , does not invest but keeps servicing the

debt when X t ∈ ( X B , X i ) , and defaults whenever X t drops to X B . Given ( X B , X i ) , the debt valuation
remains the same as Proposition 3, and the equity valuation is given by

 X (1 − Δλi ) ρ
− + C1 X −γ 3 − p − A1 X −γ1

r −i
r
E(X ) = 
 X + C X −γ 4 + C X δ 4 − p − A X −γ 2 − A X δ 2
2
3
2
3
 r

X ≥ Xi
X B < X < Xi

with

i (1 − Δλi ) γ 4 +1 Δγ 3
Xi −
γ3


r (r − i)
r
ρ
γ 3 i (1 − λi ) X i
γ 4 +δ 4
−γ 4
δ4
C3 =
,
C
C
X
,
and
C
X
C
X
C
X
+
+
=
−
=
+

.
B
i
i
i
2
3
1
2
3
r
(γ 3 + δ 4 ) X iδ4 +γ 4 − (γ 3 − γ 4 ) X Bγ 4 +δ4
 r (r − i)


(1 + γ 3 )

 − ρ − Δ λ iX
 , 0} we know that
We have the smooth pasting condition E ′ ( X B ) = 0 . From max {E ′ ( X ) iX

i ∈{0,i}

E′ ( X i ) =

ρ
iX i

+ Δλ. Recall y = X i X B , and ( y, X B ) satisfies the following system of equations

43

γ1 + δ2
− δ y − δ −γ
γ 2 − γ1 2
i (1 − λ r ) Δ 0γ 3 

−
 y (1 + γ 3 )
 (γ 4 + δ 4 )
γ2

X B = rp

γ1 + δ2
+ y −δ
γ 2 − γ1

1= γ3

+

2 −γ 2

 γ +δ

+  1 2 + y − δ 2 −γ 2  
 γ 2 − γ1


− γ −δ
i 1 − δ 4 − (1 + γ 4 ) y 4 4
r γ 3 + δ 4 − ( γ 3 − γ 4 ) y −γ 4 −δ 4

2

2

r −i
XB 
δ4
( γ 3 + δ 4 ) y − ( γ 3 − γ 4 ) y −γ 4

,
+γ2

γ1 + δ2
− δ 2 y −δ
γ 2 − γ1

2 −γ 2

i (1 − ρλ r )


Δγ
γ 1 (1 + γ 3 )
(γ 4 + δ 4 ) − 0 3 (γ 4 + δ 4 ) 

−
r
r
i
X
( )
B
 γ1 +

δ4
−γ 4


+
−
−
γ
δ
γ
γ
ry
y
y
(
(
r − i γ1 + δ2
3
4)
3
4)
+


γ +δ
1 − ρλ r γ 2 − γ 1 

γ 2 1 2 y γ 2 − δ 2 y −δ 2
γ 2 − γ1







δ 4 + γ 4 y −γ 4 −δ 4
r − i γ 3 
 
1 − ρλ r  r  γ 3 + δ 4 − ( γ 3 − γ 4 ) y −γ 4 −δ 4

 1 Δ0
.
 + 
i
yX

B
 

Proof of Proposition 4
It is easier to work through

f = 1/ m → ∞ . In Eq.(13), we see that γ 1, γ 2 and δ 2 are going to infinity
at the same order, while other constants are independent of f .
From Eq.(16) one can easily show that y → 1 for f → ∞ , and y as a function of f is given by
i (1 − rλ )
1 + (1 + γ 3 )
r −i
y

which is bounded. Hence y

γ 2 +δ 2

γ2( f )

=

r −i
1 + γ 3i / r

r (1 − rλ )

(18)

,
is bounded as well. Based on Eq (17), we have

X B = rp

γ2

i (1 − rλ )
1 + (1 + γ 3 )
+γ2
r −i

.

(19)

This immediately implies that X B → rp , which is the first claim in Proposition 4.
To show the second claim, we need to calculate the endogenous p which achieves the initial debt
value target D0 . Denote the initial assets-in-place by X 0 . Using the solution for A3 in Eq (14), one can

 XB

− p  , which implies that
 r


show that A3 → X Bγ 1 

p0 =
Define a ≡ 1 + (1 + γ 3 )

D0 − ( X 0 / X B )

−γ 1

1− ( X0 / XB)

XB

(20)

−γ 1

i (1 − rλ )
r −i
a
> 0 . Then when f → ∞ , Eq. (19)
> 0 and b ≡
r (1 − rλ ) 1 + γ 3i / r
r −i

and (18) can be rewritten as X B = rp

(

γ2
γ
and y
a +γ2

yields ( rD0 − X B ) γ 2 = aX B 1 − ( X 0 / X B )

−γ 1

2

(f)

= b . Combining X B equation with Eq. (20)

) which implicitly defines X
44

B

( f ) . Hence,

1 1
X 
−γ
−γ
aX Bγ ′ ( f )  − ( X 0 / X B ) − ( X 0 / X B ) ln 0 
XB 
∂X B
γ γ
=−
−γ
∂f
− a + γ + a (1 + γ )( X 0 / X B )

where we have denoted γ 1 , γ 2 by γ when f → ∞ . In the denominator, the second term vanishes. In the
numerator, the second and third terms vanish relative to the first term. Hence X B′ ( f ) →
Besides, y ′ ( f ) → −

y ln b

γ

2

γ ′ ( f ) . Because X i = X B y , we have X i′ ( f ) = ( a − ln b ) X i

aX Bγ ′ ( f )

γ2

.

γ ′( f )
, which
γ2

implies that X i increases in f if a > ln b holds when f → ∞ . Finally, notice that when λ → 0 so that the
investment threshold X i converges to X B , one can show that b = 1 and hence the condition holds always.
Appendix in Section 4.5
We give the equity and debt value with second stage expansion only. Footnote 18 and θ > 1 imply that
θ X B > pr . Thus, given the expansion opportunity, the firm value after expansion is θ X t / r ≥ θ X B / r , and
debt (equity) holders receive p ( θ X t / r − p ≥ 0 ).
Define the following constants:

γ 5 (m) =
with γ 5

−0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2σ 2 ( r + 1 m + ξ )

> 0, γ 6 =

σ2

−0.5σ 2 + 0.25σ 4 + 2σ 2 ( r + ξ )

σ2

> 0 (21)

X

> γ 6 . Given X B the debt value is D ( X ) = p + X Bγ 5  B − p  X −γ 5 , the firm value is
 r

1+γ 6
X r + ξθ X B1+γ 6 (θ − 1) ξ −γ 6 X X (θ − 1) ξ   X  
V (X ) =
X = +
−
1 − 
 .
r r +ξ
r
r +ξ
r
r r +ξ   XB  



and the equity value is

X r + ξθ X B1+γ 6 (θ − 1) ξ −γ 6
X

X − p − X Bγ 5  B − p  X −γ 5 .
−
r r +ξ
r
r +ξ
 r

The smooth pasting condition E ′ ( X B ) = 0 implies that
E ( X ) =V ( X ) − D( X ) =

XB =

rpγ 5

(22)

r + ξθ
γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )
r +ξ

It is clear that X B is increasing in p . For refinancing frequency f (thus maturity m ), notice that Eq.(21)
suggests that γ 5′ ( m ) < 0 while γ 6 is independent of m . Then we have

X B′ ( m ) =

rpγ 5′ ( m )
(γ 6ξ (θ − 1) + r + ξθ )
r +ξ

r + ξθ 
 γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 ) r + ξ 



45

2

< 0.

Proof of Proposition 5
We work through f instead of m = 1 f . Recall the debt value is

X

D = p + X Bγ 5  B − p  X −γ 5
 r




rpγ 5
= p + p
 γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 ) r + ξθ

r +ξ


We have

r + ξθ

−γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )

∂D
r +ξ
= p
r + ξθ
∂f

 γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 ) r + ξ


r + ξθ

 γ 6 − (1 + γ 6 ) r + ξ

 γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 ) r + ξθ

r +ξ



(θ − 1) ξ

(1 + γ 6 )
  X γ 5   X 
r +ξ
  0  ln  0  −
  X B    X B  γ − γ + (1 + γ ) r + ξθ
5
6
6


r +ξ



And
γ5

γ5








γ 5 (1 + γ 6 )

(θ − 1) ξ



.





 −γ
 X 5.




(23)

γ5

X 
 XB 
∂D
r +ξ
= 1−  B  −
.
r + ξθ  X 0 
∂p
 X0 
γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )
r +ξ

(24)

∂D0
< 0,
∂p
i.e., the debt value is decreasing in p . Then equity holders should reduce p , which reduces X B in Eq.

∂D
(22), and equity holders can find another p so that
> 0 but still keeping the date zero debt value D0 .
∂p

As X B is lower for p , the firm value and thus the equity value increases. Hence, we know that without
∂D
loss of generality we can focus on
≥ 0 , i.e., (24) is always positive.
∂p
Now we show that X B in (22) is increasing in f . We need to check the following is positive
When X 0 is sufficiently close to X B , i.e., the initial debt value is too high, it is possible that

dX B
df
where p′ ( f ) = −

Keep D


r + ξθ 
=  rpγ 5′ ( f ) + rp′ ( f ) γ 5   γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )
− rpγ 5′ ( f ) γ 5 ,


r + ξ 

∂D ∂f
with partial derivatives are given in (23) and (24). Rearranging and collecting
∂D ∂p

terms, we arrive at





γ5
γ5


 XB 
 XB 
 XB 


1− 
 + γ 5  X  ln  X 
X


dX B
 0
 0
 0
= sign 
.
ξ (θ − 1) 
df
γ5


γ5
γ 5 ( X B X 0 ) (1 + γ 6 )
r +ξ 
1 −  X B  −
  X 0 

r + ξθ
γ 5 − γ 6 + (1 + γ 6 )


r +ξ



46

The denominator, which is Eq. (24), is always positive. We need to show that the numerator is positive as
well. To see this, let z ≡ 

γ5

 ∈ ( 0,1) as X > X . Therefore, the above condition is equivalent to
0
B
X 0 

1 − z + z ln z > 0 which easily holds (as its derivative is negative for z ∈ ( 0,1) while equals zero when

z = 1 ). Hence,

XB

dX
dX B
> 0 and thus B < 0 .
dm
df

47

