                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE AND NEUTRAL POINT OF VIEW:
                            THE CASE OF WIKIPEDIA

                                          Shane Greenstein
                                             Feng Zhu

                                        Working Paper 18167
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18167


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Shane Greenstein and Feng Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Collective Intelligence and Neutral Point of View: The Case of Wikipedia
Shane Greenstein and Feng Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 18167
June 2012
JEL No. L17,L3,L86

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine whether collective intelligence helps achieve a neutral point of view using data from
a decade of Wikipedia’s articles on US politics. Our null hypothesis builds on Linus’ Law, often expressed
as “Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow.” Our findings are consistent with a narrow interpretation
of Linus’ Law, namely, a greater number of contributors to an article makes an article more neutral.
No evidence supports a broad interpretation of Linus’ Law. Moreover, several empirical facts suggest
the law does not shape many articles. The majority of articles receive little attention, and most articles
change only mildly from their initial slant.


Shane Greenstein
The Elinor and Wendell Hobbs Professor
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Feng Zhu
University of Southern California
fzhu@marshall.usc.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18167
1. Introduction

    The diffusion of the Internet and digital media has significantly increased the number of
opportunities for individuals around the globe to collaborate with each other. As a result, an increasing
number of organizations or communities today are harnessing the power of collective intelligence—a
shared intelligence that emerges from the collaboration of many individuals—to tackle problems that
are too big to be solved by themselves. For example, Wikipedia, the largest encyclopedia on the Web,
relies entirely on free contributions. Threadless.com uses a community of over 500,000 people to design
and select T‐shirts (Malone et al. 2009). Many open‐source software products are developed,
distributed and supported on a voluntary basis by and for users (e.g., Lakhani and von Hippel 2003; Ma
et al. 2008; Roberts et al. 2006; Singh et al. 2011).
    Collective intelligence has generated tremendous interest both in practice and in academic
literature for a number of reasons. Studies have documented that collective intelligence can lead to
more accurate predictions. For example, Galton (1907) and Surowiecki (2004) show that the median
estimate of a group when guessing the weight of an ox, stock prices, or winners in political elections can
be more accurate than experts’ estimates. Antweiler and Frank (2004) find that the information content
from Internet stock message boards can predict the behavior of financial markets. Wu and Brynjolfsson
(2009) demonstrate that search engines like Google can take advantage of queries submitted by their
users to provide highly accurate predictions of future housing prices. Dewan and Ramaprasad
(forthcoming) show that aggregate data from music blogs are correlated with consumers’ sampling
behavior of music tracks.
    Several studies also find that collective intelligence can lead to high‐quality output. von Hippel
(2005) finds that in some industries such as kitesurfing, the collective product‐design and testing work of
user innovation communities are a better source of innovation than companies’ own in‐house
development teams. Several studies find that open source software products have fewer bugs than
competing closed‐source software (e.g., Shankland 2003; Lemos 2004). In a similar vein, Giles (2005)
finds that Wikipedia is about as good a source of accurate scientific information as Britannica, an
encyclopedia authored by experts.
    While these prior studies find that collective intelligence performs well in the context of
uncontroversial and verifiable information, it is unclear whether a production model based on collective
intelligence will perform equally well when information is controversial, subjective, and unverifiable. It is




                                                        2
also unclear whether collective intelligence can be harnessed to produce any desirable outcome in such
settings.
    In this study, we examine whether collective intelligence in Wikipedia helps achieve a neutral point
of view in US politics. A “Neutral Point of View” (NPOV) is one of the tenets that all Wikipedia articles
aspire to achieve, along with “verifiability” and “the absence of original research.” If an article reflects
NPOV, then conflicting opinions are presented next to one another, with all significant points of view
represented. Achieving NPOV has been a goal for Wikipedia’s contributors and editors since its
founding.
    One would expect that NPOV should not be difficult to achieve when articles cover uncontroversial
topics loaded with objective information that can be verified against many sources. Such a setting
characterizes the vast majority of Wikipedia articles about established scientific topics, for example.
What about topics lacking these ideal features? What biases arise in topics where information is
controversial, subjective, and unverifiable? In the context of Wikipedia, although most contributors try
to diffuse issues with a fair representation, collective intelligence bias (CIB), the opposite of NPOV, may
arise for a number of reasons. For example, some issues are simply too complex for contributors to
resolve a dispute, such as in the case of interpreting the science behind global warming. Anyone can
verify the same objective data, but generating a consensus about what it all means takes considerable
effort and expertise. CIB can also survive because of the difficulties editing subjective information that is
costly to verify.
    The study sheds light on Wikipedia’s revision processes. We use Linus’ Law to build our null
hypothesis about this process. “Linus’ Law” often is expressed as the slogan, “Given enough eyeballs, all
bugs are shallow” (Raymond 1998). Many editors and contributors of Wikipedia believe that it governs
the emergence of NPOV during revision, and many participants in open‐source communities regard the
law as foundational. According to a narrow interpretation of Linus’ Law, articles should come closer to
NPOV as more contributors scrutinize them and make contributions. In a broad interpretation, a more
widely dispersed set of contributors also should contribute to the production of NPOV.
    The near‐decade of experience at Wikipedia provides sufficient variance to test Linus’ Law. With
Wikipedia’s size and scale, not all articles receive the same amount of attention and contributions. Some
have accumulated many contributions over time while others have not. Articles also vary in the
concentration of contributors they attract. In addition, Wikipedia retains prodigious records of its
revisions, which allow for a detailed statistical analysis.




                                                       3
    We apply the null hypothesis to a sample of 28,382 entries about US political topics in 2011. We
select these articles for two reasons. First, it is an interesting place to look. Achieving NPOV faces
challenges when articles cover controversial topics, and rely on subjective information that is costly to
verify. Hence, we presume that Linus’ Law has its highest probability of failing. Alternatively, if Linus’
Law succeeds here, it is likely to succeed for other topics. Second, it is feasible to measure bias, building
on an approach pioneered by Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), and the broader literature examining
content bias. Those gains come with one drawback. It is not available for all articles about US politics
(over 70,000 in 2011), so we must consider whether zero slant and bias signals merely lack of
information or sample selection issues.
    Wikipedia’s history also provides some interesting context for this study. Greenstein and Zhu (2012)
show that in its earliest years, Wikipedia’s political entries lean Democrat, on average, and tend to be
biased. Both of these traits diminish over time. By the most recent observation, on average, Wikipedia’s
entries lack much slant and contain (moderately) less bias than observed earlier. What role did revision
play in these trends? Oversimplifying somewhat, if Linus’ Law holds, then older articles could lose their
slant through more revision, diminishing bias and slant. Alternatively, if Linus’ Law does not hold, then
another mechanism, such as the entry of articles with opposite slant, is responsible for the aggregate
decline in average slant over time.
    This study shows that the evidence supports a narrow interpretation of Linus’ Law. Only one feature
of the revision process—namely, number of reviewers—shape the slant or bias of an article in the
direction that the Law predicts. Moreover, several facets of the revision process do not shape revisions
in the anticipated direction, and no evidence supports a broad interpretation. The evidence further
points to persistence of bias in many articles, potentially consistent with the presence of CIB. This is
partly a vintage effect and partly a result of the topic covered by the article. Some topics, such as entries
on civil rights, tend to lean Democrat, and some, such as trade, lean Republican. Finally, we show that a
fundamental resource issue constrains the implementation of Linus’ Law, namely, due to not enough
contributors, only a small percentage of articles ever get enough contributions to enable the law to have
an opportunity to work.
    Readers who are interested in open source will take an interest in this study. The vast majority of
research on open source examines the production of programming code (e.g., MacCormack et al. 2006;
Haefliger et al. 2008), not contributions to content development, and little examines Linus’ Law directly.
Also, little work considers content production from an aggregation of contributions from a large
numbers of volunteers, as observed in Wikipedia. Wikipedia is a natural subject for the open source



                                                     4
community to examine because of the attention it receives. In most countries with developed Internet
sectors Wikipedia ranks among the top‐ten web sites visited by households.1 In the US Wikipedia is one
of the most popular web sites in which user‐generated content plays a prominent role.
    Our research also contributes to the broad literature examining content bias. Scholars have
identified various sources of bias in media content, such as pressure from advertisers or the government
(e.g., Price 2003; Besley and Prat 2006; Reuter and Zitzewitz 2006), the media’s partisan bias (Larcinese
et al. 2007), and readers’ desire to reinforce their prior beliefs (e.g., Groseclose and Milyo 2005;
Mullainathan and Shleifer 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2006; Bernhardt et al. 2008; Gal‐Or et al. 2010;
Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010). Unlike these prior studies, we examine user‐generated content and focus
on factors that cause content bias to change over time.
    We also provide empirical evidence on whether the Internet is increasing ideological segregation
(e.g., Sunstein 2001; Carr 2008; Lawrence, Sides and Farrell 2010; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011). Our
results support the view that prominent articles are not isolated. Our results are consistent with the
view that contributors with different political viewpoints have dialogues with each other, and that
diminishes the slant of articles. In addition, the general movement in Wikipedia’s overall slant suggests
entry of new opinions is not precluded. On the other hand, most Wikipedia articles only mildly change
their slant, consistent with the view they might receive more attention from readers with similar
viewpoints.
    This study also adds to the empirical studies of Wikipedia, a topic of interest in its own right. Prior
work emphasizes the social network behind editing (Zhang and Zhu 2011; Ransbotham and Kane 2011),
the dynamics of contributions (Chi et al. 2007, Halfaker et al. 2009), the accuracy of articles (Giles 2005;
Brown 2011), the social influences on the gamesmanship among editors (Piskorski and Gorbetai 2010),
allocation of effort among topics (Gorbetai 2011) and the impact of Wikipedia on market information
environment (Xu and Zhang forthcoming).2 Our study is the first to develop statistical tests for whether
Wikipedia articles achieve NPOV, and to translate widely discussed ideas about Linus’ Law into testable
propositions. It is also the first to raise questions about limitations of Linus’ Law, and, related, this study
frames several new open questions about revision, such as feedbacks between an article’s bias and
further contributions.



1
  See the rankings at Alexa.com. Wikipedia is the fifth or sixth most‐visited web site in the United States, behind
Google, Facebook, Yahoo, YouTube, and, perhaps, eBay (accessed May 2011).
2
        See         a        list      of        academic          studies       about         Wikipedia         at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Academic_studies_of_Wikipedia (accessed June 2012).


                                                        5
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first provide a background of Wikipedia in Section
2 and discuss the role of NPOV on Wikipedia in Section 3. We then develop our hypotheses in Section 4.
We present our data and summary statistics in Section 5. Section 6 presents our regression results, and
Section 7 concludes.


2. The Emergence of Wikipedia
    The first wiki was developed in 1995 by Ward Cunningham, a software engineer from Portland,
Oregon. Wikis were first developed and intended for documenting software development. Says
Cunningham (Levine, 2006), “It’s a medium that allows people to collaborate more easily than they
could in systems that are modeled after the pre‐computer world, like e‐mail.”
    Wikipedia was founded in 2001 when Wikipedia began to position itself as “the free encyclopedia
that anyone can edit,” that is, as an online encyclopedia that is entirely written and edited through user
contributions. As of November 2011, it supports 3.7 million articles in English and well over 20 million
articles in all languages. It hosts content that hundreds of millions of readers view each month.
    Wikipedia’s production defies simple characterization. Because it relies so heavily on user‐generated
content, it does not fit existing models of production, in which a fixed sequence of activities produces an
output following a pre‐specified design. Instead, Wikipedia uses a commons‐based approach to
aggregate and revise information from a widely dispersed set of contributors and it produces non‐
proprietary information.
    This study examines Wikipedia just prior to its tenth birthday, which it is the largest Wiki on the
planet. Since 2003, Wikipedia has been owned and administered by the Wikimedia Foundation, a not‐
for‐profit group established to manage the operations behind the Wikipedia Web site and related
efforts. Until 2006 the foundation operated with a minimal staff of two programmers, under the
supervision of Jimbo Wales, but by 2010, the staff had grown to include a full‐time professional manager
and several dozen employees. Virtually all the content continues to come from volunteers.
    Wikipedia operates under an open‐source license. When Wikipedia first began, most images and
other content were covered by the GNU free documentation license (GFDL), a variant on the more
popular GPL designed for manuals, textbooks, and reference materials. With the latter, contributions
remained the property of their creators, whereas the GFDL license ensured the content would remain
freely distributable and reproducible. More recently, most content is dual‐licensed under both the GFDL




                                                     6
and/or the Creative Commons Attribution‐Sharealike 3.0 Unported License (CC‐BY‐SA).3 Copies can be
sold commercially, but if produced in larger quantities, then the original document or source code must
be made available.
    Wiki server technology allows the creation of hypertexts with nonlinear navigation structures. Each
page contains a series of cross‐links to other pages. The reader decides how to navigate through the
site. Contributing to Wikipedia is easy and transparent. Contributors do not need specialized knowledge.
    As there is no editorial control from the center, Wikipedia relies on users for fixing errors. Wikipedia
started with almost no contribution restrictions, and as it grew, it developed a few restricted privileges
to facilitate administration. It primarily relies on civility and transparency to govern contributors. Any
entry can change if a contributor thinks that changes are warranted. As stated by a long‐time editor who
tested a number of articles: “An outsider makes one edit to add a chunk of information, then insiders
make several edits tweaking and reformatting it. In addition, insiders rack up thousands of edits doing
things like changing the name of a category across the entire site—the kind of thing only insiders deeply
care about. As a result, insiders account for the vast majority of the edits. But it’s the outsiders who
provide nearly all of the content (Schwarz, 2006).”
    Wikipedia contains many articles that do not differ markedly from those in a printed encyclopedia,
such as entries devoted to basic history or science. It also has many entries for general topics in
geography and politics. Yet many Wikipedia entries do not neatly fit into a single category, many too
obscure for attention in a traditional encyclopedia. It faces no limits on the number or size of articles,
though a norm developed to keep articles under 6‐8 thousand words.


3. The Role of NPOV
    The site is organized in a way that presumes all errors will be corrected given enough review. This
follows a shared assumption among all major participants: Wikipedia follows Linus’ Law, “Given enough
eyeballs, all bugs are shallow,” which Eric Raymond stated in “The Cathedral and the Bazaar.”4
    Many participants in open‐source communities consider Linus’ Law to be a foundational principle.
For example, ask an editor for Wikipedia about whether Linus’ Law works well, and the answer is likely
to emphasize the editing process; it comes back to believing in the power of an open‐revision process
that enables multiple users to edit any passage. Wikipedia’s own page about contributing reads, “Many

3
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:About (accessed August 2011).
4
 See Raymond (1998), who was rephrasing Linus Torvald, founder of the open‐source operating system, Linux.
Torvald’s rule No. 8 is: “Given a large enough beta‐tester and co‐developer base, almost every problem will be
characterized quickly and the fix obvious to someone.”


                                                      7
users of Wikipedia consult the page history5 of an article in order to assess the number of people who
have contributed to the article. An article can be considered more likely to be accurate when it has been
edited by many different people.”6 Founder of Wikipedia, Jimbo Wales, reiterated the idea in his public
comments: “I think the day will come in the future when people will look at an article in Britannica and
say, ‘This was written by one person and reviewed by two or three more? That’s not sufficient. I need an
article that’s been reviewed by hundreds of people (National Public Radio, 2005).’”
    Wikipedia has policies in place to nurture revisions. First, since founding Wikipedia has asked all
contributors to aspire to write or edit with a NPOV, representing views fairly and without bias.
Conflicting opinions are supposed to be presented alongside one another, not asserted in a way that is
meant to be convincing. This sometimes was boiled down to the principle to “assert facts, including facts
about opinions—but do not assert the opinions themselves.”
    The cost of representing additional viewpoints was low, so the judgment of the editors created the
primary limit on multiple viewpoints. According to Wales: “If a viewpoint is held by an extremely small
(or vastly limited) minority, it does not belong in Wikipedia regardless of whether it is true or not and
regardless of whether you can prove it or not.”7
    Verifiability is the second aspiration for contributors. Any reader must be able to check an article’s
contents and verify against reliable sources. Editors have to be able to cite these sources in their articles
and provide links if possible. Editors understand that verifiability is not equivalent to truth; the editor is
not responsible for determining whether the information in a newspaper article he or she cites is true,
as long as the newspaper is a reliable, peer‐reviewed source.
    Finally, contributors are asked not to include original research in their contributions. All material
must have been previously published by a reputable source. Alternatively, a reasonable adult should
understand the concept (i.e., a “vegetable” does not need to be published by a reliable source to be
permitted an article in Wikipedia). This policy was put in place in order to avoid a “novel narrative or
historical interpretation” of a subject.8
    Enforcing these policies and aspirations created many challenges. Over time, the site has adopted a
design that makes it simple for contributors to monitor each other. Editors and contributors can
subscribe to follow (or “watchlist”) articles to check if they have been changed. “Being very transparent
encourages good behavior,” Wales said (Hyatt, 2006). Furthermore: “Everything is very carefully
5
  Page histories allow a reader to trace the history of edits in reverse chronological order.
6
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Who_writes_Wikipedia (accessed April 2012).
7
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view (accessed April 2012).
8
  Jimmy Wales, private correspondence, August 28, 2006.


                                                           8
monitored by a core community who is constantly watching the site, constantly discussing, reviewing
changes that are coming in . . . If [a user] is something of an outsider to the community, his changes
when they come in will be noticed as, oh, well, this is somebody we don’t know and we’ll check it over
and if it seems fine, it’ll stand. Otherwise, it can be removed very quickly (National Public Radio, 2005).”
    Enforcing NPOV has become the focal point for discussion by those constructing entries in
Wikipedia. Many of the back‐channel conversations on Wikipedia‐dedicated Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
channels concern whether particular passages reflect this principle. In general, the vast majority of
entries settle on approaches that the wide community of contributors agrees to, either because such
agreements reflect a consensus or because those with minority opinions got the passage they wanted in
additional test or a dissident gave up.
    Could a NPOV ever exist on any of the most controversial topics? Wikipedia’s editors point to the
triumph of civility on even the most controversial topics, arguing that the results display a more neutral
view than any printed entry. They argue that the process takes multiple views into account, achieving
something printed encyclopedias do not do as well by relying on a single author.


4. Hypotheses
    This study develops a statistical approach for measuring NPOV in the context of Wikipedia articles.
That research goal requires translating the collective activities of many contributors, as well as the
beliefs of Wikipedia’s editors, into testable propositions. This study uses classical statistical approaches,
employing a narrow or broad interpretation of Linus’ Law, which will constitute the null. We then test
predictions consistent with that null.
    We presume an article is the unit of observation, both at any point in time and over time. Although
there are mild exceptions to the constant identity of an article—because some articles are merged or
eliminated, etc.—this is a good working assumption for the vast majority of articles. Wikipedia facilitates
this approach by assigning numerical identities to articles and maintaining prodigious histories of edits,
which helps identify when contributors create new articles and alter (even minor) aspects of existing
articles. This also helps make it possible to measure the variance in the ages of articles and their
condition over time.
    As with other studies of media bias, this study posits that there exists a uni‐dimensional yardstick for
measuring neutrality bias. Call this aspect of an article, Y, where Y is a real number that measures its
political slant. As normalization, let zero be neutral, and loosely speaking, negative is Democrat while
positive is Republican. Cardinal numbers have meaning along this yardstick, with larger numbers



                                                      9
denoting more extreme values. Such a yardstick provides two related but somewhat different
definitions for neutral/not neutral. One notion is “slant,” namely, comparing Y = 0 to negative or positive
numbers. Another notion compares “NPOV” to “bias,” namely, comparing Y = 0 to Abs(Y), the absolute
value of the slant. The first definition leads to a “slant index” and measures the size of bias and its
direction. The second definition leads to “bias size” and measures only the size of bias.
    This study characterizes the statistical relationship between contributions and Y or Abs(Y). One set
of predictions arises intuitively from Linus’ Law and its role with NPOV – “Given enough eyeballs, all
bugs are shallow.” It is possible to proceed under the hypothesis that this law captures a feature of the
revision process, namely, that revision attenuates bias. Empirically that means thinly edited pages will
have a higher likelihood of bias than thickly edited pages. Stated narrowly:


    Hypothesis 1: All other things equal, an article that has attracted more contributions and
    contributors over its lifetime will be less extreme than one that has attracted fewer
    contributions and contributors. Less extreme articles will have a level of Y or Abs(Y) closer to
    zero.


    Note that Linus’ Law allows for a narrow and broad interpretation. The narrow version focuses
solely on the amount of contributions. The broad interpretation focuses on related aspects, such as the
range of contributions or its dispersion. Based on the broad interpretation, we can have the following
hypothesis:


    Hypothesis 2: All other things equal, an article that has attracted a more diverse set of
    contributors over its lifetime will be less extreme than one that has attracted a similar set of
    contributors. Less extreme articles will have a level of Y or Abs(Y) closer to zero.


    These hypotheses are free of historical context, and many variables will try to control for factors
related to vintage and year, such as changes to Wikipedia’s size. Such controls are necessary because
the Wikimedia Foundation has altered the site over time to enable participation from an increasingly
larger group of participants. In addition, many contributors have access to improved broadband
technologies, which facilitate online activities, so the composition of online readers has dramatically
changed over the decade. There is no reason to expect Wikipedia’s contributors to favor one or another




                                                     10
political persuasion, on average, so our approach is agnostic with respect to party. The test for Linus’
Law will allow for more bias or less bias over time, as the number of contributors increases.
      Though not labeled as such, prior work offers insight into the mechanisms that might generate
NPOV or CIB. For example, the majority of statistical studies to date stress the importance of the social
networks behind the editing process.9 Frequent editors and contributors develop social ties, and these
generate informal norms for when it is appropriate to edit an article. These social ties also may generate
formal and informal norms about what constitutes NPOV in an article. That social understanding does
not necessarily have to settle at a place that another set of observers would regard as unbiased.
      A related mechanism posits a two‐stage model of production with a feedback loop.10 At the first
stage, some topics attract readership, and these readers provide small edits. At the second stage, the
articles that attract more interest from readers then attract more interest from editors, who provide a
large number of contributions and serve as arbiters in disputes over NPOV. In turn, well‐edited articles
attract more readers, and so on. In this model of production, NPOV will be achieved primarily at the
second stage, when it attracts editors with interests on all sides of a topic. If an article attracts strong
interest from those with one view, it is possible for an article not to settle at a NPOV aligned with the
views of contributors at the first stage, but at a place that the second set of editors agree upon. In that
case, the articles might display CIB.


5. Data and Summary Statistics
      This study’s data come from Wikipedia on January 16, 2011. We develop methods to produce a data
set that meets these three criteria: (1) it is possible to measure the NPOV; (2) it is possible to measure
the editing process; and (3) within a set of articles, each individual article differs from the others in the
amount of attention received.


5.1. Assembling a sample
      This study employs a process to maximize the likelihood that at least a few of the articles contain
some controversial material, or lack objective data that can be easily verified against outside sources.
The initial sample of articles focuses on a broad and inclusive definition of US political topics. It examines
the latest version of each article in January 2011, selecting all articles with keywords “Republican” or



9
    See Zhang and Zhu (2011), Ransbotham and Kane (2011), and Piskorski and Gorbetai (2010).
10
     Gorbetai (2011) discusses why some topics attract more interest, but does not apply this model to NPOV.


                                                          11
“Democrat,” resulting in a list of 111,216 articles. Many of these cover countries other than the United
States, necessitating further culling.11 From this set, we obtain a list of 70,668 articles about US politics.
     This sample covers an enormous array of topics, including many controversial ones, such as entries
on abortion, gun control, civil rights, taxation, and foreign policy. It also includes many articles that lack
anything controversial, such as undisputed historical accounts of minor historical political events and
biographies of comparatively obscure regional politicians.
     We compute a slant index for each article. This index applies the methods and estimates developed
by Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), hereafter G&S, who developed a method for measuring the biases of
US newspapers. Related to G&S, we ask whether a given Wikipedia article uses phrases favored by more
Republican members or more Democratic member of Congress. G&S select 1,000 phrases based on the
number of times these phrases appear in the text of the 2005 Congressional Record, applying statistical
methods to identify words and phrases that separate Democratic representatives from Republican
representatives, under the model that each group speaks to its respective constituents with a distinctly
coded language. For example, G&S find that Democratic representatives are more likely to use words
such as “war in Iraq,” “civil rights,” and “trade deficit,” while Republican representatives are more likely
use words such as “economic growth,” “illegal immigration,” and “border security.”12 After offering
considerable supporting evidence, G&S estimate the relationship between the use of each phrase and
the ideology of newspapers, using those 1,000 phrases to identify whether newspapers tend to use
phrases more aligned with Democrats or Republicans. We label the 1,000 words from the G&S lexicon as
“code words.”
     This approach has several strengths. It has been tested on newspapers and has passed many
internal validity tests. In addition, as with newspapers, this provides a general yardstick for measuring
the bias of articles, and it removes many subjective elements from that yardstick. Moreover, Wikipedia’s
contributors are unlikely to have targeted these 1,000 words for editing with this yardstick as a goal,
though they might have included or excluded these phrases to try to represent their own views or edit
another’s views.



11
   The words “Democrat” and “Republican” do not appear exclusively in entries about U.S. politics. If a country
name shows up in the title or category names, we then check whether the phrase “United States” or “America”
shows up in the title or category names. If yes, we keep this article. Otherwise, we search the text for “United
States” or “America.” We retain articles in which these phrases show up more than three times. This process
allows us to keep articles on issues such as “Iraq War,” but drop articles related to political parties in non‐US
countries.
12
   See Table I in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) for more examples.


                                                       12
      This benefit comes with one potential limitation (as the study will show). Although newspapers
contain hundreds or thousands of code words over time, the measure is quite noisy in a setting with few
code words, as occurs on many Wikipedia pages. In one interpretation of G&S, a lack of code words
directly indicates that an article lacks bias. In another interpretation, it simply means an article’s slant
cannot be measured, and it signals little except that the slant index is uninformative. The latter
interpretation requires correction for selection.
      The first step of this study is to follow the methods outlined by G&S for measuring the slant of a
newspaper.13 The procedure is identical to that in G&S with a few slight modifications to accommodate
some features of this setting. First, in G&S, articles with no code words have a slant index of 0.49, and
articles with slant indices below (above) 0.49 are Democrat‐leaning (Republican‐leaning). For
convenience, we center the slant index for articles with no codes at zero by subtracting 0.49 from all
slant indices. We can thus compute the bias size of an article directly as the absolute value of its slant
index. Second, the method applies some trimming to account for outliers. The 1,000 phrases exhibit a
few words (e.g., “civil rights” and “illegal immigration”) with unusual values for their slant, and in light of
the many articles with only a few code words, these outliers could have an inordinate influence on all
results. To mitigate their effect, we reset the parameter values for each extreme phrase, namely, the
nine most Democrat‐leaning phrases and nine most Republican‐leaning phrases. We make the value for
these phrases equal to the tenth‐most left‐leaning and tenth‐most right‐leaning phrase, respectively.
      Just as there is no definitive way to measure the “true bias” of a newspaper in G&S, there is no
definitive way to measure the “true bias” of a Wikipedia article. Rather, this study uses the distinct
words of Republicans/Democrats to measure biases and looks for a series of internal consistency and
internal validity tests. In this sense, “unbiased” and “unslanted” means an equal number of
Republican/Democrat words with the same cardinal values.
      Of the 70,668 articles observed in January 2011, it is possible to measure the bias for 28,382 articles
(40.2%). As it turns out, 3.68% have more than 10 code words by this final date. This variance is not
surprising, given an oversampling on a wide array of political articles. It is also evidence of skewness in
attention at Wikipedia and should not come as a surprise to a frequent Wikipedia participant. Wikipedia
includes many articles about obscure political events and individuals that engender little or no attention
(e.g., the biography of a mayor of almost any major US city). It also contains another group of political
articles about controversial topics (e.g., George W. Bush, Barack Obama, the Iraq War, health‐care


13
     We provide the details in the appendix.


                                                      13
legislation) that might attract considerable attention. By this measure of bias, that group of articles
attracting the majority of the attention numbers around several thousand, give or take.


5.2. Descriptive statistics
     Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the resulting slant index for these 28,382 articles in
January 2011, the last period in which we observe them. The table also shows these statistics for
different categories of topics in that same year. These categories are not mutually exclusive. Articles can
have more than one category attached to them. These categories are assigned by editors and
contributors, typically early in an article’s life, changing very little over time.14 The table shows the most
commonly used categories.
     On average, these 28,382 articles have a Democrat bias (‐0.09). Most categories have a bias that
differs significantly from zero. For example, articles about civil rights tend to have a Democrat bias (‐
0.16), while trade tends to have a Republican bias (0.06), and articles about energy tend not to be
biased, on average (‐0.02). At the same time, seemingly controversial topics, such as abortion and drugs,
are centered at zero. Moreover, in addition to considerable variance across topics, the standard
deviation is large within most categories.
     The 70,668 articles have a total of 17,270,274 revisions. As it is computationally infeasible to
examine all these revisions, we take each article and divide its revisions into ten revisions of equal
length. For articles with less than ten revisions, we keep all that are available, even if it is low (many of
these are short and contain no code words). We retain all revisions, even when one of the 28,382
articles lacks any code word in a prior version, and also when the last version contains nothing but an
earlier does. This effort results in 647,352 article observations. Of those, 409,363 of these contain no
code words. At least one code word appears in 237,989 observations (36.8%). There is enormous
variance in the last year, with 1,086 articles having 19 or more code words, but 11,524, or 40.6%, articles
have only one. Although some articles tend to have more code words over time as a result of revision,
most retain the same number of code words.
     Alternatively, we can measure the change in the slant indices between the earliest and latest
observations for each article. For the 68,253 articles for which we have more than one observation, we
find that 46,187 articles (68%) have no change in slant.15 Only 1,193 articles (9.2%) among the 12,902


14
  Table 1 does not show changes in averages over time. These tend not to change within any given category.
15
  For convenience, if an article has no code words in both its first and last observations, we assume that it has no
change in slant index between the two observations.


                                                        14
articles that have observed slant indices in both the first and last observations change the sign of their
slant indices between the two observations, and only 4 articles have a change of more than 1.0 in slant
index. Generally, articles retain their general direction of bias, and if they transition from one state to
another, it is a moderate transition.
     Tables 2 and 3 show how the aggregate statistics vary over time.16 This procedure produces
noisiness (particularly in the first and last year).17 It does not support definitive conclusions. Panel A of
Table 2 shows there has been movement toward NPOV over time: Wikipedia’s articles become less
slanted, moving from a mean value of ‐0.53 in 2002 to a mean value of ‐0.18 in 2003, and moving
gradually downward thereafter to ‐0.07 in 2010. That would be equivalent to the newspapers in G&S
with a strong Democrat slant, such as the San Francisco Chronicle, Atlanta Constitution, or the Baltimore
Sun.18
     The standard deviation of this slant index remains large, however, with evidence of only a gradual
decline, starting in 2002 (0.22), rising in 2003 (0.33), and gradually declining by 2010 (0.27). The absolute
value of the slant, our bias size, has a similar characteristic, starting at 0.55 (in 2002) and 0.30 (in 2003),
and eventually declining to 0.21 (in 2010). Once again, the standard deviation of bias size remains large
throughout, showing evidence of only a gradual decline.
     Panel B shows patterns for articles with more or less attention. Panel B shows a weighted average
across the articles, where the weights come from the number of revisions an article receives in a given
year.19 The number of revisions serves as a proxy for the attention an article receives, and it is the best
variable we could assemble that is available for all years and all articles.20 The average slant is much
lower in the weighted averages. The largest slant is ‐0.15 (in 2002), and it settles to around ‐0.05 in most
of the later years. Consistent with those results, the largest bias is 0.17 (in 2002), settling to around 0.14
in the later years. In both columns, the weighted average is lower than the unweighted average, more



16
   Different versions of the same article can appear in the same year, so there is no reason to observe 27,000
articles each year. Moreover, the last revision of an article may not have been in January 2011, so there will not be
a version of every article in 2011.
17
   Only 1,292 articles have ages between ages 9 and 10 years, i.e., a birth in 2001, because this was the first year of
Wikipedia. There were not many political articles written in that year.
18
   See Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), page 46‐47. Note that the data in this paper have been demeaned, while
Genzkow and Shapiro include the original estimates.
19
   The weight is the number of revisions plus one. Because the number of revisions per article is very skewed, this
procedure differs little from the alternative, weighting these articles by zero.
20
   A more ideal weight, an article’s number of views in a year, is available after 2007. It is highly correlated with
revisions (> 0.5) across articles when both are available.


                                                          15
so in the slant than the bias. Panel B, therefore, suggests that some of the slant and bias in Panel A
arises because articles receiving less attention tend to be more slanted and biased.
     Panel A of Table 3 provides an overview of how slant and bias change with the age of articles. We
have 70,636 observations for articles that are less than one year old. We obtain such a large number
because some (very young) articles, all less than one year old, have multiple revisions with a measured
bias. In that case, all revisions are included. We observe fewer at each successive year of age. The trend
toward less bias and slant must partly result from the features of older/younger articles. Most of the
older articles lean more Democrat. Every article over five years old except the oldest year (with the
smallest sample) leans Democrat (‐.016, ‐0.17, ‐0.22, ‐0.24, and ‐0.04, respectively), while every article
under five years old leans Democrat but less strongly (‐0.06, ‐0.05, ‐0.08, ‐0.11, ‐0.14, respectively). The
bias size has a similar characteristic, with the older articles being more extreme than the younger ones,
with the exception of the oldest year (i.e., 0.27, 0.27, 0.30, 0.31, and 0.16 for the older five versus 0.21,
0.20, 0.22, 0.23, and 0.25 for the younger five, respectively). In both cases, the standard deviation shows
only a mild decline as articles become younger.
     Panels B and C look at different vintages of articles at distinct ages. Both panels suggest that
vintages play an important role and that this role is more important than age. The slant and bias are
most pronounced for articles born in 2002 and 2003, with lower slants and bias in all subsequent years.
These slants decline mildly with age, with the biggest decline resulting from small samples in the last
year (an artifact of the data‐collection method). The differences between vintages of articles released in
2002 and 2003 and other vintages also persist.21
     To summarize, the average old political article in Wikipedia leans Democratic. Wikipedia’s articles
gradually have lost that disproportionate use of Democratic code words, moving to nearly equivalent
use of words from both parties, akin to a NPOV, on average. Moreover, the words used are mildly less
extreme over time. The number of recent articles far outweighs the number of older articles, so by the
last measurement, Wikipedia’s articles appear to be centered close to a middle point, on average.
Overall, therefore, Tables 2 and 3 give rise to a question: Why did Wikipedia become less biased over
time? What factors in the revision process shape the bias, and what factors determine the appearance
of the code words themselves?
     Table 4 provides an understanding about the skewness in the revision process. The table is
organized around the total share of all revisions, which the first column shows the fraction of total


21
  Weighted averages indicate similar differences between 2002 and 2003 and other vintages, albeit at lower
cardinal values. For the sake of brevity, these are not shown.


                                                     16
revisions, starting with 0.1 and ending with 0.99. The second column shows the smallest number of
articles necessary to obtain the fraction of total revisions in the row. For example, it takes seven articles
to account for one percent of the revisions. The next column expresses this same number as the share
of articles, dividing by the total number of articles, 70,636. The second to last column provides the
average age of articles meeting this criteria, denominated in years. The last column provides the average
revisions per year for these articles.
      The table demonstrates the skewness of the allocation of revisions. Just over 1.1% of the articles
account for 30% of the revisions, and just over 3.3% of the articles account for half of the revisions. Less
than 14.5% (27.8%) account for 80% (90%) of the revisions. In short, a small percentage of articles get
most of the revisions.
      Some of this skewness result reflects the composition of the age of articles, for example, whether
the group includes old or newer articles. Older articles are more likely to have received a larger number
of revisions merely by virtue of being around long enough to collect them. Yet, that cannot be the
primary explanation for the skewness. The second to last column suggests that age does not matter
much at the most interesting tale of the distribution, where articles get the most revisions. The top 5%
are 8.6 years old and the top 50% are 8.1 years old. A half a year hardly accounts for the average
difference between these in revisions.
      The last column provides a better explanation. As the next column shows, revisions per year differs
significantly in each group. For example, the difference of the top 5% and top 50% is 1746 and 536. In
other words, some articles simply get more revisions per year than others, which is a symptom that
some articles simply attract more attention from contributors.
      The large change in skewness in revisions per year continues at all levels. For example, in the row for
those articles receiving 80% of the revisions per year is 216, contrasting with the 536 received by the top
50%. That implies that the additional 7904 articles (e.g., 10237‐2333) had to have an average at 122 to
bring the average down to 216. 22 That is more than one quarter the rate of revisions as the top 50%.
      To summarize, Table 4 shows one simple reason why Linus Law will not work with all the articles,
namely, a large fraction of articles do not receive much attention or revision. Table 4 also suggests why
an econometric approach is required. There is considerable variance in the number of revisions an
article receives.




22
     (216.64*10237‐536.10*2333)/7904 = 122.34


                                                      17
5.3. Explanatory variables
       We classify the key explanatory variables into three groups. The first group examines a narrow
interpretation of Linus’ Law, which we label “attention and editing.” The second group examines the
broad interpretation of Linus’ Law, focusing on the dispersion of contributions. The third group
measures features of articles that act as controls. Table 5 presents descriptive statistics for all variables.
       In the first group we have three variables. We expect that more attention and editing lead to more
NPOV. We also use Unique identifiers to measure the number of unique users who edited this article in
the past. Users are identified by their user ids and Internet protocol (IP) addresses. Different (same) IP
addresses are counted as different (same) users.23 We use Total revisions to date to measure the total
number of revisions an article had to date. Finally, we use Pageviews to measure the number of page
views in that month for this article. Unfortunately, we have data for this variable only after February
2007, when it first began to be collected. Hence, Pageviews limits available data, with 415,836 revisions
of articles have a non‐missing Pageviews. Of these, 259,417 have no measure of bias, leaving 156,419
(37.6%) observations for which we can observe the bias of an article with a measure of Pageviews.
       Both Pageviews and Unique identifiers come closer to measuring “eyeballs” than Total revisions to
date. The latter reflects the controversy of an article and potentially can be inflated by reversion wars
or editors who artificially inflate their revisions with many small changes.
       The second group contains two variables. We use Revisions per contributor, defined as Total
revisions to date/Unique identifiers, as one measure of the dispersion of contributions. We also use
Herschman‐Herfindahl‐Index (HHI), based off the concentration of Unique identifiers. If all revisions are
edited by one user in the past, HHI will be 1 (just as a monopoly in the industry). A small HHI index
indicates less concentration, or more dispersion.
       Many variables are included in the control group. Total frequency measures the number of code
words contained in a version of the article. Words measures the number of words in the observed
version of an article. Total frequency and Words are highly correlated, especially for the sample of data
in which Words > 0, so only one can be used in a regression. Articles are longer mostly because they
attract more attention and more editing. Linus’ Law would predict that greater Total frequency or Words
leads to more NPOV. However, because slant arises from the sum of codes words, whether two or
twenty or in between, Total frequency or Words also measures whether more code words tends to slant
an index as a statistical artifact.


23
     This is correlated with the total number of IP addresses, and total number of minor revisions.


                                                           18
     References measures the number of references in this version. References per word, defined as
References/Words, measures the extent of verification per length of article. A larger number of
references should lead to more NPOV under the null. However, references are also easily manipulated
and inflated, so the coefficients estimates need to be interpreted cautiously.
     Dummies indicate the year in which the article was created. Under the null, the older vintages have
had more opportunity for more attention and more editing, so articles with older vintages should have
more NPOV. However, the changing composition of participants on Wikipedia and change knowledge of
those participations about NPOV norms could lead to different interpretations. For related reasons we
also add year‐specific effects as a further control.
     Lastly, we create dummies for the categories listed in Table 1 and year of observation to control for
category. These controls are for the statistical tendency of some categories to slant in certain directions,
or contain a large bias.
     Under a narrow interpretation of Linus’ Law, only the amount of attention and editing matters.
Under a broader interpretation, the dispersion of contributions also matters.


6. Regression Analysis
     We use the slant index or the bias size of each article as our dependent variable. These variables
distinguish between extreme and mild slant, but that gain requires controlling for selection as many
articles do not contain any code words.
     Our selection model for the slant index assumes a production function for slant, Y* = f(X), where X is
the list of explanatory variables as discussed in Section 5.3, and Y is measured with error, so Y = Y* + u.
The model assumes a function for observing Y, using the same exogenous variables, as in a standard
“type‐2” Tobit (Amemiya 1985). Hence, in our first stage, we regress the probability of observing any
code words in an article on X. Similarly, the selection model for bias size assumes ln[Abs(Y*)] = h(X).
Once again, this model becomes a standard “type‐2” Tobit.
     Tables 6 and 7 present the key results.24 Table 6 presents the estimates for the first stage of the
selection model. One estimate includes Pageviews and the other does not, with a corresponding change
in the sample size. Having more revisions lowers the probability of having code words, while having
more unique identifiers (e.g., more contributors) works in the opposite direction, increasing the
probability of having code words. More attention, as measured by Pageviews, lowers the probability of

24
  We report coefficents of category dummies for all regression tables in the appendix and omit them in the paper
for the sake of brevity.


                                                       19
having code words. In each case, the value of the coefficient suggests a small overall effect, but one that
matters when the variable reaches a value nears its maximum.
    The results from dispersion also do not point in one direction about selection. These results indicate
that a wider community of contributors produces a variety of effects. More revisions per contributor
lead to a higher likelihood of having code words, and the effect is small. A one‐standard‐deviation
increase in revisions per contributor leads to little change. Only a value near the maximum leads to a
large change. Less concentration among the number of contributors (lower HHI) reduces the likelihood
of code words, but the effect is unimportant except at the maximum values. Overall, these results do
not suggest that the breadth of contributors has much impact on the likelihood of having code words.
    Features of articles do predict the appearance of code words. Longer articles (more words) have
more code words. A one‐standard‐deviation increase in length leads to a 0.7 increase in the likelihood of
having code words (in the lowest estimate). That is a big effect, very big at maximum values. Articles
from the oldest two vintages also are likely to have code words. Having more references increases the
likelihood of having code words near its maximum value.
    The aforementioned ambiguity contrasts with the results for many of the controls. For example,
some topics, such as abortion, civil rights, energy, trade, and gun control, are more likely to result in the
appearance of code words. Articles on these topics are more likely to have code words than every other
article, all other things equal, with coefficients all above 0.5. Fixing other variables at their means, being
related to civil rights increases the probability of having code words by 20.47%. Some topics also come
close to this, such as foreign policy, social security, and tax reform, with coefficients above 0.3. Some
topics are less likely to have any code words, such as drugs, family & children, and infrastructure &
technology. The topic, infrastructure & technology, lowers the probability of having code words by
3.80%.
    Overall, these results suggest that selection cannot be dismissed as a concern for a few controversial
topics and for long articles. In most articles, however, it is not likely to be important.
    The first two columns of Table 7 present the results for the second stage of the model of the
determinants of the slant index. More attention and editing make an article more Democrat. Having
more revisions produces more Democrat bias, as does having fewer unique identifiers (e.g., fewer
contributors). More attention, as measured by Pageviews, has the same effect. All are quantitatively
small in importance, however. They do not matter except at values near the maximum.
    The results from dispersion do not point in one direction. Having more revisions per contributor
leads to more Democrat words, but less concentration among the number of contributors (lower HHI)



                                                      20
leads to more Republican words. The effects are small, however, except at maximum values. Overall,
these results do not suggest that the breadth of contributors affects the slant very much.
    Many of the controls work as expected, but their effects are small. The features of articles do
predict their slant, however. Older vintages lean Democrat in comparison to later vintages, with a
difference over 0.3, which is a big effect, equal to one standard deviation in the endogenous variable.
That Democrat leaning is especially pronounced in Wikipedia’s second year, 2002.
    Many of the category controls also take on interesting directions. Abortion articles lean Republican
(0.1), civil rights articles lean Democrat (‐0.14), and foreign policy leans Republican (0.1), while the
typical biography leans Republican (between 0.05 and 0.7). These effects are big in light of the size of
the standard deviation of the endogenous variable, which is 0.3.
    Overall, the biggest predictors of slant come from the features of articles, such as their topic and
vintage. The best predictor of leaning Democrat is the vintage. Consistent with Table 2, older articles
lean Democrat, as do articles observed at earlier moments, and the latter tendency diminishes in recent
articles. Hence, the best predictor of leaning Republican is a recent observation of an article with a late
vintage on a topic, such as abortion. The editing process, such the number of contributors or their
spread, does not have much effect.
    The last two columns of Table 7 present the results for bias size. There is some evidence for the
narrow interpretation of Linus’ Law. Pageviews does not matter, but the other measure of eyeballs,
unique identifiers, does matter. While having more revisions increases the movement away from zero,
having more participants decreases it. The former matters, but latter is more important. A one‐
standard‐deviation increase in unique identifiers results in an 18% decline in the bias. Holding all other
variables at their mean values, one‐standard‐deviation increase in Total revisions to date results in a
12% increase in the bias. This result for Total revisions to date is consistent with the presence of revision
wars, interpreting large numbers as a measure of an article’s controversy.
    The results for the broad interpretation of Linus’ law are weak. HHI is negative, which means more
dispersion leads to more bias. A one‐standard‐deviation increase in dispersion leads to a 6% increase in
bias. Revisions per contributor is too small to matter, except at maximum values.
    The biggest predictors of bias come from the features of articles, such as their topic, (some) vintage,
and year of observation. The first three vintages of articles display the largest bias, as do the first three
years in which those articles are observed. The effects are large. There is a 90% decline in bias between
the 2002 vintage and 2010 vintage and a 20% decline between 2003 and 2010. The differences among




                                                     21
vintages between 2004 and 2010 are comparatively small. The 2001 and 2011 vintages also display
extreme differences, but this is identified by small samples in each case.
       Some topics, such as civil rights, trade, and government, are also more biased, while topics such as
abortion, corporations, gun control, social security, and biographies tend to be unbiased. This is the one
place where the slant and bias estimates do not line up. The cardinal value for bias yields distinct insight.
       The results in Tables 6 and 7 suggest that a few features of the revision process do shape slant and
bias, such as the number of unique contributors. This is consistent with a narrow interpretation of Linus’
Law. None of the evidence is consistent with a broad interpretation.
       In unreported regressions, we conduct robustness checks by estimating probit models that examine
changes to slant and bias size, controlling for the selection effects. The inferences are similar.25 We also
found no qualitative difference estimating the basic equations on a sample that removed the youngest
articles and those with the least active revision rates. The results supporting a narrow interpretation of
Linus’ Law also are robust to including or excluding the tests for the broad interpretation, as well as
other features of the articles, such as words, references and references per word.26


7. Discussion and Conclusion
       In this study, we empirically examine whether Linus’ Law, a principle that many participants in open‐
source communities consider foundational, shapes content production. We conduct this test on US
political articles in Wikipedia, where Linus’ Law would face challenges due to the presence of
controversial topics and lack of verified and/or lack of objective information.
       Our first set of findings pertains to the general characteristics of Wikipedia’s slant and bias over
time. In broad terms, in its earliest years, Wikipedia’s political entries lean Democrat and tend to be
biased. Over time, both traits diminish, on average. By the most recent observations, Wikipedia’s entries
lack much slant and contain less bias than observed earlier.
       Our second set of finding points toward persistent bias, inconsistent with Linus’ Law. This arises
partly from a vintage effect, partly from the skewed attention of contributors, and partly as a result of
the topic. Overall this second set of findings is consistent with only a narrow interpretation of Linus’ Law
(i.e., Hypothesis 1), one that emphasizes the number of contributors or reviewers. No evidence supports
a broad interpretation of Linus’ Law (i.e., Hypothesis 2).



25
     See the appendix for results.
26
     Available upon request.


                                                      22
    Our third set of findings points towards a number of empirical patterns inconsistent with Linus’ Law
shaping most articles. The majority of articles receive little attention, and most articles change only
mildly from their initial slant. Altogether, this is a potential indicator of collective intelligence bias.
    These findings can be reconciled with the historical facts. The general tendency toward more
neutrality in Wikipedia’s political articles appears to arise largely not from revision, but from the entry of
later vintages of articles with an opposite point of view from earlier articles. Wikipedia achieves
something akin to a NPOV across articles, but not necessarily within them.
    The study demonstrates a broad approach for estimating the relationship between features of
articles and the revision process, based on testing both narrow and broad interpretations of Linus’ Law.
We consistently find that evidence for a narrow interpretation, at best, and we find no support for a
broad interpretation. This result has implications for measuring production involving large number of
contributors, suggesting it is possible to find regularities (around the number of contributors) but that
this effect should not be regarded as the sole determinant of neutrality.
    Broadly, our study provides empirical evidence on the limit of collective intelligence. Many
managers believe that they could improve products by taking advantage of the wisdom of crowds. We
show that in the case of Wikipedia, there are aspects such as NPOV that collective intelligence does not
help achieve successfully. A natural question for future research is whether an alternative production
model could perform better in this dimension. For example, would a production model centered on
experts, such as the one employed by Encyclopedia Britannica, do a better job than the one used by
Wikipedia at achieving NPOV?
    Some readers may not conclude that Linus’ Law fails to hold, but, rather, that we did not measure
the revision process with a proper set of statistics. As with any econometric research, we do not
consider our research to be definitive. In that light, these results motivate a number of potential
questions. For example, how frequently do articles with distinct biases link to one another? What factors
shape the entry of new articles, particularly articles with bias? Does Linus’ Law become weaker in
practice due to feedback between an article’s existing biases and the biases of the revisions it attracts?
Hence, we hope that our attempt to measure Linus’ Law and NPOV, and to formulate an approach using
classical statistical methods, motivates further work on the operation of key principles and their
operation within open‐source production.




                                                        23
References

Amemiya, Takeshi. 1985. Advanced Econometrics. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Antweiler, Werner, Murray Z. Frank. 2004. Is all that talk just noise? The information content of Internet
    stock message boards. Journal of Finance 59(3) 1259–1294.
Bernhardt, Dan, Stefan Krasa, Mattias Polborn. 2008. Political polarization and the electoral effects of
    media bias. Journal of Public Economics 92(5‐6) 1092–1104.
Besley, Timothy, Andrea Prat. 2006. Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media capture and government
    accountability. American Economic Review 96(3) 720–736.
Blake,   Aaron.   2006.    Wikipedia    site   attempts    to   make    politics   healthier.   The   Hill,
    http://tinyurl.com/6qycehm (accessed January 2012)
Brown, Adam R. 2011. Wikipedia as a data source for political scientists: accuracy and completeness of
    coverage. Political Science & Politics, 44, 339–343
Carr, Nicholas. 2008. The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google. New York: Norton.
Chi, Ed, Aniket Kittur, Bryan A. Pendleton, Bongwon Suh, Todd Mytkowicz. 2007. Power of the few vs.
    wisdom of the crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. Computer/Human Interaction 2007
    Conference.
Dewan, Sanjeev, Jui Ramaprasad. Forthcoming. Consumer blogging and music sampling: long tail effects.
    Information Systems Research.
Galton, Francis. 1907. Vox populi. Nature 75:7.
Gal–Or, Esther, Tansev Grelani, Tuba Pinar Yildirim. 2010. The impact of advertising on media bias.
    Working paper.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. Media bias and reputation. Journal of Political Economy
    114(2) 280–316.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily
    newspapers. Econometrica 78(1) 35–71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro. 2011. Ideological segregation online and offline. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 126(4) 1799–1839.
Giles, Jim. 2005. Internet encyclopaedias go head to head. Nature 438 900–901.
Gorbetai, Andreea. 2011. Aligning collective production with social needs: evidence from Wikipedia.
    Working paper, Harvard Business School.




                                                    24
Greenstein, Shane, Michelle Devereux. 2009. Wikipedia in the spotlight. Kellogg Case 5‐306‐507, Kellogg
    School of Management, Northwestern University.
Greenstein, Shane, Feng Zhu. 2012. Is Wikipedia biased? American Economic Review, Papers and
    Proceedings, 102(3) 343–348.
Groseclose, Tim, Jeffrey Milyo. 2005. A measure of media bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(4)
    1191–1237.
Haefliger, Stefan, Georg von Krogh, Sebastian Spaeth. 2008. Code reuse in open source software.
    Management Science 54(1) 180–193.
Halfaker, Aaron, Aniket Kittur, Robert Kraut, John Riedl. 2009. A jury of your peers: Quality, experience
    and ownership in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis and Open
    Collaboration.
Hann, Il‐Horn, Jeff Roberts, Sandra Slaughter. 2004. Why developers participate in open source software
    projects: An empirical investigation. ICIS 2004 Proceedings.
Hyatt, Josh. 2006. The wonder of Wikipedia: How to motivate—and control—an army of 30,000
    volunteer workers. Fortune, June 12.
Lawrence, Eric, Jon Sides, Henry Farrell. 2010. Self‐segregation or deliberation? Blog readership,
    participation and polarization in American politics. Perspectives on Politics 8(2010) 141–157.
Larcinese, Valentino, Riccardo Puglisi, James M. Snyder. 2007. Partisan bias in economic news: Evidence
    on the agenda‐setting behavior of U.S. newspapers. NBER working papers, National Bureau of
    Economic Research, Inc.
Lakhani, Karim R., Lars Bo Jeppesen. 2007. Getting unusual suspects to solve R&D puzzles.
    Forethought. Harvard Business Review 85(5).
Lemos, Robert. 2004. Security research suggests Linux has fewer flaws. CNET News. December 13.
Levine, Robert. 2006. New Web sites seeking profit in wiki model. New York Times, September 4.
Ma, Liye, Pei‐yu Chen, Tridas Mukhopadhyay. 2008. Voluntary open‐source ‐ the effect appropriability,
    externality, and uncertainty. ICIS 2008 Proceedings.
MacCormack, Alan, John Rusnak, Carliss Y. Baldwin. 2006. Exploring the structure of complex software
    designs: An empirical study of open source and proprietary code. Management Science 52(7) 1015–
    1030.
Malone, Thomas W., Robert Laubacher, Chrysanthos Dellarocas. 2009. Harnessing crowds: Mapping the
    genome of collective intelligence. MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 4732–09.
Margolis, Jonathan. 2009. Wicked‐Pedia! Millions trust its every word. Daily Mail, February 15.



                                                    25
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Andrei Shleifer. 2005. The market for news. American Economic Review 95(4)
    1031–1053.
National Public Radio. 2005. Talk of the Nation, “Analysis: Wikipedia, open source, and the future of the
    Web,” Transcript, November 2.
Piskorski, Mikolaj Jan, Andreea Gorbatai. 2010. Testing Coleman’s social norm enforcement mechanism:
    Evidence from Wikipedia. Working Paper.
Price, Cindy J. 2003. Interfering owners or meddling advertisers: How network television news
    correspondents feel about ownership and advertiser influence on news stories. Journal of Media
    Economics 16(3) 175–188.
Ransbotham, Sam, Gerald C. Kane. 2011. Membership turnover and collaboration success in online
    communities: Explaining rises and falls from grace in Wikipedia. MIS Quarterly 35(3) 613–627.
Raymond, Eric. 1998. The cathedral and the bazaar. First Monday, http://tinyurl.com/bqfy3s (accessed
    January 2012).
Reuter, Jonathan, Eric Zitzewitz. 2006. Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the financial
    media. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1) 197–227.
Roberts, Jeffrey A, Il‐Horn Hann, Sandra A Slaughter. 2006. Understanding the motivations,
    participation, and performance of open source software developers: A longitudinal study of the
    apache projects. Management Science 52(7) 984–999.
Singh, Param Vir, Yong Tan, Vijay S. Mookerjee. 2011. Network Effects: The influence of structural
    capital on open source project success. MIS Quarterly 35(4) 813–829
Shankland, Stephen. 2003. Study lauds open‐source code quality. CNET News. February 19. Available at
    http://news.cnet.com/Study‐lauds‐open‐source‐code‐quality/2100‐1001_3‐985221.html
Sunstein, Cass R. 2001. Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Swartz, Aaron (2006). Who Writes Wikipedia? http://tinyurl.com/7n84bsh (accessed January 2012).
Surowiecki, James. 2004. The Wisdom of Crowds. New York: Random House.
von Hippel, Eric. 2005. Democratizing Innovation. The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Wu, Lynn, Erik Brynjolfsson. 2009. The future of prediction: How Google searches foreshadow housing
    prices and sales. Working paper.
Xu, Sean, Xiaoquan Zhang. Forthcoming. Impact of Wikipedia on market information environment:
    Evidence on management disclosure and investor reaction. MIS Quarterly.
Zhang, Xiaoquan, Feng Zhu. 2011. Group size and incentives to contribute: A natural experiment at
    Chinese Wikipedia. American Economic Review 101(4) 1601–1615.



                                                   26
          Table 1: Summary Statistics for Slant Index by Category

                                  No. Obs Mean Std. Err. One‐tailed t‐test
 All Categories                    28,382 ‐0.09      0.00      ***
 Abortion                            71       0.02   0.03      n.s.
 Bios                               4,748    ‐0.05   0.00      ***
 Budget & Economy                   1,109    ‐0.02   0.01      ***
 Civil rights                       1,183    ‐0.16   0.01      ***
 Corporations                        121     ‐0.06   0.02      ***
 Crime                              1,257    ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Drugs                               105     ‐0.02   0.02      n.s.
 Education                          1,362    ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Energy & Oil                        270     ‐0.02   0.01       **
 Families & Children                 405     ‐0.06   0.01      ***
 Foreign Policy                     2,094     0.02   0.00      ***
 Trade                               399      0.06   0.01      ***
 Government                        11,383 ‐0.14      0.00      ***
 Gun Control                         56      ‐0.03   0.02        *
 Health Care                         556     ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Homeland Security                   490     ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Immigration                         372     ‐0.02   0.01       **
 Infrastructure & Technology 1,143           ‐0.04   0.01      ***
 Jobs                                693     ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Principles & Values                 614     ‐0.05   0.01      ***
 Social Security                      5      ‐0.10   0.05        *
 Tax Reform                          95      ‐0.06   0.02      ***
 War & Peace                        2,292    ‐0.02   0.00      ***
 Welfare & Poverty                   323     ‐0.04   0.01      ***
n.s. not significant, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                    27
             Table 2: Summary Statistics for Slant Index and Bias Size by Year

                  Panel A: Unweighted Slant Index and Bias Size Over Time
Year              Slant Index                        Bias Size                    No. Obs.
            Mean              Std. Dev.        Mean            Std. Dev.
2001         0.03               0.24           0.19              0.15                290
2002        ‐0.53               0.22           0.55              0.15               3,276
2003        ‐0.18               0.33           0.30              0.23                960
2004        ‐0.23               0.34           0.33              0.25               4,571
2005        ‐0.10               0.30           0.24              0.21               9,733
2006        ‐0.11               0.30           0.24              0.21              28,521
2007        ‐0.12               0.30           0.24              0.21              37,465
2008        ‐0.10               0.29           0.23              0.20              42,552
2009        ‐0.08               0.28           0.22              0.20              46,139
2010        ‐0.07               0.27           0.21              0.19              51,210
2011        ‐0.10               0.27           0.22              0.19              13,272


        Panel B: Slant Index and Bias Size Over Time Weighted by Revisions in that Year
 Year     Slant Index (Weighted Mean) Bias Size (Weighted Mean)                No. Obs.
 2001                    0.00                        0.05                         290
 2002                   ‐0.15                        0.17                        3,276
 2003                   ‐0.03                        0.07                         960
 2004                   ‐0.04                        0.11                        4,571
 2005                   ‐0.03                        0.13                        9,733
 2006                   ‐0.05                        0.15                       28,521
 2007                   ‐0.05                        0.15                       37,465
 2008                   ‐0.06                        0.15                       42,552
 2009                   ‐0.05                        0.14                       46,139
 2010                   ‐0.05                        0.14                       51,210
 2011                   ‐0.05                        0.14                       13,272




                                            28
                    Table 3: Summary Statistics to Examine Articles’ Vintage Effects

      Panel A: Slant Index and Bias Size of Wikipedia’s Political Articles for Different Article Ages
                             Slant Index                              Bias Size
 Age (Year)                                                                                      No. Obs.
                      Mean             Std. Dev.             Mean               Std. Dev.
   [0, 1)             ‐0.06              0.28                 0.21                 0.19           70,636
   [1, 2)             ‐0.05              0.27                 0.20                 0.18           28,946
   [2, 3)             ‐0.08              0.29                 0.22                 0.20           28,412
   [3, 4)             ‐0.11              0.30                 0.23                 0.21           28,614
   [4, 5)             ‐0.14              0.30                 0.25                 0.22           27,461
   [5, 6)             ‐0.16              0.31                 0.27                 0.22           21,348
   [6, 7)             ‐0.17              0.30                 0.27                 0.22           15,398
   [7, 8)             ‐0.22              0.31                 0.30                 0.23           10,043
   [8, 9)             ‐0.24              0.31                 0.31                 0.23            5,839
  [9, 10)             ‐0.04              0.21                 0.16                 0.14            1,292

        Panel B: Slant Index of Wikipedia’s Political Articles for Different Article Ages and Years
Age (Year)    2001      2002    2003    2004       2005       2006       2007      2008     2009      2010
  [0, 1)       0.03     ‐0.53   ‐0.17   ‐0.03      ‐0.03      ‐0.05     ‐0.04      ‐0.04    ‐0.04     ‐0.04
  [1, 2)      ‐0.11     ‐0.51   ‐0.10   ‐0.04      ‐0.05      ‐0.05     ‐0.05      ‐0.02    ‐0.03     ‐0.08
  [2, 3)       0.02     ‐0.46   ‐0.09   ‐0.05      ‐0.05      ‐0.04     ‐0.04      ‐0.03    ‐0.05          .
  [3, 4)      ‐0.01     ‐0.39   ‐0.09   ‐0.05      ‐0.05      ‐0.04     ‐0.04      ‐0.06         .         .
  [4, 5)      ‐0.02     ‐0.37   ‐0.11   ‐0.06      ‐0.04      ‐0.03       0.02          .        .         .
  [5, 6)      ‐0.02     ‐0.36   ‐0.10   ‐0.05      ‐0.04      ‐0.09           .         .        .         .
  [6, 7)      ‐0.03     ‐0.33   ‐0.09   ‐0.05      ‐0.08           .          .         .        .         .
  [7, 8)      ‐0.04     ‐0.33   ‐0.09    0.02           .          .          .         .        .         .
  [8, 9)      ‐0.02     ‐0.29   ‐0.05        .          .          .          .         .        .         .
 [9, 10)      ‐0.04     ‐0.06        .       .          .          .          .         .        .         .

         Panel C: Bias Index of Wikipedia’s Political Articles for Different Article Ages and Years
Age (Year)     2001      2002     2003     2004       2005      2006      2007       2008    2009     2010
  [0, 1)        0.19      0.55     0.29     0.19       0.19      0.19      0.20       0.19    0.19     0.19
  [1, 2)        0.22      0.54     0.23     0.20       0.19      0.19      0.20       0.18    0.18     0.16
  [2, 3)        0.17      0.50     0.22     0.20       0.19      0.19      0.19       0.18    0.14         .
  [3, 4)        0.17      0.44     0.22     0.19       0.19      0.18      0.19       0.17        .        .
  [4, 5)        0.17      0.41     0.23     0.19       0.19      0.17      0.19           .       .        .
  [5, 6)        0.16      0.41     0.22     0.19       0.19      0.21          .          .       .        .
  [6, 7)        0.16      0.38     0.21     0.19       0.15          .         .          .       .        .
  [7, 8)        0.17      0.38     0.21     0.16           .         .         .          .       .        .
  [8, 9)        0.16      0.35     0.17         .          .         .         .          .       .        .
 [9, 10)        0.16      0.16         .        .          .         .         .          .       .        .




                                                    29
                     Table 4: The Distribution of Revisions across Articles in January, 2011

     Total share of all      (n) Number of         (n/N) Share of         Average Age of              Average Revisions
        revisions                articles             articles            articles (Year)                 Per Year
            0.01                    7                 0.0001                   8.77                       2815.52
            0.05                   59                 0.0008                   8.66                       1746.02
            0.10                   150                0.0021                   8.77                       1343.76
            0.20                   413                0.0058                   8.70                       1005.58
            0.30                   821                0.0116                   8.52                        780.64
            0.40                  1433                0.0203                   8.25                        697.02
            0.50                  2333                0.0330                   8.07                        536.10
            0.60                  3747                0.0530                   7.74                        412.55
            0.70                  6072                0.0859                   7.38                        310.40
            0.80                 10237                0.1449                   6.96                        216.64
            0.90                 19604                0.2774                   6.32                        135.03
            0.95                 30627                0.4334                   5.80                        96.01
            0.99                 51365                0.7268                   5.05                        66.79

Definitions
Total share of all revisions = fraction of total revisions.
Number of articles = smallest number of articles to achieve fraction of total revisions.
Share of articles = smaller share of articles to achieve fraction of total revisions.
N = total number of articles, 70,636.
Average age of articles = average age of articles, in years.
Average revisions per year = average revisions per year for articles.


                              Table 5: Summary Statistics for Explanatory Variables27

Variable                                                  Obs.         Mean         Std. Dev.          Min        Max
Attention and Editing
Unique identifiers (10,000 IDs)                         237,989          0.0121         0.0329   0.0001           1.3983
Total revisions to date (100,000 revisions)             237,989        0.00282        0.00816 0.000001           0.44193
Pageviews (100,000,000 of views)                        156,419       0.000092       0.000683         0          0.06169
Dispersion
Revisions per contributor (100,000 revisions)           237,989 0.0000284 0.0000489                          0   0.00597
HHI (0.01 is perfectly concentrated)                    237,989     0.0024     0.003                         0       0.01
Article Features
Total frequency (1000 of code words)                    237,989          0.0039       0.00737           0.001      0.62
Words (10,000 article words)                            237,989           0.193          0.244         0.0003 19.7806
References (100,000 references)                         237,989        0.00016        0.00039               0 0.01022
References per word (100 references/word)               237,989       0.000074         0.0001               0 0.004516



27
     We re‐scale some variables for the ease of displaying their coefficients in regression tables.


                                                             30
                       Table 6: Regression Results for the First Stage Selection Equation28

                                                                  (1)                     (2)
                Dependent Variables                         Has code words          Has code words
                Attention and editing
                Unique identifiers                               5.297***               1.732***
                                                                  [0.551]                [0.480]
                Total revisions to date                         ‐35.582***             ‐20.211***
                                                                  [2.231]                [1.960]
                Pageviews                                        ‐13.659*
                                                                  [7.245]
                Dispersion
                Revisions per contributor                    1,278.439***             1,665.096***
                                                                [57.775]                 [50.039]
                HHI                                           ‐52.372***               ‐49.307***
                                                                 [1.073]                  [0.752]
                Article features
                Words                                          2.965***                  3.328***
                                                                 [0.018]                  [0.015]
                Reference                                     711.030***               538.473***
                                                                [15.477]                 [13.628]
                References per word                          ‐160.131***               ‐53.585***
                                                                [14.952]                 [11.456]
                Year created = 2002                            0.650***                  0.593***
                                                                 [0.025]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2003                               0.002                 ‐0.099***
                                                                 [0.026]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2004                            ‐0.217***                ‐0.327***
                                                                 [0.025]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2005                            ‐0.334***                ‐0.415***
                                                                 [0.025]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2006                            ‐0.442***                ‐0.512***
                                                                 [0.025]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2007                            ‐0.484***                ‐0.521***
                                                                 [0.026]                  [0.017]
                Year created = 2008                            ‐0.320***                ‐0.402***
                                                                 [0.026]                  [0.018]
                Year created = 2009                            ‐0.206***                ‐0.292***
                                                                 [0.026]                  [0.019]
                Year created = 2010                            ‐0.165***                ‐0.264***
                                                                 [0.027]                  [0.019]
                Year created = 2011                            ‐0.570***                ‐0.665***
                                                                 [0.055]                  [0.051]
                Category Dummies                                Included                 Included
                Year Dummies                                    Included                 Included
                Observations                                    415,836                   647,352
                Standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




28
     Note that to make the coefficients easier to read, we have re‐scaled the variables as shown in Table 5.


                                                           31
                            Table 7: Regression Results for Slant Index and Bias Size

                                      (1)                   (2)                   (1)                   (2)
Dependent Variables               Slant index           Slant index            Bias size             Bias size
Attention and editing
Unique identifiers                 1.460***              1.351***             ‐6.571***             ‐6.151***
                                    [0.081]                [0.070]              [0.370]               [0.316]
Total revisions to date           ‐3.120***              ‐2.791***            16.167***             13.826***
                                    [0.324]                [0.279]              [1.483]               [1.258]
Pageviews                          ‐2.072**                                      ‐2.979
                                    [1.050]                                     [4.809]
Dispersion
Revisions per contributor           ‐13.874              ‐24.412**           301.312***            355.838***
                                   [13.625]               [12.065]             [62.404]              [54.432]
HHI                                2.367***               1.840***           ‐18.135***            ‐14.774***
                                    [0.364]                [0.270]              [1.667]               [1.216]
Article features
Total frequency                    ‐1.462***             ‐1.081***               ‐0.007             ‐1.073***
                                     [0.098]               [0.079]              [0.447]               [0.358]
Reference                          15.830***              4.280**            ‐70.922***             ‐20.222**
                                     [2.308]               [2.078]             [10.572]               [9.376]
References per word                   4.224             18.391***            203.924***            184.997***
                                     [6.319]               [6.001]             [28.911]              [26.999]
Year created = 2002                ‐0.201***             ‐0.235***             0.697***              0.697***
                                     [0.004]               [0.003]              [0.014]               [0.014]
Year created = 2003                 0.030***              0.008**             ‐0.077***             ‐0.077***
                                     [0.005]               [0.003]              [0.015]               [0.015]
Year created = 2004                 0.089***             0.079***
                                     [0.005]               [0.003]
Year created = 2005‐2011,      [0.103, 0.115]***     [0.085,0.103]***
[min, max] shown.
Year created = 2004‐2010,                                                 [‐0.300, ‐0.381]***   [‐0.289, ‐0.434]***
[min,max] shown.
Category Dummies                   Included                Included            Included             Included
Select Year dummies              2007 omitted           2001 omitted        2007 omitted          2001 omitted
                               0.020*** in 2008       ‐0.251*** in 2002   ‐0.062*** in 2008     0.566*** in 2002
                               0.021***in 2011        ‐0.138*** in 2003   ‐0.084*** in 2009     0.270*** in 2003
                                                      ‐0.103*** in 2010                           0.025 in 2010
                                                      ‐0.109*** in 2011   ‐0.096*** in 2011       0.049 in 2011
Full set of Year Dummies            Included               Included            Included             Included
Inverse Mills ratio                ‐0.026***              ‐0.041***           0.157***              0.239***
                                     [0.003]                [0.002]             [0.013]              [0.010]
Observations                        156,419                237,989             156,419               237,989
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        32
