NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PLAN SELECTION IN MEDICARE PART D:
EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Florian Heiss
Adam Leive
Daniel McFadden
Joachim Winter
Working Paper 18166
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18166

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

This research was supported by the Behavioral and Social Research program of the National Institute
on Aging (grants P01AG033559 and RC4AG039036), with additional support from the E. Morris
Cox Fund at the University of California, Berkeley. We thank Mark Duggan for helpful comments,
Patricia St. Clair for her support of the data construction effort, and Armando Franco and Sarah Axeen
for additional assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Florian Heiss, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Plan Selection in Medicare Part D: Evidence from Administrative Data
Florian Heiss, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter
NBER Working Paper No. 18166
June 2012
JEL No. C25,D12,H51,I11,I18
ABSTRACT
We study the Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance program as a bellwether for designs of private,
non-mandatory health insurance markets, focusing on the ability of consumers to evaluate and optimize
their choices of plans. Our analysis of administrative data on medical claims in Medicare Part D suggests
that less than 10 percent of individuals enroll in plans that are ex post optimal with respect to total
cost (premiums and co-payments). Relative to the benchmark of a static decision rule, similar to the
Plan Finder provided by the Medicare administration, that conditions next year’s plan choice only
on the drugs consumed in the current year, enrollees lost on average about $300 per year. These numbers
are hard to reconcile with decision costs alone; it appears that unless a sizeable fraction of consumers
value plan features other than cost, they are not optimizing effectively.

Florian Heiss
Department of Statistics and Econometrics
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz
Haus Recht und Wirtschaft II
D-55099 Mainz
Germany
heiss@uni-mainz.de

Daniel McFadden
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu

Adam Leive
Schaeffer Center for
Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
3335 S. Figueroa Street
Los Angeles, CA 90089
leive@usc.edu

Joachim Winter
Department of Economics
LMU
Ludwigstr. 28 (RG)
D-80539 Munich
Germany
winter@lmu.de

1. Introduction
Health-care systems with mandated health insurance financed from some combination of
consumer, employer, and government sources are standard in all developed countries except the
United States, where about 18 percent of the non-elderly population is currently uninsured (Gruber, 2008), and many of the insured face financially risky gaps in coverage. The health cost of
incomplete coverage is substantial: In comparison with other countries, the United States ranks
25th in the survival rate from age 15 to age 60, which impacts the population of workers and
young parents whose loss is a substantial cost to families and to the economy.1 If the U.S. could
raise its survival rate for this group to that of Switzerland, a country that has mandatory standardized coverage offered by private insurers, this would prevent more than 190,000 deaths per year.
The elderly in the United States aged 65 and older do have universal coverage under the Medicare program, with prescription drug coverage (Medicare Part D) added in 2006. This may explain the somewhat better comparative performance of the United States for seniors, a rank of
14th in life expectancy at age 65. Since the U.S. has a population that at retirement has the poorest health in the developed world, this is a medical accomplishment, but it is very costly – U.S.
health expenditures per capita are 50 percent higher than those in any other country.
Medicare Part D provides the Medicare-eligible population with universal access to a subsidized market for non-mandatory standardized prescription drug coverage through governmentapproved contracts sponsored by private insurance firms; see Bach and McClellan (2005). This
new market is representative of a trend toward “consumer-directed healthcare” that relies on consumer behavior and competition among insurance firms to attain satisfactory allocation of health
care resources with limited government regulation, and is one model for more comprehensive
reform of health care insurance (see Newhouse, 2004; Buntin et al., 2006; Goodman, 2006; and
the references therein). Overall, Medicare Part D is considered a success story: Despite a rocky
start, enrollment rates are high2, consumers have a broad choice of sponsors, and premiums are

1

These statistics are based on World Health Organization data for 2006, and U.S. Census data on
population by age in 2006.
2

In the first year of Medicare Part D, more than 90% of the eligible population obtained prescription drug
coverage, either from a Medicare Part D plan or a source with comparable coverage (Heiss, McFadden, and Winter,
2006).

2

lower than anticipated by policymakers and insurers (Heiss, McFadden, and Winter, 2006, 2007;
Goldman and Joyce, 2008; Duggan, Healy, and Scott Morton, 2008).3
Despite these successes, making optimal, or even just reasonable, decisions in the Part D
market is difficult for seniors. Typically, about 40 drug plans are in the choice set of an individual
in most Medicare regions, once she has decided that she wants to enroll in a Part D stand-alone
Prescription Drug Plan (PDP). When choosing among these plans, individuals face uncertainty
with respect to their future health status and drug needs, and rather complicated benefit schedules
and formularies with a coverage gap and other peculiar institutional features of the Part D program.4 Plan choice was considered a major problem of Medicare Part D right from the beginning
(see, e.g., Neuman and Cubanski, 2009), and the Medicare administration (the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS) has undertaken an extensive program of outreach to provide relevant information and guidance to consumers. In particular, such efforts include its Plan
Finder, an internet tool that gives the available plans, premiums, and out-of-pocket costs for a
medicine cabinet specified by the consumer. A range of industry-specific factors – market concentration of insurers, jockeying by insurers in their formulary and benefit designs, their marketing to new and existing enrollees, and their bargains with pharmaceutical companies – all have
the potential to reduce the social benefit of the Part D program. Management of these market
features and orderly and efficient operation of the Part D market will require continuing vigilance
from CMS.
How seniors decide whether to enroll in Medicare Part D, and what plans they select, is
important not only for management of the Part D program, but also is an informative experiment
on how consumers behave in real-world decision situations with a complex, ambiguous structure
and high stakes, and may yield predictions for how they will handle plan choices in the new gen3

We have pointed out elsewhere (Heiss, McFadden, and Winter, 2009) that variety in available levels of
coverage has diminished sharply for individual buyers in the first three years of operation of the Part D market.
Offerings of plans with the most comprehensive coverage have collapsed, and plans with intermediate coverage are
at risk of a death spiral of rising premiums and falling enrollment, a phenomenon predicted for this market by Pauly
and Zeng (2004) as a consequence of adverse selection, and observed in other health insurance markets; see Cutler
and Reber (1998). Union and employer-provided retiree plans that are coordinated with Part D, and Medicare
Advantage plans that bundle drug coverage with other medical services in an HMO-like setting, are not subject to the
same selection pressures, and continue to offer a variety of coverage levels. However, health insurance provided
under retiree plans is dropping in the working population, and individual policies for prescription drugs will become
more important in the future.
4

In addition to the monthly premium, features of PDP include deductibles, copayment percentage or
copayment tiers in an initial coverage range up to an initial coverage limit, level of coverage in the gap (the doughnut
hole between the initial coverage limit and a catastrophic coverage threshold), copayment rules above the
catastrophic coverage threshold, formulary restrictions, etc., all explained in more detail later.

3

eral health insurance exchanges that will implement the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act of 2010.
In this paper, we examine how well consumers did in choosing their Medicare Part D insurance plan. A number of papers have considered this issue, but mostly with rather specific or
small samples, and also with somewhat inconsistent findings.
Abaluck and Gruber (2011) use comprehensive pharmacy data provided by Wolters Kluwer that cover almost one-third of all third-party prescription drug transactions. They match these
data with information on the characteristics of all the plans available to the individuals in the
dataset. Abaluck and Gruber find that in their plan choice, individuals place more weight on plan
premiums than on expected out-of-pocket costs. Also, individuals value plan financial characteristics in excess of their possible impacts on financial expenses or risk, while placing almost no
value on variance-reducing aspects of plans.
Ketcham et al. (2011) analyze a large data set from a “single insurer that sells Part D plans
(PDPs) and administers PDPs sold by other companies”. The data contain information on individuals’ chosen and available plans, prescription drug use and spending, and other characteristics.
Their analysis focuses on the issue of whether the choices of Medicare Part D enrollees improved
over the first two years of the Medicare Part D program in terms of reducing overspending, defined as “the consumers annual ex post out-of-pocket (OOP) costs for insurance and prescription
drugs above the cost of the cheapest alternative, where the alternatives include other Part D plans
as well as having no coverage”. They find large reductions in “over-spending” from 2006 to
2007, which they attribute mostly to plan switching. These findings contrast with those of Kling
et al. (2011) who argue that consumers’ choices are subject to substantial “comparison frictions”
and arrive at a more pessimistic conclusion about consumers’ ability to choose the best plans.
Our paper is the first to provide a comprehensive analysis of plan choice in the Part D
market using a large random sample from the entire Medicare-eligible population. Our data, Part
D claims records for three years, 2006–2008, combined with Parts A and B claims records for
2002-2008, have been provided by the Medicare administration (the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, or CMS) under a special data use agreement. These records give administrative information on plan choice, drug use, health conditions, out-of-pocket costs, and premiums.
The data on drug use are particularly detailed, thus avoiding the need to impute an individual’s
drug bill from self-reported survey data (as discussed in Winter et al., 2006). Using these Medi4

care A, B, D data, we study both enrollment choices in the first three years of Medicare Part D
(2006–2008) and plan choice among those enrolled, conditional on previous year’s drug use, in
the years 2007 and 2008.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe the data
and the approach taken for simulating the relevant attributes of alternative plans available to each
consumer. We use the administrative data on drug spending to characterize Part D enrollment
decisions in Section 3. In Section 4, we present the analytical framework for analyzing ex ante
and ex post optimization failures, along with the results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data
2.1 Data sources and definition of working samples
Our study starts with a draw of all records from the Medicare denominator files for the
years 2006, 2007, and 2008 that have an HIC code ending in the digits ‘0’ or ‘5’. The denominator file is an administrative list of all persons in the United States who are eligible for Medicare
benefits, and each person enrolled in Medicare for one or more days in a year has a unique identifier, the HIC code, that is associated with them for the duration of their enrollment in Medicare.5
Then, this draw is in each year a 20 percent representative sample of all people enrolled in Medicare at some point in the year, and all persons enrolled in any year appear longitudinally across
all the years in which they are enrolled by virtue of retaining their HIC code with the same terminal digit (or being tracked through a change in HIC code for their primary beneficiary). The 20
percent sample grows each year as new people become eligible (primarily by reaching age 65 or
developing a qualified disability), and shrinks as people become ineligible (primarily through
death or recovery from a qualified disability). Each record in the 20 percent sample is linked to
(1) Medicare Parts A and B claims beginning in 2002, or date of enrollment if later, giving data
on diagnoses and treatments, (2) a file giving Part D enrollment status and (encrypted) plan
choice in each of the years 2006, 2007, and 2008, and (3) for those enrolled in stand-alone prescription drug plans (PDP), all prescription drug claims, including medication, benefits paid, total
prescription cost, and copayments.
5

When an individual moves from one household to another, and is not a primary beneficiary in either, the
HIC code assigned to this beneficiary switches to reflect the new primary beneficiary, and will no longer necessarily
end in ‘0’ or ‘5’. However, as of 2006 these individuals are tracked through the HIC code change, their claims are
retained in the 20 percent draw, and their claim records under their previous HIC code are retained. We have not yet
obtained full documentation of these procedures, and this description may be modified to reflect actual practice.

5

The 20 percent representative sample includes 9,086,340 beneficiaries in 2006; 9,299,848
in 2007; and 9,530,609 in 2008. Table 1 shows how the working samples are constructed from
the initial 20 percent samples by applying a number of exclusion criteria. The reduced sample
comes primarily from (1) the exclusion of Part D non-enrollees and late enrollees, (2) the exclusion of dual-eligibles, people under 65 who are eligible due to disability, and people with lowincome subsidies, many of whom were directed to Medicare Advantage plans that do not break
out prescription drug use, and (3) the exclusion of people on retiree plans who do not have unrestricted plan choice. Most of these exclusions are part of the definition of our target population
of consumers in stand-alone PDP where study of plan choice is of interest and drug claims records are available. For our final working samples, we also exclude people who do not have Part
D coverage throughout the year, people not enrolled in stand-alone PDP plans throughout the
year, people who switch plans during the year, people enrolled in employer group waiver
(EGWP) plans, people not living in the United States, and people without prior year claims information. An appendix table gives a breakdown by age of the patterns of part and full year
Medicare enrollment.
Because of the exclusion restrictions we apply, the numbers of beneficiaries in our working sample do not match up directly with published statistics. Consider the 20 percent sample in
2007. Of the 9,299,848 beneficiaries on the denominator file, 87 percent are identified as having
some form of prescription drug coverage at some point in 2007. This is a little less than the 90
percent coverage rate targeted by CMS and achieved in various enrollment reports; the difference
may be under-reporting in the denominator file of some forms of coverage that are counted by
CMS in total coverage. The share of the 9,299,848 beneficiaries with Part D coverage at some
point in 2007 is 56.1 percent, and with Part D coverage throughout the year is 48.7 percent.
These shares reflect individuals with creditable or retiree coverage who are not enrolled in Part
D, and individuals who move into Part D from non-Part D plans, in some cases because they become newly eligible during the year.
2.2 From prescription drug claims data to simulated plan choices
For each beneficiary, we observe a complete record of each prescription filled and submitted to Medicare for reimbursement in each of the years 2006, 2007, and 2008. Each claim includes detailed information on the payment for the particular drug and quantity dispensed, days
supplied, which tier the insurance plan classifies the drug on, the benefit phase associated with

6

each claim, the national drug classification (NDC) code of the drug, and the prescription’s date.
This information forms the beneficiary’s claim history that will be used to simulate their out-ofpocket (OOP) copayments for prescriptions, and the sum of their simulated OOP copayments and
premiums, which we call Consumer Inclusive Cost (CIC), in each of the insurance plans available
to them.
Our simulation predicts a beneficiary’s out-of-pocket spending among each available
stand-alone Part D plan in his region. There are two main parts to this simulation: (1) constructing the formulary and benefit design (FBD) for each plan, and (2) running each beneficiary’s
claim history through these FBDs and calculating out-of-pocket (OOP) spending based on each
plan’s various rules and copayment provisions.
2.2.1 Construction of empirical FBDs
CMS data confidentiality rules encrypt the identities of plans in our Part D data. Consequently, we cannot assign published plan formularies from public CMS records to these encrypted identifiers, and are unable to calculate from actual formularies the benefits and out-ofpocket costs for plans available but not chosen. As a substitute, we construct an empirical formulary for each insurance plan that is the union of all the NDC codes of claims of enrollees in our
Part D data who are in plans with the same formulary identifier in a specified year. The most
popular formulary in 2007 had almost 900,000 enrollees, while the median formulary had 7,385
enrollees. The chance that a formulary drug will be captured by this method is low for uncommon drugs in formularies with low numbers of enrollees.6 Thus, the assumption that only drugs
observed with claims are covered by each plan’s formulary may make the coverage of smaller
plans appear less generous than in reality.
There are five types of Part D stand-alone PDPs. A Standard plan has an administratively
specified benefit schedule with four phases – an annual deductible, an initial coverage phase with
a 25 percent copayment, a gap or doughnut hole with no coverage between an initial coverage
limit (ICL) and a catastrophic coverage threshold (CCT), and a catastrophic phase above the CCT
with a 5 percent copayment. In 2007, the deductible was $265, the ICL was $2400, and the CCT
was reached when OOP costs reached $3850, attained at a drug bill of $5451.25. These limits are
6

A drug ranked 500 in prescription frequency is used by about 0.21 percent of enrollees, and in the median
enrollment empirical formulary is almost certainly captured; the probability is 1 - (1 - 0.0021)7385. For the drug
ranked 1000, the prescription frequency is 0.03 percent , and the chance of capture is 90 percent, while for the drug
ranked 2000, the prescription frequency is 0.003 percent and the chance of capture is 19 percent.

7

adjusted by CMS each year. Actuarially Equivalent plans differ from the Standard plan only by
substituting copayment tiers for copayment percentages, keeping benefit generosity the same on
average. Basic Alternative plans eliminate the deductible phase, and are required to be at least as
generous as the Standard plan. Enhanced plans offer two types of gap coverage, either full coverage, or coverage of generic drugs only, at the equivalent of a 25 percent copayment rate. Enhanced plans reduce OOP costs through the gap phase, so that higher drug bills are required to
reach the CCT.7
Our data identify plan types, and for each drug appearing in the empirical formulary of a
plan, its branded/generic/preferred status classification and tier classification. Many beneficiaries
in stand-alone PDP plans have one or more covered claims for drugs listed on a tier that is higher
than the highest tier covered by the plan or a tier classified as “NA”. The NDC claims for drugs
so classified never appear on a regular tier in other claims for enrollees in the plan, indicating that
they are in most cases benefits paid as the result of appeals rather than administrative coding errors or off-schedule purchases, such as replacements of lost prescriptions. After empirically examining the cost sharing associated with such claims by benefit phase, we assign “off-tier” claims
no coverage in the deductible or doughnut hole, 25 percent coinsurance in the pre-ICL phase, and
5 percent coinsurance in the catastrophic phase. Roughly 20 percent of the sample has at least one
off-tier claim so this is a pervasive phenomenon.
We estimate a benefit design for each plan based on drug classification, phase-dependent
empirical tier copayment rate, days supplied, and the type of pharmacy that fills the prescription.
These aspects of the benefit design, and other elements that we take into account, are summarized
in Table 2. The steps described above then provide an empirical formulary and benefit design for
each plan and year that can be used to estimate the annual OOP cost of any specified list of prescriptions supplied under that plan.
2.2.2 Simulation of OOP copayments for alternative plans
Each person in our working sample has realized OOP costs in the claims data in their chosen plan for the prescriptions they use during a year; we term the list of prescriptions filled their
medicine cabinet (MC). To study the quality of plan choices, we must impute “what if” OOP

7

For example, in 2007 a drug bill of $14,175 was required for an enrollee with full gap coverage to reach
the CCT. Consequently, this enrollee co-paid at a 25 percent rate rather than the Standard plan 5 percent rate for
drug bills between $5451.25 and $14,175, eventually repaying all the benefits received from gap coverage.

8

costs in the available plans that were not chosen. To do this, we impute adjusted OOP costs from
our simulation of the formulary and benefit design of each plan, and use these imputed OOP costs
for both the chosen and alternative plans. The imputation avoids some anomalies due to tier coding and off-schedule drug purchases, and potential bias in comparing actual and imputed OOP
costs, but also misses some payment variations actually experienced. In this imputation, each
person’s claims history is run through the empirical FBD described above for a particular plan to
estimate their OOP should they have been enrolled in that plan. The simulations are performed on
each of the plans in the beneficiary’s choice set determined by the Medicare-defined region (of
34) in which she lives. When claims straddle two or more benefit phases, we split the claim into
parts corresponding to each benefit phase and apply the associated cost sharing for that component. We make five assumptions about prescription drug utilization:
A1 Same order of drug utilization. Individuals follow the same order of drug consumption in
each alternative plan as is actually observed in their chosen plan. Any substitution is
based only on the type of drug, but not the quantity or timing of utilization.
A2 Sorting claims on the same date. It is common for multiple prescriptions to be filled on
the same day. The order in which such claims are processed may be important for calculating a patient’s OOP if one of the claims straddles two benefit phases. To achieve replicable simulation results, some sorting rule must be imposed for claims occurring on the
same day. We assume that multiple claims on the same day are sorted first based on the
benefit phase recorded in the beneficiary’s chosen plan and are then sorted second based
on the total cost of the drug (from low to high).
A3 Pharmacy choice to minimize OOP cost. In reality, the choice of where to fill prescriptions is likely based on differences in both OOP cost and convenience. However, we assume that beneficiaries will always fill prescriptions at pharmacies and in quantities offering the lowest annual OOP cost. Our assumption assures comparability in costs across
consumers and plans, and to the extent that higher OOP costs incurred at local pharmacies
or for more frequent refills simply reflect consumers’ valuations of the added convenience, our measure is the correct benchmark for OOP cost comparisons.
A.4 Zero price elasticity of drug use. We assume that if a consumer uses a drug in their chosen plan, then they will use the same quantity and dosage of this drug, or a therapeutic

9

equivalent, in any alternative plan, irrespective of price differences across plans and
drugs.
A.5 Drug substitution. We simulate OOP costs under two alternative assumptions on drug
substitutions. The first assumption is no drug substitution, so a specific drug used in the
consumer’s chosen plan would also be used if the consumer were enrolled in an alternative plan, even if it is on a different tier or is not covered in the alternative plan formulary.8 This alternative may overstate the OOP cost of meeting the same therapy needs in
alternative plans, and make chosen plans look better than they are. The second alternative
assumption is that whenever a drug used in a chosen plan is not in the formulary of an alternative plan, then that drug is replaced in both the chosen and alternative plans by lowest-price therapeutic equivalents. The rules we adopt here are similar to those used by the
CMS Plan Finder for calculating the costs of alternative plans.9 Note that if a consumer
uses a branded drug that is in the formulary of her current plan, and has a strict preference
for this brand over an alternative brand classified as therapeutically equivalent, our calculation with drug substitution can understate the OOP cost to this individual of meeting her
perceived drug needs under both the chosen and alternative plans.
2.2.3 Validity of the simulation
The simulation’s internal validity is tested by examining the difference in actual OOP
spending and simulated adjusted OOP spending (without drug substitution) for each beneficiary
in their chosen plan. Actual OOP is defined as the sum of patient payments not reimbursed by a
third party, all qualified third party payments, and patient liability reductions due to coordination
of benefits from other payers. The median difference is $0, the mean difference is -$33, and the
correlation coefficient exceeds 0.98. This compares favorably to a similar simulation check presented in Ketcham et al. (2011). Figure 1 below displays the distribution of this difference for
beneficiaries with differences less than $1000 in absolute value, which make up more than 99.5
percent of the distribution. The small size of these differences for most beneficiaries suggests

8

Under CMS rules, OOP payments for off-formulary drugs do not count in the accumulated “True OOP”
(TrOOP) costs that determine qualification for catastrophic coverage. Our simulation does not account for this
additional cost of alternative plans. In practice, this will have little influence on our analysis, as plans requiring offformulary drugs are rarely cost competitive even without accounting for this potential added cost.
9
One difference is that Plan Finder asks consumers which pharmacies they would like to use, without
providing any cost information, and then bases cost estimates on those choices. Our simulation chooses the lowest
cost pharmacy to calculate OOP cost since we cannot observe the consumer’s preferences for different pharmacies.

10

that the simulation performs reasonably well and is likely accurate for predicting OOP spending
in the plans not chosen. However, there are still some outliers for whom the difference between
simulated and actual OOP is large. Figure 2 plots the empirical mean of simulated OOP cost
against overall drug bill for consumers on various plans, and compares this with the designed
standard plan benefit schedule. The figure indicates that the simulated benefits for Standard and
Actuarially Equivalent plans conform well to the designed schedule over the phases where benefits are paid, but give somewhat higher OOP costs when drug bills are in the gap. This may be a
statistical artifact, or may be evidence that consumers are being surcharged on drugs purchased in
the gap where there is no coverage. The OOP costs for plans with brand and generic gap coverage show the expected reduction of OOP costs in the gap phase. The relatively higher OOP costs
for plans covering only generics in the gap phase may suggest that branded drugs are the primary
cost driver at that level of spending.
For comparability of chosen and non-chosen plans, we use hereafter annual imputed adjusted OOP costs of a medicine cabinet, with or without drug substitution, rather than a mix of
observed OOP costs for the chosen plan and imputed OOP costs for alternative plans. An important measure for consumers is the sum of annual imputed adjusted OOP cost and premiums,
which we term Consumer Inclusive Cost (CIC).

3. Enrollment choices
We begin our analysis of the administrative data on Medicare Part D by looking at the enrollment decision; this complements earlier research that used survey data such as Winter et al.
(2009) and Heiss et al. (2006, 2009). The Part D program is heavily subsidized, with insurers
reimbursed from government general revenues for about 75 percent of overhead and benefits paid
out, with fairly tightly regulated formulary and benefit design and competitively determined premiums. As a result, the program is first-year actuarially favorable for most eligible people, even
before considering the value of reducing risk and the option value of avoiding delayed enrollment
penalties if a Part D plan becomes attractive in the future (Winter et al., 2006).
The marketing and information provided on Part D policies by insurers and by CMS focus
on the expected benefits rather than on risk reduction. In particular, the CMS Plan Finder invites
users to list current drugs, and then provides a list of available plans ranked by out-of-pocket cost
if the current drug use continues through the coming year. While consumers could in principle

11

use Plan Finder on a “what if” basis by introducing counterfactual drugs and dosages, it would be
cumbersome to do this and combine the results into an analysis of expected plan benefits and
costs. No information is provided on the likelihood that the person will have different drug needs,
the ability of plans to meet these needs, and the reduction in risk offered by plans with more generous coverage. As a result, consumers are nudged toward lowest cost plans under the static
forecast that current drug use will continue without change, rather than being nudged toward
overall risk management.
This said, current drugs and annual drug bills are good predictors of one-year-ahead drug
needs. The correlation of total drug bills in adjacent years is about 0.75, reflecting high persistence in patterns of use of individual drugs. As a result, persons with modestly high drug bills
can expect to be ahead of the game by enrolling, even if they are not risk-adverse or concerned
about the late enrollment penalty and future options. In addition, conditioned on this information
there is significant risk reduction from enrollment. Figure 3 gives the cumulative distribution
function of 2007 total drug bills. Table 3 gives descriptive statistics for this distribution, and also
for the distribution of 2008 total drug bills, for the population that had full-year enrollment in a
stand-alone prescription drug insurance plan in both years. The correlation of total drug bills in
the two years is 0.7437.
Figure 4 gives the complementary cumulative distribution functions for 2008 total drug
bills, conditioned on the 2007 drug bill percentiles. As the relatively high inter-year correlation
implies, these CCDF are relatively tightly distributed around the 2007 levels, but with some regression to the mean. However, they have relatively thick right tails. Figure 5 plots the conditional mean of the 2008 total drug bill, and the contour giving the approximate 95th percentile,
against the 2007 total drug bill. The scales are logarithmic, so that this graph shows substantial
risk of large increases in drug bills over the previous year. Below a 2007 drug bill of $2317 (the
71st percentile), the 2008 conditional mean exceeds the 2007 drug bill, and above this level, the
reverse is true, reflecting regression to the mean.
A myopic consumer who considers only first-year benefits from a Part D plan and is risk
neutral should enroll if expected benefits received exceed the premium. Consider a Part D standard or equivalent plan in 2008, which had a typical premium of $30 per month. Figure 6 gives
the probability, conditioned on 2007 total drug bill, that an enrollee in the standard plan will be
ahead of the game in the first year, with benefits exceeding the annual premium. For 2007 drug
bills above $690, this probability exceeds 50 percent. The probability peaks at a 2007 drug bill of

12

about $5000, and thereafter declines slightly, apparently due to elevated mortality risk for people
with very high drug bills. Figure 7 gives the expected cost conditioned on the 2007 total drug bill
for non-enrollment, enrollment in a Silver (i.e., standard or equivalent) plan, and enrollment in a
Gold (i.e., generic drug coverage in the gap) plan with a premium at the national average of
$63.34 per month. These curves assume that 50 percent of drug costs in the gap are generic. At a
2007 drug bill of $470, corresponding to a 2008 expected drug bill of $760, enrollment in a Silver
plan breaks even with non-enrollment in terms of expected cost. Then, if risk aversion and an
option value for avoiding a late enrollment penalty in future years are not considerations, 19.5
percent of the eligible population is best off not enrolling. At a drug bill of $3,744 in 2007, corresponding to an expected drug bill of $3,570 in 2008, the Silver and Gold plans break even in
terms of expected cost. Then, the 9.5 percent of the eligible population with the highest 2007
drug bills is best off with a Gold plan. Moreover, if first-year payoff is the only criterion and risk
is not a consideration, about 12 percent of those enrolling in Part D plans would choose a Gold
plan.
In an earlier analysis of Part D enrollment choices using a national sample of about 2,500
eligible people, Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2009) found that 23.8 percent of those not automatically enrolled in Part D through retiree plans or Medicaid chose to not enroll. CMS tabulations from the denominator file give 15.1 percent of the eligible population without drug insurance of some creditable form in 2008 – this will translate into a higher percentage of those who
are active deciders with a personal choice of whether to enroll and if so what plan to choose; see
Table 4. While these rates bracket the 19.5 percent that the simple analysis above would suggest
if consumers are myopic and risk-neutral, the actual pattern of non-enrollment was much more
random, including many who left money on the table in the first year as the result of their enrollment choice. The earlier finding was that non-enrollment was concentrated among those with
low but above-poverty incomes, low education, and relatively low prior drug use. The earlier
analysis also found that when the option value of Part D insurance without a late enrollment penalty is taken into account, only a few percent of very old people with little drug use should rationally choose to not insure. Then, the observed rates of non-enrollment indicate that myopia and
inattention are significant, and are reducing prescription drug insurance participation rates below
levels that are optimal for individuals.
In our Medicare 20 percent sample of all Part D eligible people, Gold plans (combined
with the relatively unimportant Platinum plans with full gap coverage) have a 9.4 percent share of

13

those enrolled in Part D plans; see Table 5.10 Thus, Gold plans appear to be slightly undersubscribed relative to their first-year actuarial value. The complexity of the valuation of Silver and
Gold plans, the availability of plans at national average premiums, consumer errors in assessing
the actuarial value of gap coverage and focus on premium costs over potential benefits, and our
assumption on the share of generics in gap purchases are factors that may contribute to this difference in predicted and actual market share. What the numbers indicate is that risk aversion is
apparently not strong enough to offset the (perceived) disadvantageous loading of extended benefits.
The analysis above did not condition on the demographic variables available in claims data, gender and age. We find that drug use does vary with these variables, but that conditioned on
prior drug use, they have little explanatory power. Thus, further conditioning on these demographic variables does not alter our general conclusions on enrollment.

4. Models of plan choice behavior
In this section, we develop an analytical framework for comparing ex ante and ex post optimization failures of Part D enrollees, and present results for 2007 plan choices made at the end
of 2006 and for 2008 plan choices made at the end of 2007.

4.1 Rational expectations and decisions
We make the reasonable assumption that at the time of their plan choice at the end of a year
for the upcoming year, consumers know the drugs they have used over the current year, their
health conditions, and their realized drug bill for the year, and they can calculate from public information (e.g., the CMS Plan finder) the projected CIC for each plan alternative they face and
each medicine cabinet they may need. Since the open enrollment periods for 2007 and 2008 were
mid-November to mid-December in the preceding year, this is a good but not perfect assumption,
as end-of-year events that appear in our information measures may not be predictable by the individual, and no public source including Plan Finder makes it easy to carry through a sophisticated
forecast of the likelihood and consequences of changes in health and drug needs. We assume in
practice that the information that each consumer has in year t-1, denoted Xt-1, includes their age
10

Our calculations are based on 253,080 beneficiaries enrolled in Gold and 23,468 enrolled in Platinum
plans and 2,936,066 beneficiaries enrolled in Part D stand-alone PDP.

14

and gender, their medicine cabinet (MCt-1, a high-dimensional vector that describes all the consumer’s prescription claims over the year and includes information on each claim such as national drug code (NDC) and number of days supplied), their end-of-year chronic conditions
(based on the CMS Chronic Condition Warehouse (CCW) inventory of chronic health conditions), their risk score for expected drug costs (based on the Hierarchical Condition Code (HCC)
used by CMS for risk adjustment), their overall drug bill, their Part D plan (if any), and premium
and realized OOP cost (and hence CIC) under this plan.
Each consumer is assumed to have sufficient information, from the CMS Plan Finder or otherwise, to determine the formulary and benefit design mapping, denoted CICt = FBD(MCt,k,t),
for each Plan k available in year t in her region11, and to have, from peers or otherwise, a personal
conditional density f(MCt | k,Xt-1) of year t medicine cabinets given year t-1 information. From
this, we assume that the consumer can deduce the conditional distribution of CIC in t given Xt-1
and k, and its mean and variance

µ(k,Xt-1) =
σ2(k,Xt-1) =

FBD(MCt,k,t) f(MCt | k,Xt-1),
[FBD(MCt,k,t) - µ(k,Xt-1)]2 f(MCt | k,Xt-1).

For a consumer with fully rational expectations, the density f will be statistically accurate. Consumers with less than fully rational expectations may have densities f that are not fully accurate,
perhaps because they ignore available conditioning information or because they distort reality.
We assume that consumers have CARA utility functions U = (1 – exp(-γ + αCICt))/α, where
γ is a term that can vary across individuals due to variations in wealth and in other risky opportunities, and α > 0 is a coefficient of risk aversion that approaches zero in the limiting case of risk
neutrality. Rational consumers are assumed to choose plans k that maximize the expected value
of U. To a first approximation for α small, this is equivalent to minimizing a certainty equivalent
expected CIC, µ(k,Xt-1) + α[σ2(k,Xt-1) + (γ - µ(k,Xt-1))2]/2. This utility formulation ignores the
possibility of intertemporal optimization of a discounted stream of utilities. For plan choice,
where the consumer is free to reoptimize in each annual open enrollment period, the conditions
for separability of the intertemporal problem into a series of one-period decisions are largely

11

In practice, only about 20 percent of Part D enrollees consult Plan Finder, and it is unclear how much information the remainder obtain indirectly.

15

met.12 Note that fully rational choice requires (1) use of all available relevant information to
form expectations, (2) statistically realistic processing of information, and (3) plan choice to
maximize expected utility. Failure of full rationality could come from violation of any of these
conditions, and in general it will be difficult to identify the conditions responsible for failures.

4.2 Ex post and ex ante optimization errors
Observed choices and alternatives can be compared ex post, the realized costs from the chosen plan against the “what if” calculation of what costs would have been after the fact if the least
inclusive cost alternative had been chosen. This allows us to describe consumer “regret” from a
choice that in retrospect was not optimal. However, an ex ante comparison is more relevant for
judging the quality of consumer decision making. This requires comparing expected utility of the
observed plan choice with the alternative that maximizes expected utility, conditioned on the information available to the consumer at the time plan choice for the following year is made. This
analysis requires specification of the information available to the consumer at the time of decision, and of the formation of expectations regarding the distribution of CIC for each choice alternative. Choosing a plan that fails to maximize expected utility, and the certainty equivalent expected excess cost from this failure, are arguably indications of failure by consumers to protect
their self-interest, although factors such as a mismatch of the consumer’s actual information and
our information assumption, our assumption on utility, our assumptions on the formation and
measurement of expectations, plan features known to the consumer and not taken into account in
our description of consumer information, such as convenience of pharmacies in the insurer’s
network, and mistakes that are economically insignificant, may also contribute to behavior that
we classify as optimization failures.
First consider ex post comparisons. Similarly to Ketcham et al. (2011), we define ex post excess cost as the difference between CIC for the chosen plan and the lowest CIC for any available
plan, given the realized medicine cabinet. This comparison ignores risk, in effect treating consumers as risk neutral. The ex post excess cost is an upper bound on the losses of risk-neutral
consumers from non-optimal decisions, but it will not be a tight bound unless the consumer has
perfect foresight on drug use in the coming year. More realistic ex ante assessments of the qual12

Factors that could reintroduce an intertemporal element would be switching costs between plans, leading
consumers to prefer plans with good expected long-term performance even if they are not first-year optimal, and
non-separable intertemporal preferences in which habit and inertia enter the determination of consumer well-being.

16

ity of consumer decisions reflect their ability to marshal and process the information available at
the time they make a plan choice, to assess their own risk preferences and beliefs regarding future
drug needs, and to go through a decision-making process that evaluates the utility of alternative
plans and picks an optimal plan. This assessment requires consideration of the information available to consumers at the time plan choices are made, the manner in which they form expectations
conditioned on this information, and the decision rules they follow given these expectations. We
consider several models of information, expectations, and decision rules:
(1) Perfect foresight: In year t-1, the consumer forecasts exactly her drug needs in year t.
This model is of course unrealistic, but it should give a lower bound on excess cost
which will be tight only if consumers actually do have perfect foresight.
(2) Static: The consumer chooses the plan that minimizes expected CIC, given the realized
drug cabinet in year t-1. In effect, drug use in year t is expected to be the same as in
year t-1. Let CICSkt = FBD(MCt-1,k,t) denote this static expected CIC, and call it the
Plan Finder Predicted CIC (PFPCIC). Brand and generic substitutions are made as described above. This expectations model should have zero excess cost when consumers
follow the recommendation of the CMS Plan Finder, except for difference in OOP cost
resulting from pharmacy choices (see footnote 9).
(3) Diffuse (or inattentive) expectations: The consumer chooses at random among available plans, with equal probability. In effect, all plans in year t are believed to have the
same expected CIC, insofar as this is considered by the individual, so that economic
premiums and OOP costs are irrelevant to choice. The diffuse expectations model
should give an upper bound on expected excess cost.
(4) Minimum premium: A related decision rule prescribes that the plan with the smallest
premium is chosen, in effect all plans are believed to have the same expected OOP
costs, insofar as this is considered by the individual.
(5) Herding rule: Another decision rule that ignores CIC and OOP costs is to choose plans
randomly, but with probabilities defined by plan market shares. This decision rule can
be seen as consistent with herding, or with consumers picking plans because of their
familiarity or salience (due to, say, advertising or endorsement by organizations such
as AARP). The quality of herding rules depends on whether leader behaviour is opti-

17

mizing, and whether followers have idiosyncratic characteristics that make imitation
sub-optimal.
(6) Rational expectations: We assume that consumers form rational expectations, statistically realistic forecasts of µ(k,Xt-1) and σ2(k,Xt-1), for relevant information Xt-1, and that
they choose a plan k to minimize µ(k,Xt-1) + α[σ2(k,Xt-1) + (γ - µ(k,Xt-1))2]/2, the certainty equivalent expected CIC.

The rational expectations model is the ultimate benchmark for “good” consumer decisionmaking in our analysis, but is also richest and computationally most burdensome alternative in
that it requires specification of the information in year t-1 available to and considered by the individual, and calculation of the conditional forecasts µ(k,Xt-1) and σ2(k,Xt-1). Because of the high
dimensionality of Xt-1 when it includes MCt-1, it is impractical to estimate nonparametrically the
conditional density f(MCt | k,Xt-1) and use this to estimate directly the moments µ(k,Xt-1) and
σ2(k,Xt-1). Instead, we use a “method of sieves” and a one-dimensional “sufficient statistic” for
the impact of last year’s medicine cabinet to estimate these moments semiparametrically. Our
method does not take advantage of the known fine structure of the nonlinear mapping CICt =
FBD(MCt,k,t), but with sufficient flexibility in the sieve specification we can recover the relevant
aspects of this structure from the data. To implement this procedure, we assume first that the
static expectation CICSkt = FBD(MCt-1,k,t) is a sufficient statistic for the information conveyed by
a consumer’s prior medicine cabinet MCt-1, and second that CICSkt and a limited number of other
demographic and health characteristics in Xt-1 influence the conditional density of MCt through a
single linear index H(k,Xt-1)βkt, where H is a vector of transformations of Xt-1 and βkt is a vector of
parameters for each plan and year. This implementation is also consistent with an “adaptive expectations” model in which consumers start with the static expectation and adjust toward the CIC
for consumers with similar demographic and health attributes.
We consider a number of alternative “rational” decision models with various variables included in Xt-1, as described in Table 6. These variables and transformations are defined as follows:
1. PFPCIC (Plan Finder predicted CIC), the static expectation CICSkt = FBD(MCt-1,k,t), appearing in H either linearly or in a cubic spline
2. Age linear spline

18

3. Gender
4. CCW, a vector of indicator functions of 22 chronic conditions derived from the Chronic Conditions Warehouse (CCW) as well as HIV/AIDS. The CCW employs algorithms based on International Classification of Disease Version 9 (ICD-9) codes, the type of claim (inpatient,
outpatient, physician services, etc.), and the number of claims within a given time period.13
5. CCW score, equivalent to the Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) risk score calculated by
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). The HCC risk score is a measure of expected drug costs based on diagnosis codes and demographic factors and is used by CMS to
adjust Medicare Parts C and D payments to insurance plans.14

In each version of Xt-1 in the rational decision models we consider, we use the method described above to
2

estimate µ(k,Xt-1), and σ (k,Xt-1), and then predict the choice k that minimizes the certainty equivalent
conditional mean. We have investigated the effect of risk aversion by varying α in these calculations, but
do not find evidence for a significant influence of risk aversion on plan choice. We report results only for
the case of risk neutrality, α = 0.

For any of these expectations models, our primary measure of the quality (loosely speaking) of the consumer’s plan choice is the ex ante expected excess cost, obtained by taking the
difference of the conditional mean (or conditional mean adjusted for risk preference) CIC associated with the chosen plan and the alternative with the lowest conditional mean CIC in year t, given the information assumed available at the time of plan choice in t-1, and the model of how the
consumer processes this information. In the case of the rational expectations model, these means
are taken over the sample of individuals with the same information set in t-1. In general, one
could use kernel or nearest neighbor estimates of these conditional expectations. In the current
analysis, we condition only on categorical subpopulations, a simple form of nearest neighbor estimation.
A secondary measure of the quality of consumers’ plan choices is the “regret” the consumer will have after the fact, given by the difference of the simulated adjusted CIC for actual
13

The 22 CCW conditions include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and brochiectasis, depression,
diabetes, glaucoma, heart failure, hip/pelvic fracture, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, ischemic heart disease,
osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis/osteoarthritis, stroke/transient ischemic attack, breast cancer, colorectal cancer,
prostate cancer, lung cancer, and endometrial cancer. For detailed information on the construction of the chronic
conditions, see www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_conditioncategories2011.pdf We code
the presence of each chronic condition as of December 31 of the year that plan choices are made.
14
For more information on the construction of the HCC score, see http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/HealthPlans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Risk_adjustment.html

19

plan choice for year t less the simulated adjusted CIC for the optimal plan choice for year t obtained from ex ante optimization with a specified expectations model, both evaluated at the actual
year t medicine cabinet. This is a retrospective excess cost for the specified ex ante optimal
choice. This is an imperfect criterion for judging decision-making quality, except in the case of
perfect foresight, as it replaces the ex ante difference in expectations with the difference of the
CIC under the chosen and ex ante best plan, evaluated at the realized 2007 or 2008 medicine
cabinets which are random draws from the empirical distributions of expected CIC. However,
this measure averaged over a subpopulation with the same ex ante information will coincide with
the full ex ante excess cost measure under rational expectations, so that across subpopulations
with different information sets, these measures will be highly correlated. The retrospective excess cost will also provide a measure of “realized pain” that may influence the attention that consumers pay to their Part D plan choices, and may nudge them to consider switching plans.
Summarizing, we have three valuation criteria, ex post excess cost, ex ante expected excess cost, and retrospective excess cost; and in addition to the benchmark perfect expectations
model, thirteen expectations models: static, diffuse, minimum premium, herding, and nine variants of the rational model with various specifications of the conditioning information Xt-1.

4.3 Results
All simulations reported in this sections are conducted for the entire working samples of
2007 and 2008 (data from 2006 is used to construct the t-1 variables that serve as state variables
in the decisions made at the end of year t-1 for year t). Due to the large samples, statistical sampling errors are negligible, and are not reported.
We begin by characterizing optimal plan choices ex post. Table 7 reports the sample proportions of simulated plan choices (given data for t-1) that are ex-post optimal after the year t
medicine cabinet has been realized. It also reports the sample proportion of individuals whose
actual plan choice is better ex post than the plan choices predicted by our simulated decision
rules. The top panel ignores drug substitution, the bottom panel implements drug substitution as
discussed earlier. First, we observe that the plans that individuals chose for 2007 and 2008 were
rarely ex post optimal – only 5.8 percent in 2007 and 7.4 percent in 2008. Taking account drug
substitution, these numbers change slightly. In general alternatives to a chosen plan will have

20

lower cost if substitutions are assumed, but there can be exceptions when a drug is in the alternative plan formulary, but on a higher tier than in the chosen plan formulary, or when a drug in the
chosen plan is much more expensive than the least cost therapeutic equivalent in this plan. A
decision rule based on static expectations – essentially, following the strategy used by the CMS
Plan Finder – does much better: The sample proportion of individuals who would have chosen
the ex post optimal plan if they followed that rule is 41.7 percent in 2007 and 46.0 percent in
2008 without drug substitution; with drug substitution these numbers are 60.3 percent and 54.6
percent for 2007 and 2008, respectively. Interestingly, none of rational expectations rules does
better by this criterion than following the static rule. This holds both without and with drug substitution. Rational models that include PFPCIC in Xt-1 must by construction do at least as well as
PFPCIC alone in terms of the criterion of minimizing expected CIC, implying that the gain from
these rational models comes primarily from shrinking the upper tail of the conditional distribution
of CIC. However, the additional gain is small compared to the gain from moving from actual to
optimal choices under static expectations.
Next, we turn to actual choices. Corresponding to the numbers just mentioned, most individuals could have done better by following one of the rules we considered – those who show up
in the “worse than” columns of the table. With a simple rule such as “pick the plan with the
smallest premium”, 68.3 percent (2007) and 71.1 percent (2008) could have done better. Even by
picking a plan randomly, about a quarter could have done better than with the plan they actually
have chosen. These numbers are for the case without drug substitution and even higher with drug
substitution. One immediate interpretation is that individuals are willing to pay higher premiums
for features of plans that do not enter our cost calculation, such as convenience. It will be easier
to assess this interpretation by looking at the monetary losses implied by not choosing plans optimally or at least by some simple rule such as “pick the lowest premium”. We turn to this analysis in Tables 8 and 9.
An upper bound on the losses an individual incurs by not choosing her plan optimally is
given by comparing the total cost of the chosen plan, and of the plans predicted by our hypothetical decision rules, with the cost that obtains for the plan chosen under perfect foresight. These
numbers are reported in Table 8. At the mean over our working sample, these losses are, for the
actually chosen plan, $399 and $435 dollars in 2007 and 2008, respectively. Medians are lower at
$249 and $327. To put this into perspective, the median loss as a percentage of realized CIC is 27

21

percent in 2007, and the mean loss is 30 percent. These are substantial numbers, but of course
perfect foresight is only an abstract benchmark. Among the hypothetical decision rules we consider, the diffuse decision rule (random plan choice) and the herding rule generate higher losses
at the mean and the median. All other decision rules imply smaller losses relative to perfect foresight than actual choices. Again, the static rule that conditions only on the current year’s medicine cabinet when making plan choices for the next year implies surprisingly small losses of $137
and $105 at the mean, and $24 and $16 at the median (all without drug substitution). These low
numbers are explained, in part, by the fraction of individuals with zero or low drug expenditures
in both years. For example, just over 1 percent of beneficiaries have zero claims, over 9 percent
of beneficiaries have claims totalling less than $100 in out-of-pocket costs, and almost a quarter
paying less than the deductible. With drug substitution, the simulated losses incurred by following our hypothetical decision rules are even smaller, and zero at the medium for the static decision rule. Overall, the diffuse and herding rules do rather poorly – choosing one’s prescription
drug plan randomly certainly is not a good idea. The rational decision rules generate losses relative to perfect foresight at about the order of magnitude of the static decision rule.
Finally, Table 9 reports means and medians of the distribution of savings that the individuals in our working samples could have realized ex post by following our hypothetical decision rules rather than their actual decision rule. (The numbers reported for the perfect foresight
rule are the same as in Table 8.) Again, the static decision rule fares well: On average, individuals
could have saved $261 or $330 in 2007 and 2008, respectively, had they picked the plan that is
optimal given previous year’s drug cabinet (i.e., if they followed the strategy used by Plan
Finder). Medians are lower at $159 and $242 but still sizeable. In 2007, this translates into savings of 20 percent of the actual CIC for the mean and 18 percent for the median. Allowing for
drug substitutions increases these hypothetical savings dramatically to $579 (2007) and $438
(2008) at the mean; medians are again lower. Even a simple “minimum premium” decision rule
would have resulted in savings of above $100 per year on average. As before, the rational decision rules do, overall, as well as the static rule – some slightly better, some slightly worse. The
conclusion here is that following a rather sophisticated decision rule that requires a rational expectations prediction of future drug costs does not, in this particular market, bring systematic
monetary and thus utility gains, even if one excludes the potentially large costs associated with
making such predictions.

22

Another important result of these simulations is that the monetary costs associated with
the plans the individuals in our sample chose, relative not only to the perfect foresight decision,
but also relative to the simple static rule are substantial – about $159 and $242 at the median in
2007 and 2008, even if one does not allow for drug substitution (with which they would be
around $300 in both years). It is hard to reconcile these monetary losses—about 12 percent and
25 percent of realized CIC with and without drug substitution, respectively, in 2007—with just
the implicit decision costs associated with using a tool such as Plan Finder. In fact, Medicare
might take a lesson from Geico’s popular advertisement for its car insurance: “12 minutes with
Plan Finder could save you 12 percent or more on your prescription drugs.” As suggested above,
another interpretation is that individuals value plan features other than those we consider in our
analysis, such as convenience and customer service.
This brings us to our final question: What predicts individuals’ actual plan choices? To
answer this question, we ran multinomial logit models in which the chosen plan is the dependent
variable. The choice set is the set of all (30-50 or so) plans in the corresponding Medicare region
(the number of available plans is around 40 but varies between regions). For computational reasons, we ran these regressions on a 5 percent random sample of our 2007 and 2008 working samples, and then used a one-step linearization to obtain our estimators. The results are shown in
Tables 10a and 10b for 2007, and 2008, respectively.15 The plan-specific explanatory variables
are the plan premium and additional variables that capture expected costs, computed under the
rules we just discussed.
We begin with the 2007 results (Table 10a). The first specification (column 1) contains
only the plan premium, the CIC associated with the plan, and the PFPCIC – that is, it corresponds
to the static decision rule where predictions of next year’s drug costs are conditioned on the drugs
used in the current year. All three variables are highly statistically significant (not surprising
given the sample size) and have negative signs. The pseudo R2 measure of determination is 0.028.
The remaining 18 specifications (columns 2–19) include each of the 9 rational expectations CIC predictions, where the specific expectations models are those described in Table 6
above. For each of the 9 CIC measures, we estimated one specification that includes the premium, the predicted CIC and the variance of the predicted CIC, and a second specification that
15

The numbers of observations reported in these tables refer to the number individual-plan combinations.
They vary slightly between different specifications because of missing values in some variables that are used to construct the predictors.

23

includes current CIC in addition. Other than the variance measure, whose effect is not always
statistically significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level, all other predictors are highly
statistically significant in all specifications. As one would expect, the premium and (where included) current CIC always have a negative effect on the probability of choosing a plan (and the
magnitudes of these effects are stable across the different specifications).
There are three specifications that have pseudo R2 measures that are noticeably larger than
those of the baseline and most other specifications (around 0.033 compared to 0.028 in the baseline specification). These are all specifications that include current CIC; the rational-expectations
predictions of the CIC in these specifications come from models “rational 1”, “rational 6”, and
“rational 7” – the models that use only sex and age splines, the CCW score alone, and the CCW
score together with CCW conditions to predict the CIC. The other specifications which are based
on rational expectations predictions that condition on the PFPCIC do not bring an improvement
in explanatory power of the predictive regressions.
The results for 2008 (Table 10b) are similar overall. Note that every coefficient reported
in the table is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The sizes of the coefficients for the
premium are smaller than those in the regressions for 2007, and they change their sign between
specifications. However, note that in these regressions, PFPCIC and predicted CIC are included.
By definition, these also include the premium. So the coefficient of the premium captures the
additional effect, which explains the sign change. Most importantly, as in the 2007 regressions,
the largest pseudo R2 values are obtained for the specifications that use predicted CICs based on
the rules “rational 1”, “rational 6”, and “rational 7”.

5. Conclusions
This paper shows that there is potentially great scientific benefit in using the detailed information on health, drug use, Part D plan choice, premiums, and OOP costs in Medicare A, B, D
claims data. To deal with the inability to link encrypted plan information in the Part D claims
data to CMS public files on plan characteristics, we have constructed empirical formularies and
benefit designs using data from the sub-sample of individuals enrolled in each plan. This effort is
successful in reproducing the OOP costs of chosen plans, and appears to be valid for calculating
the CIC for both chosen and alternative plans.

24

Our analysis of enrollment and choice between levels of plan generosity suggests that the
share of eligible consumers without drug insurance is in the range one would expect if risk reduction and the option value of avoiding late enrollment penalties in the future are ignored and the
only criterion is whether enrollment is first-year actuarially favorable. In choice between Silver
(e.g., standard) and Gold (e.g., generic gap coverage) plans, the evidence is that consumers are
undersubscribing to Gold plans. This result is consistent with the finding by others (inter alia,
Abaluck and Gruber, 2011) that consumers pay more attention to premiums than to benefit generosity, so that they are nudged toward low-premium standard or equivalent plans.
Calculations of the ex post costs for all available plans, without and with drug substitution,
and of the optimal choices under various expectations models and decision rules for each individual, suggest that less than 10 percent of individuals enrolled in plans that are ex post optimal
with respect to consumer inclusive cost (premiums and co-payments). Relative to the benchmark
of a static decision rule, similar to the Plan Finder provided by CMS, that conditions next year’s
plan choice only on the drugs consumed in the current year, enrollees lost about $300 per year, on
average. While these losses are rather modest when compared to the losses associated with not
enrolling at all, an issue we have studied extensively in earlier research, they are difficult to reconcile with decision costs alone. It appears that a sizeable fraction of consumers either value plan
features that are not reflected in total cost, or else do not optimize effectively. Our results then do
not support the proposition that consumers can make and benefit from good choices in private
health insurance markets, and direct health care resources to their best use.

25

References
Abaluck, J. T. and J. Gruber (2011): Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence from
plan choice in the Medicare Part D program. American Economic Review, 101, 1180–1210.
Bach, P. B. and M. B. McClellan (2005): A prescription of a modern Medicare program. New
England Journal of Medicine, 353, 2733–2735.
Bach, P. B. and M. B. McClellan (2006): The first months of the prescription-drug benefit: A
CMS update. New England Journal of Medicine, 354, 2312–2314.
Buntin, M. B., C. Damberg, A. Haviland, K. Kapur, N. Lurie, R. McDevitt, and M. S. Marquis
(2006): Consumer-directed health care: Early evidence about effects on cost and quality. Health
Affairs, 25, w516–w530.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2005): Instructions for the Part D payment demonstration. Technical report, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Washington, DC.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2012): Statistical Supplement. Available at:
https://www.cms.gov/MedicareMedicaidStatSupp/ (Accessed January 21, 2012).
Congressional Budget Office (2004): A detailed description of CBO’s cost estimates for the
Medicare prescription drug benefit. Technical Report, Congressional Budget Office (CBO),
Washington, DC.
Cutler, D. M. and S. J. Reber (1998): Paying for health insurance: The trade-off between competition and adverse selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 433–466.
Cutler, D. M. and R. J. Zeckhauser (2000): The anatomy of health insurance. In A. J. Culyer and
J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, 563–643. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Domino, M. E., S. C. Stearns, E. C. Norton, and W.-S. Yeh (2008): Why using current medications to select a Medicare Part D plan may lead to higher out-of-pocket payments. Medical Care
Research and Review, 65(1), 114–126.
Duggan, M., P. Healy, and F. Scott Morton (2008): Providing prescription drug coverage to the
elderly: America’s experiment with Medicare Part D. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(4),
69–92.
Engelhardt, G. V. and J. Gruber (2011): Medicare Part D and the financial protection of the elderly. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Frank, R. G. and J. P. Newhouse (2007): Mending the Medicare prescription drug benefit: Improving consumer choices and restructuring purchasing. Discussion Paper No. 2007-03, The
Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Goldman, D. P. and G. F. Joyce (2008): Medicare Part D: A successful start with room for improvement. Journal of the American Medical Association, 299(16), 1954–1955.
Goldman, D. P., G. F. Joyce, J. J. Escarce, J. E. Pace, M. D. Solomon, M. Laouri, P. B. Landsman, and S. M. Teutsch (2004): Pharmacy benefits and the use of drugs by the chronically ill.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(19), 2344–2350.

26

Goldman, D. P., G. F. Joyce, and W. B. Vogt (2011): Part D formulary and benefit design as a
risk steering mechanism. American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 101(3), 382–386.
Goodman, J. (2006): Consumer directed health care. Policy Brief 2006-PB-20, Networks Financial Institute, Indiana State University.
Gruber, J. (2008): Covering the uninsured in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature,
46, 571 –606.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2006): Who failed to enroll in Medicare Part D, and why?
Early results. Health Affairs, 25, w344–w354.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2009): Regulation of health insurance markets: Lessons
from enrollment, plan choice, and adverse selection in Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper
No. 15392.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2010): Mind the gap! Consumer perceptions and choices
of Medicare Part D prescription drug plans. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Research Findings in the Economics of Aging, 413–481. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2011): The demand for Medicare Part D prescription drug
coverage: Evidence from four waves of the Retirement Perspectives Survey. In D. A. Wise (Ed.),
Explorations in the Economics of Aging, 159–182. Chicago and London: Chicago University
Press.
Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, E. J. Miravete, and M. C. Roebuck (2011): Sinking, swimming, or
learning to swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2011): Comparison
friction: Experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
Levy, H. and D. Weir (2010): Take-up of Medicare Part D: Results from the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 65B, 492–501.
Newhouse, J. P. (2004): Consumer-directed health plans and the RAND health insurance experiment. Health Affairs, 23(6), 107–113.
Winter, J., R. Balza, F. Caro, F. Heiss, B. Jun, R. Matzkin, and D. McFadden (2006): Medicare
prescription drug coverage: Consumer information and preferences. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(20), 7929–7934.

27

Table 1: Construction of the working samples, 2006–2008

Total
U.S. residents aged 65+
Enrolled in Part D
Non-dual eligible
Enrolled in standalone Part D Plan (PDP)
Non-low income subsidy
Non-employer group waiver plan
Did not switch plans during year
Prior year PDP claims available

2006
Number
9,086,340
7,120,960
3,764,474
2,727,638
1,730,371
1,618,365
1,484,007
1,415,563
NA

%
100
78
41
30
19
18
16
16

2007
Number
9,299,848
7,235,063
4,003,149
2,951,936
1,814,568
1,661,073
1,540,757
1,497,138
1,253,683

%
100
78
43
32
20
18
17
16
13

2008
Number
9,530,609
7,403,722
4,215,955
3,154,861
1,865,320
1,719,953
1,579,152
1,535,887
1,350,726

%
100
78
44
33
20
18
17
16
14

Note: Sample constructions starts with a random 20% sample of Medicare beneficiaries.

28

Table 2: Plan characteristics

Characteristics fixed by plan









Whether the first prescription is free
Whether the plan applies the deductible to generics (and if so, the copayment for generics
in the deductible)
Deductible amount
The pre-initial coverage limit (pre-ICL) amount
Whether drugs in the pre-initial coverage limit are subject to Medicare-defined coinsurance levels or cost-sharing tiers
The type of coverage in the gap (none, generics only, generics and preferred brands, generics and brands, or all formulary drugs)
The out-of-pocket threshold amount
Whether the plan charges the lesser of cost sharing or the total cost

Characteristics specific to drugs within a plan


The copayment or coinsurance rate associated with each drug based on:
o Number of days supplied
o Pharmacy type (in-network preferred, in-network non-preferred, out-of-network, or
mail-order)

29

Table 3: Descriptive statistics for observed total drug bills in 2007 and 2008

Mean
s.d.
1st percentile
5th percentile
10th percentile
25th percentile
Median
75th percentile
90th percentile
95th percentile
99th percentile

Total drug bill, 2007 Total drug bill, 2008
1,871.7
1,941.8
2,221.0
2,524.2
28.1
23.5
111.9
118.4
229.5
239.4
648.8
647.0
1,440.0
1,463.0
2,490.1
2,556.2
3,740.1
3,850.2
4,860.3
5,063.6
8,360.3
9,114.4

Note: Tabulations for all persons in the working sample with full-year coverage in a stand-alone PDP in 2007 with
positive Part D claims. The table is not corrected for Part D enrollees in 2008 who were not enrolled in Medicare in
2007, for enrollees with part-year coverage in 2008, or for enrollees with no claims. Bills are in current dollars.

30

Table 4: Medicare Part D enrollment in December, 2006–2008 (Denominator File)
2006
Total
43,338,571

65+
36,316,594

Pct

2007
Total
44,263,111

65+
36,965,846

Pct

7,801,239

6,516,882

17.9%

7,053,805

5,799,802

15.7%

6,980,480

5,726,326

15.1%

22,854,973

18,368,305

50.6%

24,477,276

19676031

53.2%

25844675 20,790,368

54.9%

2,663,377

2,172,276

6.0%

2,922,694

2,406,994

6.5%

20,191,596

16,196,029

44.6%

21,554,582

17,269,037

46.7%

6,838,613

6,552,456

18.0%

7,009,702

6,715,950

18.2%

6,655,834

6,380,143

16.8%

676,496

637,207

1.8%

703,149

659,076

1.8%

624,879

584,305

1.5%

6,162,117

5,915,249

16.3%

6,306,553

6,056,874

16.4%

6,030,955

5,795,838

15.3%

Creditable Coverage (No Part D or
Retiree Drug Subsidy)

5,843,746

4,878,951

13.4%

5,722,328

4,774,063

12.9%

5,930,894

4,999,242

13.2%

Creditable Coverage Without Regard
to Part D or Retiree Drug Subsidy

9,183,619

7688434

21.2%

9348171

7840133

21.2%

8730193

7415510

19.6%

Total
No Part D, Retiree Drug Subsidy, or
Creditable Coverage

2008
Total
65+
45,411,883 37,896,079

Pct

Part D Enrolled
Total
With Creditable Coverage
Without Creditable Coverage

2,174,420

1,831,963

4.8%

23,670,255 18,958,405

50.0%

Retiree Drug Subsidy
Total
With Creditable Coverage
Without Creditable Coverage

Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 2007-2009 Statistical Supplements, Table 14.4

31

Table 5: Counts by Part D enrollment status of 20% sample and working sample
2006

%

2007

%

Panel A. 20% Sample: Part D Enrollment Status in December
Not enrolled in Part D with creditable
coverage
1,295,192 14.3
1,292,191 13.9
Not enrolled in Part D without creditable coverage
Enrolled in Medicare Advantage plan
Enrolled in employer-provided retiree
plan (starting Jan 2007)
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone basic
(silver) plan
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone enhanced
(gold) plan
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone full gap
coverage (platinum)
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone plan for
which coverage could not be determined
NEC
Total, 20% Sample

2,769,583
1,311,554

2008

%

1,312,470

13.8

30.5
14.4

2,685,661
1,507,154

28.9
16.2

2,630,485
1,724,249

27.6
18.1

NA

25,024

0.3

25,349

0.3

3,121,961

34.4

3,136,343

33.7

3,223,848

33.8

93,125

1.0

253,080

2.7

236,295

2.5

95,856

1.1

23,468

0.3

75

0.0

24,410
374,659
9,086,340

0.3
4.1
100

1
376,926
9,299,848

0.0
4.1
100

1
377,837
9,530,609

0.0
4.0
100

1,113,201

86.7

171,110

13.3

45
1,138,105

0.0
100

NA

Panel B. Working Sample Enrollment throughout year
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone basic
(silver) plan
1,106,503
89.8
1,062,131
84.1
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone enhanced
(gold) plan
81,748
6.6
182,897
14.5
Enrolled in Part D stand-alone full gap
coverage (platinum)
44,380
3.6
18,280
1.4
Total, Working Sample
1,232,631
100
1,263,308
100

Note : The top panel displays the enrollment status in December of the particular year, providing a snapshot for all
beneficiaries on the denominator file. The bottom panel tabulates the type of gap coverage for our working sample,
which is constructed as shown in Table 2. Since our sample is restricted to people enrolled in the same PDP plan
throughout the year, these coverage counts remain constant throughout the year.

32

Table 6: Hypothetical decision rules and expectations models used in the plan-choice simulations
Shorthand

Description

Perfect foresight

Ex post minimum CIC plan

Static

Optimal given previous year's PFPCIC

Notes

Minimum premium Smallest premium plan
Diffuse

Random choice of plan

equal probabilities

Herding rule

Random choice of plan

probabilities proportional to market share

Rational 1

Rational choice with risk neutrality

sex, age spline

Rational 2

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (linear)

Rational 3

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (cubic spline)

Rational 4

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (linear) + sex, age spline

Rational 5

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (cubic spline) + sex, age spline

Rational 6

Rational choice with risk neutrality

CCW score

Rational 7

Rational choice with risk neutrality

CCW score + CCW conditions

Rational 8

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (linear) + sex, age spline + CCW
score

Rational 9

Rational choice with risk neutrality

PFPCIC (linear) + sex, age spline + CCW
score + CCW conditions

33

Table 7: Simulated plan choices implied by the hypothetical decision rules vs. actual choices
Without drug substitution
Simulated choices are
ex-post optimal [%]
Rule

2007

2008

Actual choice
Perfect foresight

5.8
100.0

Static
Minimum premium
Diffuse

Actual choice is …
better than [%]

same as [%]

worse than [%]

2007

2008

2007

2008

2007

2008

7.4
100.0

0.0

0.0

5.8

7.4

94.2

92.6

41.7

46.0

13.1

9.8

6.9

5.9

80.0

84.3

13.8

13.1

21.8
74.5

28.5
74.5

9.9
0.0

0.4
0.0

68.3
25.5

71.1
25.5

66.5

60.8

0.0

0.0

33.5

39.2

Herding rule
Rational 1
Rational 2

11.2
38.8

26.0
44.6

27.8
13.6

15.4
8.2

4.5
6.7

10.3
8.3

67.7
79.7

74.3
83.5

Rational 3

38.9

42.6

14.5

8.9

5.9

7.7

79.6

83.4

Rational 4
Rational 5

38.8
38.9

44.6
42.8

13.6
14.5

8.2
8.9

6.7
5.8

8.3
7.7

79.7
79.6

83.5
83.4

Rational 6

12.3

26.7

26.3

14.7

5.2

10.3

68.5

75.0

Rational 7
Rational 8

13.4
38.1

26.9
44.0

25.0
13.5

14.3
8.2

5.5
6.8

10.2
8.4

69.4
79.7

75.6
83.4

Rational 9

37.9

44.1

13.4

8.3

6.8

8.3

79.8

83.5

With drug substitution
Simulated choices are
ex-post optimal [%]
Rule
Actual choice
Perfect foresight
Static
Minimum premium

2007

2008

1.9

8.2

100.0
60.3
37.7

Actual choice is …
better than [%]

same as [%]

worse than [%]

2007

2008

2007

2008

2007

2008

100.0
54.6

0.0
5.9

0.0
6.9

1.9
2.6

8.2
8.2

98.1
91.5

91.8
84.9

15.0

16.8

35.8

1.6

4.3

81.6

59.9

61.8
62.8

72.3
57.9

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

38.2
37.2

27.7
42.1

Diffuse
Herd rule
Rational 1

44.5

27.9

12.4

15.2

1.9

8.8

85.7

75.9

Rational 2
Rational 3

56.3
60.3

51.7
54.1

6.8
5.6

6.4
6.1

2.5
2.6

8.6
8.5

90.7
91.8

85.0
85.4

Rational 4

56.1

51.8

6.9

6.4

2.5

8.6

90.6

85.0

Rational 5
Rational 6

59.7
44.6

54.1
28.3

5.7
12.2

6.1
15.0

2.5
1.9

8.5
8.9

91.7
85.8

85.4
76.1

Rational 7

44.7

28.4

12.1

14.8

1.9

8.7

85.9

76.4

Rational 8
Rational 9

55.1
55.5

51.3
51.1

7.0
6.9

6.4
6.4

2.4
2.4

8.7
8.7

90.6
90.7

84.9
85.0

34

Table 8: Ex-post losses relative to the perfect foresight rule ($ per year)
Without drug substitution
Rule
Actual choice
Static
Minimum premium
Diffuse
Herding rule
Rational 1
Rational 2
Rational 3
Rational 4
Rational 5
Rational 6
Rational 7
Rational 8
Rational 9

Mean
2007
2008
399
435
137
105
268
281
486
533
433
454
227
193
130
100
132
101
129
100
131
100
216
187
209
183
125
100
124
100

Median
2007
249
24
139
365
304
138
32
32
32
32
132
126
33
34

2008
327
16
193
468
358
113
19
28
19
27
108
106
22
21

Mean
2007
2008
653
541
75
104
215
442
632
629
650
553
97
264
69
102
66
98
70
101
66
98
98
259
97
254
71
101
70
101

Median
2007
389
0
83
437
403
31
0
0
0
0
30
30
0
0

2008
360
0
268
482
372
102
0
0
0
0
98
97
0
0

With drug substitution
Rule
Actual choice
Static
Minimum premium
Diffuse
Herding rule
Rational 1
Rational 2
Rational 3
Rational 4
Rational 5
Rational 6
Rational 7
Rational 8
Rational 9

35

Table 9: Ex-post gain relative to the actually chosen plan ($ per year)
Without drug substitution
Rule
Perfect foresight
Static
Minimum premium
Diffuse
Herding rule
Rational 1
Rational 2
Rational 3
Rational 4
Rational 5
Rational 6
Rational 7
Rational 8
Rational 9

Mean
2007
2008
399
435
261
330
130
154
-88
-98
-34
-18
172
243
269
335
267
335
269
336
267
335
183
249
189
253
273
335
275
336

Median
2007
249
159
90
-120
-55
93
159
159
159
159
97
101
159
159

2008
327
242
129
-127
-41
179
247
246
247
246
182
184
247
247

Mean
2007
2008
653
541
579
438
439
99
22
-88
3
-12
556
277
584
440
588
443
584
440
587
443
556
283
557
287
583
440
583
441

Median
2007
389
328
226
-64
-40
303
332
335
331
334
303
303
328
329

2008
360
293
62
-116
-34
199
293
296
293
296
201
203
293
293

With drug substitution
Rule
Perfect foresight
Static
Minimum premium
Diffuse
Herding rule
Rational 1
Rational 2
Rational 3
Rational 4
Rational 5
Rational 6
Rational 7
Rational 8
Rational 9

36

Table 10a: Conditional logit regressions predicting plan choice (5 percent sample, 2007)
(1)
Premium

-0.0022

CIC

-0.0010

PFPCIC

-0.0002

(2)
-0.0025

(3)
-0.0022

(4)
-0.0022

-0.0009

CIC_hat_1

-0.0012

-0.0006

CIC_var_1

-1.54E-06

-1.32E-06

(5)
-0.0021

(6)
-0.0021

-0.0009

CIC_hat_2

-0.0011

-0.0004

CIC_var_2

-1.12E-08

-3.62E-09

(7)
-0.0021

(8)
-0.0022

-0.0008

CIC_hat_3

-0.0012

-0.0005

CIC_var_3

-6.84E-10

-5.00E-09

(9)
-0.0021
-0.0009

CIC_hat_4

-0.0011

-0.0004

CIC_var_4

-1.13E-08

-3.82E-09

Pseudo R2
Log Likelihood
N

Premium

0.028

0.029

0.033

0.026

0.028

0.027

0.029

0.026

0.028

-226342

-246212

-245230

-226766

-226305

-226577

-226224

-226764

-226305

3,229,641

3,517,853

3,517,853

3,229,641

3,229,641

3,229,641

3,229,641

3,229,641

3,229,641

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

('16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

-0.0021

-0.0021

-0.0022

-0.0020

-0.0022

-0.0020

-0.0022

-0.0021

-0.0022

-0.0021

-0.0008

CIC

-0.0009

-0.0009

-0.0009

-0.0008

PFPCIC
CIC_hat_5

-0.0012

-0.0005

CIC_var_5

-4.71E-10

-4.74E-09

CIC_hat_6

-0.0017

-0.0009

CIC_var_6

-7.72E-07

-7.13E-07

CIC_hat_7

-0.0018

-0.0010

CIC_var_7

-3.98E-07

-3.81E-07

CIC_hat_8

-0.0012

-0.0004

CIC_var_8

-1.17E-08

-4.92E-09

CIC_hat_9
CIC_var_9
Pseudo R2
Log Likelihood
N

-0.0012

-0.0004

-1.05E-08

-4.54E-09

0.027

0.029

0.029

0.033

0.029

0.032

0.027

0.028

0.027

0.028

-226574

-226223

-245528

-244582

-245593

-244685

-226375

-225939

-226367

-225938

3,229,641

3,229,641

3,506,354

3,506,354

3,506,354

3,506,354

3,224,563

3,224,563

3,224,563

3,224,563

Note: Coefficients that are statistically significant at p < 0.01 are printed in
bold.

37

Table 10b: Conditional logit regressions predicting plan choice (5 percent sample, 2008)
(1)
Premium

-0.0008

CIC

-0.0013

PFPCIC

(2)

(3)

0.0002

0.0006

(4)
-0.0003

-0.0006

(5)
-0.0001

(6)
-0.0002

-0.0007

(7)
-0.0001

(8)
-0.0003

-0.0006

(9)
-0.0001
-0.0007

0.0004

CIC_hat_1

-0.0037

-0.0035

CIC_var_1

4.71E-06

4.62E-06

CIC_hat_2

-0.0021

-0.0015

CIC_var_2

5.16E-06

5.08E-06

CIC_hat_3

-0.0018

-0.0012

CIC_var_3

3.04E-06

2.88E-06

CIC_hat_4

-0.0021

-0.0015

CIC_var_4

5.17E-06

5.09E-06

Pseudo R2
Log Likelihood
N

Premium

0.017

0.038

0.039

0.027

0.028

0.023

0.024

0.027

0.028

-251712

-246715

-246329

-249192

-248807

-250158

-249855

-249156

-248771

3,490,225

3,496,126

3,496,126

3,490,225

3,490,225

3,490,225

3,490,225

3,490,225

3,490,225

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

('16)

(17)

(18)

-0.0001

0.0001

0.0004

0.0001

0.0004

-0.0004

-0.0002

-0.0004

-0.0002

-0.0006

CIC

-0.0005

-0.0005

(19)

-0.0007

-0.0002
-0.0007

PFPCIC
CIC_hat_5

-0.0018

-0.0012

CIC_var_5

3.11E-06

2.95E-06

CIC_hat_6

-0.0033

-0.0030

CIC_var_6

3.73E-06

3.61E-06

CIC_hat_7

-0.0032

-0.0030

CIC_var_7

3.75E-06

3.65E-06

CIC_hat_8

-0.0019

-0.0013

CIC_var_8

5.13E-06

5.05E-06

CIC_hat_9

-0.002

-0.001

CIC_var_9

5.18E-06

5.11E-06

Pseudo R2
Log Likelihood
N

0.023

0.024

0.033

0.034

0.033

0.034

0.025

0.027

0.025

0.027

-250100

-249790

-247163

-246857

-247131

-246854

-249207

-248855

-249231

-248883

3,490,225

3,490,225

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

3,485,940

Note: Coefficients that are statistically significant at p < 0.01 are printed in bold.

38

Figure 1: Distribution of differences between actual and simulated OOP costs

39

Figure 2: Empirical means of 2007 simulated OOP costs for alternative plan types and the Part D
standard plan designed benefit schedule, conditioned on annual drug bill

4500
Standard Plan Designed Benefit

OOP Cost

4000
3500

Actual OOP (Standard & Actuarially Equivalent)

3000

Actual OOP (Basic Alternative)

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

1000

2000

3000
4000
Total Drug Bill

5000

6000

7000

40

Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function of 2007 total drug bill

41

Figure 4: Complementary cumulative distribution functions of 2008 total drug bill conditioned
on 2007 total drug bill percentile

42

Figure 5: Mean and 95th percentile of 2008 total drug bill, conditioned on 2007 total drug bill

43

Figure 6: Probability that standard plan enrollment in 2008 at a $30 per month premium gives
lower consumer cost than non-enrollment, conditioned on total drug bill in 2007 (log scale)

44

Figure 7: 2008 expected consumer OOP plus premium cost of “No Plan”, “Silver” (Standard)
plan, and “Gold” (gap generic coverage) plan choices, given 2007 total drug bill

45

Appendix: Medicare enrollment by age in 2007
Age
January
2007

stayers

entrants

leavers
(death)

Leavers
(other)

entrants
and leavers
(other)

entrants
and leavers
(death)

Start:

January

January

January

Stop:

December

After
January
December

Before
December
2,704
5,934
6,198
6,193
6,753
6,985
7,258
7,784
8,298
8,434
9,154
9,600
10,578
10,660
11,437
12,335
12,633
13,321
13,925
13,754
13,977
14,348
13,946
12,474
12,449
11,273
60,510

Before
December
24
88
79
70
77
66
58
77
86
73
80
86
102
76
82
87
91
70
73
77
75
63
57
45
36
25
41

After
January
Before
December
71
17
9
11
5
5
7
9
6
5
5
2
8
7
2
0
4
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
0

After
January
Before
December
1,435
9
6
7
3
3
6
2
2
1
4
4
2
5
2
4
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
0
1
0
3

64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90+

98,214
444,480
421,186
402,074
395,671
374,095
355,531
345,095
330,193
306,904
306,732
295,700
293,876
273,060
265,997
256,164
237,797
223,355
210,338
189,343
171,297
157,259
134,761
108,484
95,107
77,746
295,594

393,088
4,720
2,016
1,243
972
831
602
535
435
355
357
324
250
221
211
146
125
124
99
81
56
65
41
39
23
23
63

Source: Tabulations from 20% sample of Medicare enrollees

46

