                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     VARIATION IN EMPLOYMENT
                        GROWTH IN CANADA:
                 THE ROLE OF EXTERNAL, NATIONAL,
                 REGIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL FACTORS




                        Joseph G. Altonji

                           John C. Ham




                      Working Paper No. 1816




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




We are especially grateful to David Card and Whitney Newey for many
helpful discussions. Geprge Jakubson, John Kennan, Bruce Lehmann,
Angelo Melino, Richard Rogerson, Aloysius Slow and Ernst
Stromsdorfer made very useful comments on the paper. We also bene-
fitted from comments received from participants at a conference on
Adjustment in Labor Markets, University of Santa Clara, members of
the labor market group of the NBER's Summer Workshop on Economic
Fluctuations, and participants in the Industrial Relations Workshop
at Princeton University. Dwayne Benjamin provided exceptional
research assistance. SSHRC, Canada provided generous financial
support. We emphasize that we alone are responsible for any
shortcomings of the paper. The research reported here is part of
the N8ERs research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1816
                                                     January 1986




                            in flployrrent Grth in Canada:
                      Variation
        The 11e of Extema1, National, iRegional and Industrial Factors


                                   BSTRCI'

     This paper presents a method for assessing the impact oF c:errial,
national, and sectoral shocks on Canadian employment fluctuations at the
national, industry, and provincial levels. Special attention is given to the
contribution of sectoral shocks to aggregate employment fluctuations. Shocks
which initially affect specific industries and provinces can induce aggregate
fluctuations not only because national employment is the sum of employment in
various sectors but also because of feedback across sectors.

     The analysis is based on an econometric model relating employment gcowh Lu
each province and industry to the current and lagged change in U.S. output, the
lags of employment growth at the national, industry, and provincial levels, a
Canadian national shock, and shocks affecting specific industries, specific pro-
vinces, and specific province—industry pairs. The model is estimated using
annual data on Canadian employment at the province—industry level.

     The results suggest that U.S. shocks are responsible for two—thirds of the
steady—state variance in the growth of Canadian national employment, while the
Canadian national shock accounts for approximately one quarter of this variance.
Taken together, industry specific, province specific and province—industry spe-
cific shocks account for about one—tenth of the variance of Canadian national
employment growth. Although U.S. shocks are the dominant influence on aggregate
employment growth in Canada, sectoral shocks account for about thirty percent of
the variance in national employment due to Canadian sources.

     Estimates of the contribution of U.S., Canadian national, industry, and
provincial shocks to the variance of employment in specific industries and pro-
vinces are also provided.




Joseph G. Altonji                                   John C. Ham
Deparbnt  of  Economics                             Industrial Pelations   Section
Colunbia University                                 Princeton University
   York, NY 10027                                   Princeton, MJ 08544
 1. Introduction

      The purpose of this paper is to study the sources of employment fluc-

tuations in Canada. To this end, we first present a methodology for investi-

gating the role of aggregate and disaggregate shocks in determining variation in

employment grth at the national, regional, and industry levels. Aggregate

shocks may arise from either domestic or external sources and are assumed to

affect all sectors of the economy, although the impact of these shocks may

differ across industries. Disaggregate shocks are specific to particular sec-

tors of the economy. We then apply this methodology to the Canadian economy

using annual employment data disaggregated by province and industry for the

period 1961—1982.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the motivation for

our study. Section 3 presents a disaggregate time series model of employment

and demonstrates how the model may be used to analyze the sources of employment

variation. In Section 4 we discuss the econometric meLhods used to estimate the

employment model. In Section 5 we describe the data used for estimation and

present our empirical results. We conclude the paper in Section 6.

2. Motivation

     Our research is motivated by two related issues. The first concerns the

relative importance of disaggregate shocks and aggregate shocks in booms and

recessions which affect particular industries and regions. To what degree do

recessions in a particular industry or a particular region arise from sectoral

sources and thus have a sectoral solution? To what degree do recessions in par—

ticular industrte.s or regions arise from differences across sectors in the

response to an economy wide shock? Many studies of employment growth in a par-

ticular region or industry have examined the effects of sector specific influ-

ences such as trade policy, local government expenditures and taxes, while
                                       —2—


controlling for aggregate determinants of economic activity. Consequently, our

interest in the first question does not require much explanation. We hope to

contribute to this literature by providing a comprehensive assessment of the

extent to which employment fluctuations in various industries and provinces are

a sectoral phenomena.

     The second Issue that motivates our work concerns the contribution of sec-

tor specific disturbances to aggregate fluctuations in employment growth. This

issue has received little attention in the literature. Most macroeconomic

studies have Investigated the relative Importance in business cycles of aggre-

gate supply shocks or demand shocks resulting from changes in monetary and

fiscal policy, exogenous shifts in investment demand, changes in consumer con-

fidence, shifts in the supply of raw materials and productivity shocks.1

Unfortunately, attempts to explain aggregate economic fluctuations in terms of a

simple unified model emphasizing a few variables have not been very successful,

and a consensus has not emerged on the relative importance of the above factors

in business cycles.     Better theories, econometric methods and data will undoub-

tedly lead to improved aggregate models. However, the success of such models is

bounded to the extent that business fluctuations are complex phenomena caused by

many factors.2 For this reason, we wish to obtain empirical evidence on the

contribution of a diverse set of disaggregate shocks to aggregate fluctuations.

     Our focus on disaggregate shocks is partially inspired by the Important

work of Lillen (l982a, l982b) on the effect of changes in the dispersion of sec—

toral shocks on the natural rate of unemployment. (See also Medoff (1983),

Lilien and Hall (1984), and Abraham and Katz (1985).) Many economists, including

Archibald (1971), Phelps (1971) and Lucas and Prescott (1974), have hypothesized
                                       —3—


 that the amount of frictional and "structural" unemployment in the economy is

 affected by the rate of change in employment demand in individual firms,

 industries, and regions. Essentially, the variance in sectoral shocks affects

 the amount of labor which is in the process of being reallocated across sectors.

 Lilien hypothesized that the dispersion of sectoral shocks fluctuates over time,

 leading to variation in both the natural rate and the level of unemployment.

The results of empirical work on this hypothesis are mixed.3

      In contrast to Lilien's emphasis on a linkage between the variance of sec—

toral shocks and aggregate fluctuations, we investigate the possibility that

random fluctuations in the levels (as opposed to the variance) of sectoral

shocks induce variation in aggregate employment simply because aggregate employ—

ment is a weighted sum of employment in various sectors. If sector specific

shocks have a variance that is large relative to aggregate shocks, then sectoral

shocks will obviously play an important role in fluctuations of employment

grcMth within a particular sector. However, if the variance of an appropriately

weighted average of sector specific disturbances is sufficiently large, then

taken together, these shocks may play a significant role in aggregate employment

fluctuations. We refer to this role of sectoral shocks as the "collective

impact" hypothesis.

     For example, consider an economy with five sectors of equal size. Assume

that both the aggregate shock and the sectoral shocks are serially uncorrelated,

and that there are rio feedbacks from past employment changes to current employ-

ment changes. Assume further that all shocks are independent. If the variance

of the aggregate shock is one half of the variance of the sectoral shocks, and

the sectoral shocks have equal variances, then the correlation of employment
                                      —4--



between sectors would be 1/3 for all pairs of sectors. In this case, the aggre-

gate shock will account for 71.4% of the variance of national employment and the

sectoral shocks will account for 28.6% of this variance. If the sectors are of

unequal size, the sectoral shocks will be even more important.

     While there clearly exists a potential role for disaggregate shocks in

aggregate fluctuations via the "collective impact" mechanism, the empirical

importance of such shocks is unclear. The influential studies of Burns and

Mitchell (1946) and Mitchell (1951) provide evidence that economic activity in

various industries and regions moves together. Lehmann (1982) uses modern time

series techniques to re—analyze some of the series studied by Mitchell and con-

firms the earlier findings. As Lucas (1977) emphasizes, results of this type

lend support to the view that simple aggregative models ultimately will be able

to explain business cycles.

     On the other hand, the strength and stability of co—movements in employment

across sectors of the economy should not be exagerated. Many economists have

noted a diversity in employment growth across regions and industries in both

the U.S. and Canada over the past two decades, a diversity which is only par-

tially due to differences in trend growth rates. The numbers above the diagonal

in Table 1 are the simple correlations of the annual changes in the log of

employment across Canadian one—digit SIC Industries. The numbers below the

diagonal are the partial correlations after controlling for external shocks as

proxied by the current value and first lag of the change in the log of real U.S

GNP. The simple correlations are less than .5 in 23 out of 36 cases, although

the results also show substantial positive correlations between a number of the

industry pairs. While the partial correlations indicate the presence of a corn—
                                       —5—


 mon domestic disturbance, they also indicate that there is considerable diver-

 sity in employment fluctuations across industries. Table 2 presents the simple

 and partial correlations (controlling for the current and lagged value of U.S.

 GNP) for the changes in the log of provincial employment. The correlations for

 the provinces are considerably stronger than those for the industries.

      The limited evidence In these tables suggests that it is unlikely that

disaggregate shocks are the main source of aggregate fluctuations. However
                                                                               they
also suggest that sectoral shocks play a large enough role in employment beha-

vior at the sectoral level to warrant careful study as a partial explanation for

aggregate fluctuations, especially since feedback effects (across sectors) of

sector specific shocks will contribute to these correlations.

     We are unaware of any systemmatic attempt to measure the overall contribu-

tion of industry specific, region specific, and industry—region specific shocks

to aggregate fluctuations. This may reflect, in part, the role played by

idiosyncratic shocks in many econoiaic models growing out of the work of Phelps

(1970) and Lucas (1972, 1977). In these models, idiosyncratic shocks are a

source of noise which prevents individuals inferring the level of the money

supply, the economy wide price level and aggregate economic activity from a

limited information set on prices and output.4 The variance of these shocks may

affect the natural rate of unemployment (see especially Lucas and Pr*c,tt

(1974)) and the responsiveness of output to monetary shocks. However, these

models assume that the shocks are sufficiently independent and affect units

which are sufficiently small so as to wash out in the aggregate. On the other

hand, some economists (Black (1982), Long and Plosser (1983)) have argued that

"real" shocks, rather than monetary shocks, are the dominant force in economic
                                      —6—


fluctuations. Within such a framework, it is natural to consider shocks

directly affecting the demand for or supply of particular goods. Long and

Plosser (1983) present a 'real business cycle" model in ..yhich independent sec—

toral shocks induce correlation in output across sectors because of feedback

effects. However, they do not attempt to measure the relative importance of

sectoral and aggregate shocks. Our empirical model bears some similarity to

theirs, although our model is consistent with an important role for aggregate

shocks (including monetary shocks) which influence all sectors as well shocks to

specific sectors. Further, the feedback effects in our model could arise from

many sources.

     There are a number of possible approaches to studying the sources of

employment fluctuations. One approach is to first obtain measures of the dif-

ferent sources of external, national, industry specific, province specific, and

province—industry specific shocks. One could then estimate an econometric model

relating these measures to employment at various levels of aggregation and per-

form an analysis of variance. In general, data limitations and lack of adequate

degrees of freedom in time series data limit the feasibility of treating the

sources of shocks as observed variables. Most studies of specific industries or

regions treat national output as exogenous rather than investigate feedbacks

from the industry or region to national output. (See Bolton (1980).) While

effects of specific shocks such as auto strikes, coal strikes, import quotas,

etc. on economic activity have been investigated using large scale econometric

models, a summary of the contribution of these shocks has not been calculated.

     An alternative approach is to examine a pure time series model of the

employment process. Vector autoregressive models have been fruitfully applied
                                       —7—


 to study the sources of variation in economic time series. (See Sims (1980) and

Ashenfelter and Card (1982).) Unfortunately, these methods are not well suited

 to analysis at the sectoral level because they involve too many parameters in

 large systems of equations (see below). Moreover, the VAR representation of a

time series combines the dynamic behavior arising from structural dependence of

the economic time series upon its past values and from serial correlation in the

disturbances to the time series. The "innovations" in the VAR model do not

necessarily correspond to the unobserved variables which drive the economic

time series conditional upon feedback effects from past values of the time

series. In using an unrestricted VAR model, one assumes that shocks to the eco-

nomy are uncorrelated (or defines the shock as the residual after all serial

correlation has been eliminated From the error term). This restricts the dyna-

mics of the model to come from feedback effects, and leaves no role for dynamics

arising from serially correlated shocks. However, in future work it would be

useful to compare the results on the importance of various shocks reported here

to those obtained using a suitably restricted VAR model.

     Index models of the type used by Sargent and Sims (1975), Engle and Watson

(1981), and Lehmann (1982) represent another possible approach to the problem.

These models attempt to explain the behavior of a vector of economic time series

in terms of a small set of unobservable variables and a set of idiosyncratic

error components which are specific to the particular series. All of the above

studies rule out feedback from past values of the economic time series to the

current values. They attribute the dynamic behavior of economic time series to

serial correlation in the unobserved factors. However, the general class of

index models discussed in Jatson and Engle (1982) incorporates direct feedback
                                      —8—


from past values of the observed variables to the current values as well as

serial correlation in the unobserved variables which drive the system. The

model which we estimate falls into this class. Basically, we impose some strong

assumptions about the way in which employment in a particular province and

industry is affected by the lagged values of the employment in other provinces

and industries. These assumptions are necessitated by the size of our system

and available data. We also assume that shocks to employment arise from current

and lagged changes in U.S. GNP as well as:   (a) an unobserved national component

which affects employment in all industries and provinces with industry specific

coefficients; (b) a set of unobserved industry components; (c) a set of unob-

served province specific components which affects all industries in the respec-

tive province with industry specific coefficients; and (d) a component which

affects employment only in the particular province and industry. To some

extent, we allow for serial correlation in these components.

     Althigh we emphasize that our model is not a structural economic model, it

is useful to discuss both the possible sources of the industry and region speci-

fic shocks that we analyze and the possible explanations for the effect of pre-

vious employment growth on current employment growth.5 Industry and region

specific shocks may affect either the demand or supply side of employment,

although we believe that in general the demand effects will he more important.

Changes in tastes may shift the demand curve for the output of an industry out-

ward and increase its demand for labor. Alternatively, positive shocks in the

price of raw materials may lower an industry's equilibrium output and reduce its

derived demand for labor. Industry specific productivity shocks or tech-

nological change may also shift the industry demand for labor.
                                      —9—


      In our view, region specific shocks are most likely to reflect changes in

government policy. Alternate spending and taxation policies of provincial

governments can clearly shift the demand for labor in a given region,6 while

changes in minimum wage laws may shift the effective supply of labor in a given

region. Regional development programs carried out by the Federal government

also can affect the demand for labor, while changes in the treatment of regional

unemployment in the unemployment insurance system may affect labor supply in a

given region.

     The large literature on "propagation mechanisms" for business cycles

suggests a variety of explanations for the feedback effects in the model ana—

lyzed below. The simplest explanation involves the fact that output demands of

different industries and regions are interrelated through the production pro-

cess. A positive shock to manufacturing leads, in future periods, to an

increase in the demand for the output of mining. Further, a demand shock

raising employment and wages in a particular industry or region can increase

(with a lag) the demand of consumers and firms for goods produced in other

industries or regions. (Long and Plosser (1983) emphasize factors such as

these.) The need for time to build (Kydland and Prescott (1982)) and costs of

adjustment In investment and hiring decisions affect the adjustment process in

the econany, as does the time required for workers to move between industries

and regions in response to demand shifts. Empirically sorting out the role of

these mechanisms is an extremely challenging research problem, and we do not

address it here.

3. An Econometric Model for the Analysis of Employment Variation

     In this section we present the econometric model of employment variation
                                                   —10—


which serves as the basis for our empirical work. We first present a general

time series specification of employment at the province—industry level. The

general model consists of an unrestricted relationship between employment in a

given province—industry pair and lagged employment in all other province—

industry pairs, and an unrestricted disturbance. We then discuss a series of

restrictions which are placed upon the form of the feedback in employment among

industry—province pairs to obtain an estimable model. Next we consider a decom-

position of the employment disturbance into national, province, industry, and

province—industry components. Finally, we show how estimates off the model can

be used to measure the contribution of each type of dLsturbance to the variance

in the growth of employment at the national, province, industry and province—

industry       levels.
3.1 Restrictions on the Feedback Across Industries and Provinces
      Consider      an economy consisting of I industries indexed by i and P pro-

vinces indexed by p •           Let          denote the change in the log of employment

in province p and industry i •               Let          equal the IP x 1 column vector

           'l2t '"       llt     2l                   .    In general, Y may depend upon
the lagged values of employment in all of the other provinces and industries.

We also assume that, in each period, Y. is influenced by the current and

lagged value of the change in the log off real U.S. GNP and by a disturbance

       which may be serially correlated.7 Assuming for simplicity that only the

first lag of Y matters, this leads to the following specification of the time

series process for Y

(1)        =     + t—l    +
                              B1US    ÷ B2USt l ÷

where ).       is a IP x 1 unrestricted vector of intercepts,            II   is an unrestricted
                                                       —11—


 P1 x P1 matrix of lag coefficients,                        is a vector of error terms, US deno-

 tes the growth in real US GNP, and B1 and B2 are IP x 1 unrestricted vectors

of coefficients. The elements of TI depend upon the form of the feedback among

industries. The r of (1) corresponding to the equation for                                            is


  / ypit    =
                j   + 1j1P1
                      L       '   11P1
                                   12    '   "'        TIi
                                                        11    '   1P.
                                                                   21    '     "' PI-
                                                                                   P1 .
                                                                                      —t—l
                        +BIpi
                            .USt +B                    US         +c
                                                 2pi        t—1         pit

where ll., is the ((p—l)I +                  I   ,   (p'—l)I+i')             element of   II   .   The specifi-

cation permits feedback in employment changes to depend upon the particular

pairs of industries and provinces involved with coefficient II.,

      Unfortunately, given available time series data, an unrestricted model such

as (1) is hopelessly underidentified. For each of the IP elements of                                       in

(1), there is an equation corresponding to (2) which contains IP lag coef-

ficients in addition to the coefficients on US and                                             Below we work
                                                                                 US1 .
with nine one—digit industries and six provinces, so this amounts to 54 lag

coefficients for each province—industry pair. Since we have only 19 time series

observations for each equation after forming the employment change measures and

lagged values, we cannot estimate the model as it stands. Consequently, we must

impose restrictions on the feedback coefficients TI                             as well as on the
                                                                                                            -
and   --2 vectors.

      Let w. denote the fraction of Canadian employment accounted for by

province—industry pair pi.8 Let the log change in national employment                                           be

defined as a weighted average of the changes in each pi pair


(3) cty = p1 w.Y.
             pi pit
                                                   —12—


Let the change in employment in industry i be denoted by Y                                          and

defined as the weighted average

    Y. = p wY
(4) .it    p. pit

The weights w1             correspond to the fraction of employment in industry

accounted for by province p .              Similarly,         let the change in employment

in province                    ,    be defined as the weighted average

(5           =
                 .
where the weights                  correspond to the fraction of employment in province p
accounted for by industry i .             We    specify the following equation for


(6) Y        =   X.1 + -y.Y
                         1 ct—i ÷ .Y
                                   i p't—l
                                                 ÷ O.Y
                                                       1    •it—l
                                                                    +   B    •US +
                                                                            ii t
                                                                                     B
                                                                                         2i.USt—l
                                                                                                    + c
       pit                                                                                                pit

We restrict the intercept X in (2) to depend only upon the industry

(although this is relaxed in some of the empirical specifications).                                       While we

allow the coefficients on ct—i '
                                                t—l            '.1—1           US and US1 to vary
across industries, we assume that they are constant across provinces. Using

(3), (4) and (5) it is straightforward to show that (6) implies the following

restrictions on the feedback coefficients fl., relating Y ,.,
                                                               1                         pit—l to
       in (2)


(7a)             =             if    p*p' ,    i*i',

                 =
(7b)                 Y.w,     ÷ 5.w?, if p=p' ,


(7c)   TI., =                + @.w1,    if p*p ,           i=i',
and

(7d)
        1        =   y.w
                      ipi ÷   6.w. + O.w1
                               1.1       ip.      if p=p' ,         i=i'
                                                        —1 3—



            The term yY_1 permits feedback effects from all p'i'                                         province—
    industry pairs to                  ,   even when p*p' and i*i' .                    As shn in (7a), this

    term contributes the coefficient y w
                                                     i p i,
                                                                      to
                                                            the feedback effect of Y
                                                                                     p'i't—l
    on         .     This       coefficient varies proportionately across p'i' by a factor

    equal to the weight w,.1 of p'i' in national employment.

         The term 6.Y alls for the possibility that feedback will be stronger

 among industries in the same province. This is likely to be the case for

 industries with regional markets for output, such as construction and services.

As shwn in (7b) this term contributes the coefficient 6 w •,
                                                       i •1
                                                                                                        to   the total

effect of the lagged employment changes in province—industry                                       p1

         The term O.Y.tl permits feedback between province—industry pairs in the

same industry to be different from feedback between pairs in different industries.

Such differences might arise from factors such as differences across industries

in costs of adjusting employment, or from industry differences in the degree of

wage flexibility and training costs. The effect which lagged employment in p!i

has through the term O.Y                      is equal to O.w1,                       where              is the weight
                                    1 •it—l                            i p •      ,           w1,
                                                                                               p
of province p' in industry i.

         For the case in which P=6 and 1=9                    ,       the restricted system contains 54
unkncn parameters. This represents a drastic reduction from 3078 parameters in

the unrestricted system. However, some of the restrictions may be questioned.

         First, the specification imposes strong restrictions on the effect of
Y            on Y           .    As shown in (7d), the effect of the "own lag" of the
    pit—i           pit
employment change in pi depends upon                              ,        ,          and the relative weight of

pi in national employment (w.)                  ,   employment in p (wv.) , and employment in
i (w1 ) .          To relax these restrictions somewhat, one could add the term

               to (6), where the lag coefficient .                             varies   across industries but

not provinces. We experimented with this modification in the empirical work
                                                   —1 4—



but found that it made little difference to our            results.
     Second, our use of national and provincial lagged employment may             not   cap-

ture sufficiently the effects of regional proximity. Also, feedback between

different industries in different provinces may depend upon the particular

industries involved. The above specification permits the effects of the lag of

Ontario manufacturing and the lag of Ontario services on mining in Alberta to

differ only to the extent that the fractions of Canadian employment accounted

for by employment in manufacturing and by employment in services in Ontario

differ. (See (7a).)

     Third, if the industrial compositions of provinces were the same, the spe-

cification would imply that the effect of lagged employment changes for industries

in the same province is independent of the size of the province. For industries

with national markets, one might expect the influence of lagged employment in

the province to be less in small provinces than in large ones.

     In any econometric study, one must balance a desire for generality in the

model against the limitations that the data place on empirical identification.

Our preliminary experiments indicated that the usable variation in the data is

not sufficient to identify specifications more complex than (6), and so this

specification, with some minor variations, forms            the basis   for our empirical

work.9

3.2 Restrictions on the Error Structure of the Model

     Given that one of our main objectives is to assess the relative importance

of U.S., national, industry, and provincial shocks in Canadian employment

variation, we decompose the employment disturbance                      into



(8) c
         pit
               =   f.c
                    it
                         +   r.it + g.v
                                     ipt + u pit
                                              •
                                               —15—


 where     c = Canadian      national shock affecting all province—industry pairs

                  with industry     specific   coefficient f.                  —
                                                                   Var(c
                                                                           t       C
              = industry     specific shock affecting industry i
                                2
                  Var(rii) =


          v   =   province   specific shock affecting all industries in

                  province p with industry specific weight g
                               2
                  Var(v ) =
                        pt     vp

         u1 = indiosyncratic        disturbance reflecting special conditions

                  affecting only pi ; Var(u.t)
                                                         upi

We assume that    the   national shock           the vector         '.'        '' of
industry disturbances, the vector         (v1 ,...    Vp)'     of provincial disturbances,

and the vector (u1i,...,up1)'            of province—industry shocks are mutually

uncorrelated at all leads and lags. It is natural to decompose the variance of

the employment disturbances in this way. However, in our empirical work we also

make the stronger assumption that the industry shocks                  are uncorrej.ated

across industries, that the province shocks           v are     uncorrelated across pro—

vinces, and that the province—industry shocks                   are uncorrelated across

province and industry pairs.

     Identifying restrictions are necessary to estimate any factor model. For

example, in (8) one can trivially exhaust all degrees of freedom simply by

allowing the idiosyncratic errors u. to have an unrestricted covariance

matrix. In our case, the orthogonality assumptions allow us to identify the

model, and our interpretation of the results is conditional on these assump-

tions. Our approach can be interpreted as taking a model with national shocks
                                      —16—


as the baseline, and then asking whether orthogonal industry and provincial

shocks also affect the variation in employment growth at the national,

industrial or provincial levels in an economically meaningful way. We believe

that this is a reasonable approach, since it will be extremely difficult to

distinguish, (either theoretically or empirically) a national shock-model

(perhaps with multiple indices of national shocks) from a model which allows for

correlated industrial and provincial shocks.

     The assumption that there is only one index of shocks at each level is

another identifying restriction. Given the number of candidates for national

shocks, this may be an especially strong assumption at the national level. On

the other hand, we do allow for observable aggregate shocks arising from the

United States. Moreover, the use of one (unobserved) national shock gives sec—

toral shocks their best chance to play a role in variations in aggregate econo-

mic activity. If sectoral shocks do not play a major role in this model, for

our purposes there seems little point in moving to a model with several unobser-

vable national shocks.

     Let E denote the IP x IP covariance matrix of c       and let i
                                                                    pipi.


denote the element of     corresponding to the covariance of            and

p'i't .   Our assumptions imply the covariance structure in Figure 1.
                                                  —17-




                                                Figure 1


                         Covariances of e
                                            pit             pit
                                                    and c ,.,     (y
                                                                       pipi,.,)
     Same industry, Same province (p=p', i=i')
          22 +c
          f•       22 + 2
          ic fli2 .+g
                   ivp upi
    Same Industry, Different Province (p*p', i=i')

          ic +fli
          22
         fcj
                     2




    Different Industry, Same Province (p=p', 1*1')
               2
           f ,C +
         fii             gg.
                         ii    2




    Different   Industry, Different Province (p*p', i4i')
                 2
         f f c
          i it C



Two examples may be helpful for understanding the covariance structure in Figure
Figure 1. This structure rules out contemporaneous correlation between manufac-

turing in Ontario and transportation in Ontario once US                    ,
                                                                               US1   ,   the   feedback

terms in lagged employment and the shocks                c and v (p for Ontario) are
controlled for. It also rules out correlation between manufacturing in Ontario

and manufacturing in Quebec conditional on US ,
                                                              US1      ,   the feedback terms,
and the shocks c and                 Ci   for   manufacturing).

    The coefficients f.            and g determine the responsiveness of each

industry to national and provincial shocks respectively and are of central

interest. (In estimation it is necessary to normalize the f and                          g vectors,

for example, by setting f1 and g1 equal to one.) The elements of f and g
                                                   —18—


are industry specific since one would expect manufacturing (a highly cyclical

industry with a national market) to be more responsive to                               and especially

C than services.

           We now discuss how the estimates of feedback parameters, the coefficients

on the error components, and the variances of the error components may be used

to allocate the variance of national employment, industry employment and provin-

cial employment to various sources.

3.3 Sources of the Variance inpit


and u
          We first present a formula for the contribution of US ,

                         to the variance of the innovation in Y .
                                                                                        c          '



                                                                              These abstract from the
                                                                                                        v
               pit
feedback effects of the shocks on Y through                               .   From the moving average

representation of the model we then derive an expression for the total contribu-

tion of each of these factors to the steady state variance of                               .   Since

Y          ,   Y     .    are linear combinations of Y ,          we can use these formulae to measure
    p.t            .it                                  —t
the       contribution of the shocks to the innovation variance and steady state

variance of national, provincial, and industrial employment growth respectively.

          In this section we assume that c
                                                   t
                                                       ,
                                                             it   , vpt   and u
                                                                                  pit
                                                                                        are white noise

shocks for all p and i •                  This allows for considerable simplification in the
expressions for the steady state variance of Yt . Moreover, in our empirical

work, we allow for the possibility that —1 enters (6) and the possibility

that               '         and   v each follow first order autoregressive processes.

None of these modifications affects our empirical results for the variance

decompositions.

          To begin, assume that IJS follows a second—order autoregressive process


(9) uS = p0 ÷ p1TJS_1 +                        + Cust         E(e2) s
                                                                              —19—


 Substituting (9) and (8) into (1) yields


                       +
 (10) Y =                      11.!t1 +      1jD1 + 2t—i                           +
                                                                                       B2p2      US2

                       +_lcust +ct +flt +                                    G!t: +U
where A is redefined as the new vector of constant terms and
              =
                   [B11 ,..., B11                    ,
                                                             B11 ,..., B11 ,..., B11 ,...,                        B11]'
              =
                   [B21         ,...,
                                          B2         ,
                                                          B1        ,...,
                                                                              B        ,...,
                                                                                                 B21 ,..., B21]?


        -     = [ fi                             ,             ,...,           ,...,             ,...,


        at:
              =
                                 '"' it '"' flit '"'                                             '"' flit '' It1
              =
                      [v        ,            ,...                  ,                       ..., v2                              ,...,


              = [u1 u1              ,            ,...
                                                              u11        ,
                                                                             u21       ,...,
                                                                                                 u1]
and C is a P1 x P1 diagonal matrix with g., on the diagonal for rows in

                                                                             Then under the assumption c ,
which                 is from industry i' •
                                                                                                                                 c
       and u          are independently distributed, the innovation variance of

may be written as


(11) v(Y) =            s         -.i --
                                             ÷               --' +            +C             C' +


where          ,           '             are the covariance matrices for                                 11   ,   V   and   u

respectively. To calculate the contribution of each of these shocks to the

innovation variance of y
                                                ct       ,     Y             and Y.
                                                                                       it    ,   note   that
                                                                   p•t

(12)    Y
         Ct
                  =   w' Y
                      —C —t          ;   Y
                                          p •   t    = w' Y ;
                                                       —p —t
                                                                             and Y
                                                                                       •   it = 1
                                                                                                w! Y
                                                                                                   —t

where
                                                                    —oz--



(pci)         =       t.)IT '        ZT              IT
                                                              '    TZ
                                                                         '•••'        !   Id
                                                                                               (




(qi)          (O''O''d'''d'o'"'o)=                                                                      pu
                      (1_d) x I           suuiaa

(dci)             =


                                                                              uawai:

    'uqj      ;j             =             '
                                               (4z)A      =
                                                               (4)A4                      .xo       'adurxa       aq   —nqpuoo
uoj o             ipUTAO.Id S)OT4S                'NA)                    (adA
                                                                                      o            aq UOTA0UUT 93UTJA
;o                uw1Co1dm                       T                  Aq

(VT)
                  z(TI)T] I()                                     T*Il           114d      (lId [dATt
       OJ   SSSS             f[BAO             quO                UO    J0                0        aq   S)j3048   O       Lpas
        auTA ;o              'uau1oIduI           j       sj      Ltssau              o                 unoo ;o joqpa;
szjja                                 uuiAo1duj                   oj op      'stp                  uqrnoo          wsCs   u   (Ui)

pu aq        ui   s.is           ssod                     sn       UAT           Aq   ouT(o) uo               wsAs ;o     'suoTnba
pu                        uopduinss                                                       pu                              —1O3Ufl




(ci)                     =       (   + V                           +         3             +


        i_sn_
                                                               —21—



                                            G    0         0

                                  +         0    0         0
                            —t                                           —t         —t
                                            o    0         0




where                 A=
                                            II
                                                                         22
                                            o
                                                           1
                                                           1             0




the elements of        TI   are defined in (7a)—(7d)

I   = [B,l,o}   ',   and    f ,         ,            and             equal f ,                     ,     and       with

two zeros added.

       Assuming the process is stationary, and defining                                                to be the P1 x P1

identity matrix, one may express the deviation                                            from its mean as


           — mean            =
(16)                              [ 1p               1kO ACtk + k0                           11k
                                                                                                       Ct_k + kO it-k

                             + (nkG)             —t—k
                                                               +
                                                                                   —t—k
                                  k=0                              k=O



Our previous assumptions and (16) imply that the steady state variance of




                     {
v9(Y) , takes the form

(17) v5(Y) =                                          AkBBt(Ak))[I1 o oJ'}


                +           kO 11kt11 + kO                                    11k         (11k)?}




                +           11k G           GT(flk)?} +                      11k
                     {kZO                                          kO                    (11k)}
                                          —22—


The expressions for the variance of ct '                  and        are obtained by

applying the relevant weighting vector to (17). Through the use of (11) and

(17), we can measure the relative importance of US shocks, national shocks,

province specific shocks, industry specific shocks and province—industry

specific shocks to the innovation and steady state variance of the growth in

Canadian employment at the national, industry and province levels.

4. EstimatIon Methodology

       Our model consists of 54 parameters which enter linearly in (6) as well as

the 32 parameters which enter nonlinearly in (8).10 We carry out the estima-

tion in two   stages.   First, we estimate the regression parameters of (6) using

instrumental variables and least squares procedures. The resulting parameter

estimates are used to provide estimates                of the error c         .   Second, we
                                                 pit                    pit
estimate the coefficients and variances in the model for the c .                  from   the
                                                              pit
sample covariances of pit and p'i't .             Both steps of the procedure require

discussion.

4.1 Estimation of the Coefficients on Lagged Employment, US , and                 US1
       Since the parameters of (6) are constant across provinces but differ across

industries, it is useful to begin by focusing on estimating the parameters for a

specific industry. The appropriate method of estimation depends on one's assump-

tions and interpretation of (6). Vhile (6) is not a structural equation (in the
conventional sense), one could argue that the restrictions on II implied by (6)

are   appropriate once tl has been purged of any correlation with                        arising
from   autocorrelation in the components of the error. Further, one could argue

that ignoring this correlation will diminish the role of these components in

explaining the variance of       .   In   this case, TSLS should be used for estima—
                                                   —23—



tion.     On the other hand, OLS will be the appropriate estimation strategy if one

is willing to assume that the components of                     are serially uncorrelated or if

one simply interprets (6) as a restricted projection and                          as the residual

from this projection. Fortunately, our qualitative results are insensitive to

whether we use OLS or TSLS to estimate (6).

        To implement the TSLS procedure, we assume that the national shock

follocs a first order autoregressive process

             c =       rci    + Cct

To eliminate the serial correlation in c , we quasidifference (6) to

obtain


(18)             =A.(l—r) +                + .            +
                                                                         ÷ Bii US + B2. US1
                            + ;it

where c *       =      f.1 cCt      *
                                 + ii. ÷ g. *v + u*
            pit.                      it    1 pt     pit

and X =           — rX1          for any variable X .         All   elements of         are

uncorrelated with                 ,   as is any linear combination of the elements of

          The assumption of independence among the industry specific shocks,

the province specific shocks, and the province—industry specific shocks

implies that linear combinations of Y ,.,                     are also uncorrelated with
                                     p i t—l

r4t ,        ,   and             when p * pV and i * i' .             Consequently such linear
combinations are valid Instrumental variables for (18). Note that the set of

valid Instrumental variables is specific to each province—industry pair.

       Given our stochastic assumptions, we are left with a large number of

potential instrumental variables. We use the following set of instru-

mental variables:
                                                  —24--




 [us, us1. us2,                          •3—1••• •1—1 1—2 •3_2••
 where                   and              are the employment changes in industry i'

 (in t—l and t—2 respectively) averaged over all provinces except p and we

 have used industry 2 as an example. (Note that the average for industry i

 is not used as an instrumental variable.) Instruments are formed for
                                                                                           Y1
              and '
                      it—l     from industry specific regressions of these variables

 (across provinces and time periods) against the above set of instrumental

variables. Since the parameter r is common to all industries, we estimate

(18) across all industries by nonlinear two stage least squares. Although

quasidifferencing eliminates serial correlation arising from                   c , the com-
posite error              will not be white noise unless all of the components of

c. happen to obey the same autoregressive process.11

4.2 Estimating the Error Components Model

        The error components model in (8) has the form of a factor model with a

priori restrictions on the vector of coefficients or factor loadings of the

model.12 The model (8) predicts that                ,     the   covariance matrix of

takes the form given in Figure 1 above. Thus the model places restrictions

on       such that it can be expressed as                       where     is the m x 1 para-
meter vector


                                          2   2            2      2      2     2           2
(19)



       We use an unweighted miniumum distance procedure to estimate 8                  .       Let
       denote the P1 x 1 vector of regression residuals from (6) in period t

We   first    form S ,   a   consistent estimate of E ,          using

        S =
                 j IT
We   next stack the elements of S into a K x 1 vector S .                     The covariance
                                             —25—


terms are ccxinted only once, so that K =        PI.(PI   +   1)72   .   For a given value of
       we use the same procedure to stack the predicted covariances ()               into   a

vector E(8). Then analagous to least squares estimation (where the elements

of S play the role of the dependent variable), we choose                    to minimize the

sum of squared differences between the sample and predicted covariances,'3

            K
(20) Q =
           k=l
                 (Sk —   Z()
                          —k   )
                                   2




We estimate the asymptotic covariance matrix of               from


(21) v(s) =      (DD)1    (D'V(S)D) (D'D)1


where D is the K x m matrix of derivatives of E() with respect to

   evaluated at          and V(S) is an estimate of the K x K variance

covariance matrix of the vector S .          (See Chamberlain (1984).)

       In estimating       and calculating the standard errors, we face the problem

that     V(S) is a 1485 x 1485 matrix. As a result, evaluating expressions

involving V(S) can be extremely demanding in terms of computer time and

storage, and this limits our options in choosing an estimation strategy.

To reduce the computational burden (and because T is much smaller than K)

we use a large sample normality approximation and               to estimate

V(S).14 Further, we do not attempt to improve the efficiency of our

estimates of        by using an optimal (weighted) minimum distance procedure,

since this procedure requires repeatedly evaluating expressions involving

V(') •15 (These efficiency gains are analogous to those obtained from

using GLS instead of OLS when estimating a regression model.) The lack of an

optimal minimum distance estimator rules out performing standard chi—square

goodness of fit tests, and alternatives such as those suggested by Newey
                                           —26—


(1985a) are computationally infeasible.16 Instead, below we present informal

evidence concerning goodness of fit.

5.   Empirical     Analysis

        This section presents the empirical results. It is organized as follows.

Section 5.1 describes the data. Section 5.2 discusses the estimates of the

regression parameters of the model. Section 5.3 discusses the estimates of the

coefficients on the national and province specific shocks and the variances of

the national, provincial, industry, and province—industry shocks. In Section 5.4,

we use the moving average representation of our model and the parameter esti-

mates from 5.2 and 5.3 to illustrate the cumulative impact of various shocks on

Canadian employment growth at the national and industrial levels. In Section

5.5, we estimate the contribution of the respective shocks to the variance of

the growth in Canadian national employment, industrial employment and provincial

employment.

5.1 Data

        As mentioned earlier, the data for the study are annual employment in

Canada disaggregated by one digit SIC industry (Forestry, Mining, Manufacturing,

Construction, Transportation, Trade, Finance, Services, and Government) and by

province. Employment in the Yukon, Northwest Territories and Prince Edward

Island    are   excluded. New Brunswick and Nova Scotia are combined in the analy-

sis, as are Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Although it would have been desirable to

disaggregate further along industry lines, particularly in manufacturing and

construction, the necessary data are not available by province.

        The data are available from 1961   to   1982   and are taken from CANSIM. Three
years   are lost in the construction of first difference and lagged values of the
                                               —27—


 variables. Consequently, the effective saniple for estimation covers

 l964_1982.17

      Table 3 presents a summary of the average composition during our sample

period of employment in Canada by industry and province.18 Manufacturing, ser-

vices and trade are the largest sectors, with 24.5, 27.9 and 16.8 percent of

employment respectively. Forestry and Mining account for only 1.0 and 1.9 per-

cent of employment. Newfoundland accounts for only 1.6 percent of employment in

Canada. It is important to note that our estimation procedure gives equal

weight to Newfoundland in the estimation of many of the parameters. This is

probably undesirable, especially in light of the large estimated variance of

v for   Newfoundland.19 Consequently, we focus upon estimates of the model with
                       0
Newfoundland excluded.

     Tables 1 and 2 present information on the sample means and standard

deviations of provincial employment                   and industrial employment
                                                                                   it
5.2 Estimates of the Regression Parameters

     We initially estimated (6) by nonlinear TSLS, using the instrumental

variables discussed in Section 4. Since we obtained an estimate of the auto—

correlation parameter r of only —.05, we set r equal to 0 and used OLS and

TSLS to estimate (6). The TSLS results are reported in Table 4a, and the OLS

estimates are reported in Table 4b. The estimated coefficients on               US and
US1 Indicate that U.S. GNP has a strong effect on forestry, manufacturing,

construction, and a moderate effect on trade and finance. The (relatively) weak

response of mining   to   U.S. GNP   is   surprising. U.S. GNP    has   a positive impact

on all sectors except government. To determine the overall impact of U.S. GNP

on employment in a given industry It is necessary to take into account feedback
                                             —28—


effects through past employment changes. We do this in Section 5.4.

        The effects of lagged provincial employment, lagged Canadian employment,

and lagged industry employment on the dynamic behavior of employment growth are

interdependent, and thus it is very difficult to interpret the coefficients of

these variables by themselves. [n Section 5.4 we present a discussion of the

moving average representation of the response of employment to various distur-

bances. However, a few observations can be made at this point. First, note

that the TSLS and OLS point estimates are generally similar, but they do differ

by large amounts in several cases. As one would expect, the reported standard

errors, (which are approximate at best for the reasons discussed in footnote

11), are usually considerably larger for the TSLS estimates than for the OLS

estimates. They are especially large for forestry, mining, and construction as

a result of the large residual variances for these equations.

        We find that the lagged change in provincial employment has a substantial

positive effect on the current employment change in most industries. The

effect is especially large in mining, construction, transport, and finance.

The results are consistent with the notion that there is substantial interdepen-

dence among industries at the regional level. Indeed, we find the TSLS estimate

of the response of mining to lagged provincial employment to be unreasonably

large. The effect of lagged own industry employment is smaller in absolute

value in most cases and mixed in sign. The response of employment to the lagged

change in Canadian employment is negative for all industries except construc-

tion,    government and services. The    point estimate for construction is very

large    but   is subject to a very large standard error.

        Neither   the inclusion of the own   lag of the employment change nor the
                                          —29—



 inclusion    of a provincial trend significantly affects the results.21

 5.3 The Employment Responses to National, Province, and Industry Shocks

       Table 5a reports estimates of the response coefficients
                                                                    f1 , g1   ,   to   the

national and provincial shocks, as well as estimates of the variances of the

national, industry, and provincial shocks for the TSLS residuals. Table 5b

reports the corresponding results for the OLS residuals. The results are simi-

lar, and we focus upon the OLS results. We have normalized the response of

forestry to the national and provincial shocks to be 1. The response of each

industry     to the industry specific shocks is normalized to 1   for   all industries.
       The   responses to the national shock are estimated relatively precisely

and are in accord with a priori expectations. Forestry, mining, and cons truc—

tion   are the most responsive to the national shock, followed by manufacturing

and transportation. Trade, finance, and services are only about 1/4 as respon-

sive to a national shock as construction. Government has a small negative

response, which would be consistent with counter—cyclical use of manpower

programs (among other explanations).

       The variances of some of the industry specific shocks are substantial given

that the response coefficients have been normalized to one in each industry. A

number of these point estimates have relatively small standard errors. By com-

paring the point estimate for the industry specific variance to the product of

the estimate of the variance of the national shock and the square of the esti-

mated national response coefficient for the particular industry, one may assess

the relative importance of national and industry shocks in the covariance of

       across provinces for the industry. The industry specific shock is more

important than the national shock for finance, services, trade and government.
                                      —30—


However, the national shock is more important for mining, manufacturing (in the

OLS case), forestry and construction, even though the variances of the mining

and manufacturing industry specific shocks are quite large. (The estimated

variance for forestry is slightly negative, but this estimate is only marginally

larger than its standard error.)

     The parameter estimates for the provincial shocks are imprecise. The large

response coefficients for forestry and mining are somewhat surprising given that

one would expect these industries to have national or international markets.

These large point estimates could indicate a strong impact of provincial policy

changes on mining and forestry. The number of negative point estimates for

variance parameters is somewhat trcubling and may reflect misspecification. On

the other hand, all of these estimates are associated with large standard

errors, and thus may simply reflect sampling error.

     Since we cannot calculate a chi—square goodness—of—fit test, in Table 6 we

compare the predicted values of the covariances of the errors across industry

and province pairs (when the province is different) based upon the parameter

estimates in Table 5b to the unrestricted estimates, which are the average

value across different provinces of the covariance for the given industry pairs.

The restricted and unrestricted estimates correspond reasonably closely.22

     We considered several other modifications when estimating the parameters

of the error components model. We estimated the parameters from the moment

matrices based on the residuals for i) the case where the own lag of Y
                                                                      pit
enters (6) and, ii) the case where a provincial trend enters (6). We also re—

estimated the parameters while constraining to zero the variances that were

estimated as negative numbers in Table 5a.23 None of these modifications had
                                        —31—


a significant effect on the parameter estimates.

5.4 Dynamic Response of Employment Growth

     In this section we use our parameter estimates and the moving     average
representation (16) to illustrate the cumulative impact of various shocks to

Canadian employment growth at the national and industry levels. We report

results based on the OLS estimates (Newfoundland excluded) but the general

results are not sensitive to changing the estimation method or sample. The time

horizon refers to the number of years following the shock.

     In Table 7a, we trace out the response of the growth rate in Canadian

employment at the national and industry levels to a one time, one standard

deviation increase in 6ust (the size of the increase is .0246). In terms of

national employment, the growth rate rises above its initial level for years 0

through 3, at which point the effect of the US shock essentially stops. In

several industries the impact of the shock is always positive, while in

forestry, manufacturing and, to a lesser extent, construction and finance the

effect in later years beces negative before the growth rate returns to its

initial value. Initially the shock has    a   small negative effect on government,

followed by an increase in employment growth in this industry.

     Table 7b indicates the effect of a one time, one standard deviation

increase in the national shock c on the growth rate of national and

industry employment. (The size of the hypothetical shock is .0339). The

response pattern to this experiment is qualitatively similar to the response

pattern to the US shock.

     Table 7c reports the response of the growth rate of national employment to

a one time rise in each industry   specific   shock. The size of the hypothetical
                                         —32—


 shock is set equal to the square root of the industry specific variance

 (reported in Table 5b). If the point estimate of the industry's variance is

negative, the shock is set equal to the square root of the average of the esti-

mated variances of the industry specific shocks reported in Table 5b.24 (In the

latter case the size of the shock equals .0111.) For example, column 1 indi-

cates the impact on national employment growth of a one—time, one standard

deviation increase in the Forestry specific shock. In general, national

employment growth rises in response to the industry shocks, but these effects

disappear after three years. The responses are smaller than the response to a

one standard deviation national shock.

     In Table 7d, we show the impact on the growth rate of each industry's

employment of a one—time, one standard deviation shock to each industry's error

         (For each industry the shock is the same as in Table 7c.) The impact

of the shock is generally positive and virtually all effects disappear after

five years. A comparison of Tables 7d and 7c establishes that the industry

shock has a nuch larger impact on the specific industry than on national

employment growth. The response to an industry shock is positively related to

the weight of the industry in national employment growth and to the size of the

shock.

     Finally, in Table 7e we illustrate the impact on employment growth of one

experiment involving the provincial shocks. Specifically, we calculate the

impact on national and industry employment growth of a one time increase in the

provincial error for Nova Scotia/New Brunswick equal to .0281, the square root

of the average of the estimated regional variances reported in Table 5b. We

then repeat the calculation for the other provincial shocks, again using the
                                                          —33-.



 square root of the average value of the regional variances.                                  In Table 7e, we

 report the average effect on the employment growth rates of these seven experi-

ments. The effect of the provincial shocks on national employment essentially

disappears after three years. Again there are differences in the size and

timing of the industry responses to the provincial shock.

        The analysis of the dynamic response carried out in this section and the

steady state variance decompositions reported in the next section are based on

the assumption that all shocks are white noise errors. Given the estimates of

the residuals, we checked for autocorrelation in the industrial and provincial

shocks. Assuming a constant autocorrelation parameter across industries, we

obtained an estimate of approximately —.02 for this parameter. We obtained an

estimate of —.18 for the provincial autocorrelation parameter. When we recalcu-

lated the response coefficients and the variance decompositions to allow for

autocorrelation in the industrial and provincial shocks, the results were quite

similar.

5.5 Accounting for the Variance in Canadian Empyment

        We now discuss estimates of the contributions of various sources to the

variance in employment growth at the national, industry, and provincial levels.

Using (11) from Section 3, we compute the contribution of the various shocks to

the variance of the innovation in Y
                                                     ct
                                                           ,    Y      ,   Y    .
                                                                               .it
                                                                                     conditional    on past
                                                                 p•t
employment levels, US1 and US2 .                           We     also compute the contribution of

variis shocks to the steady state variances of                                                and
                                                                           'ct            ,
                                                                                                    Y     using

(17).

        Table 8a reports the contributions of the shocks to the variance of the

innovation in Y        ,   Y    .    and   Y              respectively when OLS is used to estimate
                  ct           .it             p•t
                                       —34—


(6) and data on Newfoundland are excluded. Column 1 is the variance contribu-

tion of the US shock c5 , while column 2 is the contribution of c and

column 3 reports the combined effect of the Industry shocks

Column 4 reports the combined effect of the provincial shocks v1              ,   and

column 5 reports the combined effect the province/industry shocks u11 ...
                                                                                  up1
     In these calculations (and the ones that follow) we have set negative

variances to zero, although this makes little difference in practice. For the

only case that we considered, (TSLS estimation, no Newfoundland data), we found

that using minimum distance estimates where these negative parameters were

constrained to zero had no significant impact on the calculations. The first

r of the table indicates that the US shock and the Canadian national shock

account for 43.2% and 43.8% (respectively) of the variance in the innovation of

national employment. The industry shocks, the provincial shocks, and the

province—industry shocks account for 6.6%, 3.7%, and 2.9% of this variance,

respectively. (The contributions sum   to   100.2% because of rounding.) Sectoral

shocks represent for only 13.2% of Canadian employment fluctuations due to all

sources, but account for 23.1% of the variance due to Canadian sources. Thus,

the results indicate that while sectoral shocks play only a modest role in

national employment fluctuations, they play a more significant role in Canadian

employment fluctuations due to Canadian sources.

    The results in Table 8b for the steady state variances tell a similar

story. The U.S. and Canadian shocks account, respectively, for 61.7% and 26.8%

of the national variance. The industry shocks, the province shocks, and the

province—industry shocks account, respectively, for 6.4%, 2.7% and 2.4% of the

steady state variance in Canadian employment growth. Sectoral shocks account
                                       —35—


 for 11.5% of the steady—state variance due to all sources and 30.0% of the

 variance due to Canadian sources. Thus, the dominant influences are the US

 shock and (to a lesser extent) the Canadian national shock. Nevertheless, the

 sectoral shocks contri1ite a significant fraction of the variance which arises

 from Canadian sources. One might speculate that sectoral shocks would be more

important in a more closed economy, such as that of the U.S.

     The results in the tables show considerable differences in the relative

importance of the shocks to the total industry variances. In no case are pro-

vincial shocks very important. The results on the importance of the province—

industry shocks to the industry variances are sensitive to the estimation

procedure and whether or not Newfoundland is included. However, in all cases

these shocks contribute more than 20% of the steady—state variance of Forestry,

Mining, and Government and more than 10% for Trade and Finance. For several

industries, industry shocks account for a non—trivial fraction of the employment

innovations, with transportation and forestry being exceptions.

     The industry shocks account for relatively little of the variation in pro-

vincial employment grcth, although these results are somewhat sensitive to the

esUniation method and sample. The contribution of industry shocks to both the

innovation and steady—state variance of provincial employment growth is similar

to their contrilxition to the national employment variance. Both province shocks

and industry—province shocks play a more important role at the provincial level

than at the national level.

     In summary, we have estimated the model using both TSLS and OLS estimation

procedures and have performed the analysis both with and without data on

Newfoundland.   We have also considered separately a11ocing for a lagged depen—
                                         —36—


 dent variable in (6) and allowing serial correlation in the nationaland see—

 toral shocks. We have investigated different treatments of negative point

 estimates of some of the variances. The results reported above are represen-

 tative of our results in each of the various cases.25

6. Conclusion

        In this paper, we propose a method for assessing the contribution of

various shocks to the variance of Canadian employment growth at the national,

industry, and provincial levels. Specifically, this procedure analyzes the

relative degree to which U.S. shocks, Canadian national shocks, and shocks to

specific industries, specific provinces and specific province—industry pairs

cause fluctuations in employment growth at various levels of aggregation. We

apply this methodology to annual data on Canadian employment at the industry—

province level. Our results suggest U.S. shocks are responsible for approxima-

tely two—thirds of the steady—state variance in the growth of national

employment, while the Canadian national shock acccxxnts for approximately a

quarter of this variance. Taken together, industry specific, province specific

and province—industry specific shocks account for approximately a tenth of the

variance in Canadian employment growth. Thus our analysis indicates that the

dominant influences on aggregate employment growth in Canada are US shocks, and

to a lessor   extent, national shocks. Nevertheless, sectoral shocks would appear
to    account for a substantial fraction of the variance in national employment due

to Canadian sources. Industry specific shocks play an economically significant

role in several industries, while provincial shocks play an important role in

the   variance of employment growth in most provinces. Idiosyncratic shocks are
also important in several provinces and industries.
                                      —37—


     We view our study as a first approach to the problem, and there is a large

agenda for future research. Within the present framework, development of a

feasible weighted minimum distance would be very useful. Expanding the analysis

to incorporate monthly or quarterly data would involve significant complica-

tions, but would also offer substantial benefits. First, the greater sample

sizes would enable us to alloq for a more flexible feedback mechanism between

current and lagged employment. Second, the lower degree of time aggregation

would allx us to more sharply separate sectoral shocks from the national shock.

(For example, a specific shock to Ontario in January may look very much like a

national shock by mid—year.) Finally, it would be very interesting to apply

this approach to the U.S. economy, where one would expect the role of external

shocks to be much smaller.
                                      —38—


                               Footnotes



     1Examples of studies using structural or reduced form econometric models to

investigate the role of one or more of these factors are Barro (1977, 1978),

Mlshkin (1984) and Sargent (1976). Examples of the literature using descriptive

time series methods to investigate the role of money shocks, investment shifts,

or other aggregate factors are Gordon and Veitch (1984), Lawrence and Siow

(1985), Litterman and Weiss (1984) and Sims (1972, 1980).

     2The recent paper by Blanchard and Watson (1984) is one of a number of stu—

dies which suggest that aggregate shocks arise from a number of sources.

     3See for example Lilien (1982a, l982b) for evidence in favor of the

hypothesis and Abraham and Katz (1985) for evidence against it.

     4See Zarnowitz (1985, pp. 551—562) for a recent survey of this literature.

     51n a companion paper (Altonji and Ham (1985)), we present a structural

market clearing model which generates the econometric specification used below.

We also investigate how relaxing the market clearing assumption along the lines

of Fischer (1977) and Phelps and Taylor (1977) affects our specification.

     6Changes in provincial governments may affect investor confidence and capi-

tal formation in a region, and this will have an effect ott the demand for

labor. Of course, regional shocks also may arise from non—governmental sources.

For example, in industries such as agriculture, changes in weather conditions

will represent a region specific shock.

     7See Burbidge and Harrison (1985) for a careful analysis of the rela—

tionship between aggregate Canadian and U.S. economic variables. They find

that the U.S. variables have a significant effect on the Canadian variables
                                            —39--



(in a causality sense) but find that the Canadian variables have no economically

significant effect on the U.S. variables.

         the estimation, w is allowed to vary over time. It is calculated

as (SHARE         + SHARE .    )12   where SHARE          is the share of total Canadian
            pit          pit—i                      pit
employment in p1 in year t

     9One could relax the specification (6) in a restricted way by making use

of data from an input—output table to provide a priori information on the

industry weights. (The necessary data appears to be available. See Whalley

(1983).) In the same spirit, one might make use of information from an input—

output table cross—classified by province to capture the most important dif-

ferences across provinces in feedback among province—industry pairs. This would

parallel the approach taken in some large scale multiregion econometric models

for the U.S., (see the Bolton (1980) survey), and would be an interesting topic

for future research. Long and Plosser (1983) present a model of output by

industry in which the input—output matrix across industries plays a key role in

the determination of the      II   matrix in (1).

    10For the reason discussed in Section 5.1, we present estimates based on a

sample with Newfoundland excluded. This exclusion has no important effect on

our conclusions, and results for the case where data on Newfoundland are con-

tained in the Appendix tables.
    11
      In Tables 4a and 4b, we present standard errors based on the standard OLS

and TSLS expressions. In principle, these standard errors should be corrected

for any remaining autocorrelation (which we find to be small) and for the

covariance structure of the errors described in Figure 1. Given our emphasis on

the variance decomposition presented below, we have not made these corrections.
                                                                      —40—


It is worth noting that it may also be possible to improve efficiency by

adapting the two—step two stage least squares procedures discussed in Hansen

(1982) and Cumby etal (1983) to the present problem, although we leave this to

future research.

    '2See, for example, Aigner etal. (1984) and Chamberlain (1984) for

discussions of these models and references to the literature.

    '3An alternative strategy for estimating the response coefficients to the

national shock would involve using the average of the residuals across all pi

as an estimate c of c and estimating the f.                                                   (with the normalization

 f. =   1)   from regressions for each industry of the form

                                           e
                                                pit
                                                         =f.i tC +n•
                                                                   it +g1 V           pit      pit

treating n. + g. v + u                                       as an error term. Unfortunately, the estimate
                 it           1       pi             pit
of c is contaminated by the presence of the industry, province, and

province—industry shocks and is correlated with composite error. Consequently,

c might pick up the effects of these shocks. A similar problem (and some

additional ones) arises with the use of Y                                            or the change in Canadian GNP as
                                                                            ct
a proxy for c .                   Although one may reduce these problems through various
instrumental variables schemes, we prefer to treat                                            ct as an unobservable and

use the minimum distance estimator.

    14Let c               c            c             e
                 j
                      ,
                              k   ,
                                           2.
                                                 ,
                                                         m have a joint normal distribution with zero mean.
Then cov(. Ck '                                           = cov(..               •
                                                                     ,
                                                                         e9,)        cov(Ek     Cm) ÷ cov(c '   Cm)

coy (ck ,    c   )    , (see,              for example, Magnus and Neudecker (1984)), and we use our

parameter estimates and the expressions in Figure 1 to calculate the covarian—

ces on the right—hand side of this equation. Alternatively, one could use the

elements of S to calculate these covariances, and we did this for three
                                          —41—


cases. In the case of OLS residuals, data on Newfoundland excluded, using the

elements of S lead to a moderate reduction in the standard errors.              In the

case of OLS and TSLS residuals including Newfoundland, this had no effect on

the estimate standard errors. We should note that we have not made an adjust-

ment to (21) when TSLS residuals are analyzed (see Newey (l985b).

       15The weighted estimator chooses      to minimize


   =       —
                    (V(s))1 (S —

Under the normality assmiption, the results of Magnus and Neudecker (1984) can

be used to obtain an expression for the 1485 x 1485 matrix V(S)1 which only

involves inverting the 54 x 54 matrix        ,   and   ()    is   a nonsingular estimate

of E

    16Even with an optimal minimum distance estimator, it is unclear how one

would calculate the degrees of freedom for the test, since the sample moment

matrix is of dimension P1, but is only of rank T .          Thus, one could obtain a
perfect fit of this matrix by parameterizing the Tx P1 residuals used to

calculate the moment matrix.
    17
         It should be mentioned that the data are available on a monthly basis.

We have chosen to work with annual data for two reasons. First, employment in

Canada is highly seasonal. Treatment of seasonality in a satisfactory way

would greated complicate the econometric analysis. Second, with a quarterly or

monthly model it would probably be necessary to add additional employment lags

to the employment equation (6), and allow the composite error                to depend

upon lagged values of national, provincial, industry and province—industry

shocks. This would add greatly to the number of parameters to be estimated.

Since our model is already very large and costly to estimate, we leave an

analysis   using quarterly data to future research.
                                      —42—


    118The government figures appear low because government employment is spread

over other categories, including services, construction, and manufacturing. See

Ashenfelter and Card (1985) for a recent comparison of the US and Canadian labor

markets. Employment data for US are also available by industry and state from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics. An analysis for the US along the lines of the

present paper would be an interesting topic for future research.

    19'rhis large variance may reflect the fact that data on fishing are una-

vailable and thus we cannot include this industry in our analysis.

         noted in footnote 10, results including Newfoundland are reported in

the Appendix tables. They are qualitatively similar to those excluding

Newfoundland.
    21
      Estimation of the basic model required significant expenditure of computer

funds. Since the results were quite similar across estimation methods and

samples, and to keep the computer budget from growing even larger, we did not

investigate each nodification for each of the four possible specifications:

TSLS including Newfoundland; OLS includingNewfoundland; TSLS excluding

Newfoundland; and OLS excluding Newfoundland. The addition of the own lag and

the provincial trend were considered only for TSLS and OLS including

Newfoundland.
    22
      Each of the average sample covariances in Table 6 is based on the average

of 30 sample covariances across different provinces for the same pair of

industries. The correlation coefficient between the (non—diagonal) average

sample covariances and predictions from the factor model reported in Table 6 is

.96. (The diagonal elements are excluded in this calculation since the factor

model estimate of each diagonal element is equal to the average sample
                                        —43—


covariance.) The correlation coefficient between the individual sample moments

and the predicted moments (for different provinces) is .50. One would expect

this correlation coefficient to be lower than the first because of sampling

errors in the individual sample moments. These sampling errors in the indivi-

dual moments tend to cancel out when one takes the average of covariances

across different provinces for a given industry pair.
    23
      Case i)   was investigate for the OLS and TSLS residuals when data on

Newfoundland are inchided. Case ii) was investigated for the TSLS residuals

including Newfoundland. The constrained estimation (for the negative variances)

was carried out on the TSLS residuals excluding Newfoundland.

    241n taking this average, we have set the negative variances to 0.

    25The Appendix tables contain the variance decompositions for TSLS and OLS

including Newfoundland and TSLS excluding Newfoundland. The lagged dependent

variable and autocorrelated error components cases (not reported) were analyzed

for the OLS and TSLS residuals including Newfoundland. As noted above, the

error components model was re—estimated with negative variances set to zero for

the TSLS residuals excluding Newfoundland.
                                          —44—



                                  References


Abraham, Katherine and Lawrence Katz. 1985. "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral

     Disturbances or Aggregate Disturbances?" Mimeo, Sloan School, MIT.

Aigner, D.; C. Hsiao; A. Kapteyan; and T. Wansbeek. 1984. "Latent Variable

     Models in Econometrics." Chapter 23 in Z. Griliches and M. Intrilligator

     (eds.) Handbook of Econometrics Amsterdam: North Holland.

Alt onji, Joseph and John Ham.    1985.   "The Collective Impact   of   Sectoral

     Shocks on Aggregate Employment Fluctuations." Mimeo, Department of

     Economics,   Columbia University.
Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. 1982. "Time Series Representation of
     Economic Variables and Alternative Models of the Labour Market." Review
     of   Economic Studies 59 (Special Issue): 761—782.

__________________•      1985.   "Why Have Unemployment Rates in Canada and the

     U.S. Diverged?" Mimeo, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University

     (Nay).

Barro,   Robert. 1977.     "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the

     United   States." American Economic   Review 67 (March): 101—115.

__________________• 1977.        "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level

     in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 86 (August): 549—580.

Black, Fischer.    1982. "General Equilibrium and Business Cycles." National

     Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 950 (August).

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson. 1984. "Are Business Cycles All Alike?"

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1392 (June).

Bolton, Roger. 1980. "Multiregional Models: Introduction to a Symposium."
                                        —45—


     Journal of Regional Science 20 (May): 131—142.

Burbidge, John and Alan Harrison. 1985. "(Innovation) Accounting for the

      Impact of Fluctuations in.US Variables on the Canadian Economy."

     Department of Economics, McMaster University, WP 85—11, January, forth-

     coming,   Canadian Journal of Economics.
Burns,    Arthur and Wesley Mitchell. 1946. Measuring Business Cycles New York:
     National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chamberlain,   Gary. 1984.   "Panel Data." Chapter 22 in Z. Griliches and
     M. Intrilligator (eds.) Handbook of Econometrics Amsterdam:

     North Holland.

Cumby, R.; J. Huizinga; and M. Obstfeld. 1983. "Two—Step, Two—Stage Least

     Squares Estimation in Models with Rational Expectations." Journal of

     Econometrics 21 (April): 333—355.

Engle, Robert and Mark Watson. 1981. "A One—Factor Multiviariate Time Series

     Model of Metropolitan Wage Rates." Journal of the American Statistical

     Association 76 (December): 774—781.

Fischer, Stanley. 1977. "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

     Optimal Money Supply Literature." Journal of Political           85

     (February): 191—205.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United

     States: 1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Gordon, Robert and John Veitch. 1984. "Fixed Investment in the American

     Business Cycle, 1919—83". NBER Working Paper 1426 (August).

Hansen,   Lars P. 1982. "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of
     Monnts    Estimators." Econometrica 50 (January): 263—269.
                                         —46—


Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott. 1982. "Time to Build and Aggregate

     Fluctuations." Econometrica 50 (November): 1345—1370.

Lawrence, Cohn and Aloysius Siow. 1985. "Interest Rates and Investment

     Spending: Some Empirical Evidence for Post—War Producer Equipment.

     Forthcoming, Journal of Business.

Lilien, David. 1982a. "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment." Journal

     of Political Economy 90 (August): 777—793.

__________________    1982b.   "A Sectoral Model of the Business Cycle." MRG

     Working Paper No. 8231, Department of Economics, University of Southern

     California (December).

____________ and Robert Hall. 1984. "Cyclical Fluctuations in the Labor
     Market." Forthcoming in 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard. (eds.) The Handbook

     of Labor Economics Amsterdam: North Holland.

Litterman, Robert and Lawrence Weiss. 1985. "Money, Real Interest Rates and

     Output: A Reinterpretation of Postwar U.S. Data." Econometrica 53

     (January): 129—156.

Lehnann, Bruce. 1982. "What Happens During Business Cycles?"       Mimeo,

     Graduate School of Business, Columbia University (October).

Long, John and Charles Plosser. 1983. "Real Business Cycles." Journal of

     Political Econo 91 (February): 39—69.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money."

     Journal of Economic Theory 4 (April): 103—124.

                      1977. "Understanding Business Cycles." In K. Brunner

     and A. Meltzer (eds.) Stabilization of the Domestic and International

     Economy. Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public Policy, Vol. 5.
                                          —47—



      Amsterdam:    North Holland.

__________ and Edward Prescott. 1974. "Equilibrium Search and Unemployment."
      Journal   of Economic Theory 7 (February): 18 8—204.
Magnus, J. and H. Neudecker. 1984. "Symmetry, 0—i         Matrices   and Jacobians: A
     Review." Econometrics Discussion Paper ill, London School of Economics
     (December).
Mitchell, Welsley. 1951. What Happens During Business Cycles: A Progress
     Report. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Miskin, Fredrick.     1983. A Rational   Expectations   Approach to Macroeconomics:
     Testing Policy Ineffectiveness and Efficient Market Models. Chicago:
     University    of Chicago Press.

Newey, Whitney K. 1985. Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing."

     Mimeo, Department of Economics, Princeton University, forthcoming, Journal

     of Econometrics.

_____________ 1985b.      "Notes on Minimum Distance Estimation Using Instrumental

     Variable Residuals." Mimeo, Department of Economics, Princeton

     University.

Phelps, Eduund. 1970. "Introduction: The New Microecoriornics in Employment

     and Inflation Theory." In E. Phelps (eds.) Microeconomic Foundations of

     Employment and Inflation Theory New York: Norton.

____________ and John Taylor. 1977. "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy

    Under Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy 85 (February):

     163—190.

Sargent, Thomas J. 1976. "A Classical Macroeconomic Model for the United

    States." Journal of Political Economy 84 (April): 207—237.
                                        —48—


_____________ and Christopher A. Sims. 1975. "Business Cycle Modelling
     without Pretending to Have to Much A Prioria Economic Theory." In New

     Methods in Business Cycle Reserach: Proceedings from a Conference.

     Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Sims, Christopher A. 1972. "Money, Income and Causality." American Economic

     Review 62 (September): 540—552.

__________________      1980.   "Macroeconomics and Reality." Econometrica 48

     (January): 1—48.

Watson, Mark and Robert Engle. 1982. "The EM Algorithm for Dynamic Factor and

    MIMIC Models." Economics Department Working Paper 82—6, University of

    California, San Diego.

Whalley, John. 1983. "Induced Distortions of Interprovinical Activity: An

    Overview of Issues." In M. Trebilcock; J.R.S. Pritchard; T.J. Courchene;

    and J. Whalley (eds.) Federalism and the Canadian Economic Union.

    Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Zarnxdtz, Victor. 1985. "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical

    Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature 23 (June): 523—580.
                                                                             Table    1



                                   Means,   Standard Deviations and Correlations for lndustrj               pyme it   C   roth'


A.     Mean and Standard Deviation

                                                         Manii—              Con—          Trans—
                             Forestry          Mining                           .                       Trade         Finance             Services
                                                        facturing      structiori         portation                                                   Government
                                                                                                      ______ ________       ________________
Mean                         —.0113            .0171      .0128          .0179              .0168       .0349             .0476            .0482        .0317
Standard Deviation           (.0760)         (.0514)     (.0364)        (.0560)            (.0179)     (.0218)        (.0231)             (.0165)      (.0223)


B.     Simple Correlations Above the Diagonal /         Partial    Correlations Below the Diagonal-b'

                                                         Ma flu—          Con—             Trans—
                             Forestry          Mining                                                   Trade         Finance             Services    Government
                                   _________            facturing      struction          portation
——                                                                                                                                -   -   _________         _____-
Forestry                      1.               .497       .689           .478               .590        .396              .468             .296       —.097
MinIng                        .596          1.            .451           .462               .533        .373              .077             .307       —.194
Manufacturing                 .397           .572        1.              .793               .621        .821              .472             .589       —.150
Construction                  .365           .486         .788          1.                  .567        .692              .369             .523       —.057
Transportation                .523           .548        .692            .649              1.           .614              .410             .276        .142
Trade                         .115           .365        .812            .642               .582       1.                 .563             .570        .105
Finance                       .180           .028        .198            .265               .286        .437          1.                   .403        .325
Services                     —.071           .296        .444            .494               .123        .457              .204            1.          —.050
Government                   —.104          —.190       —.174          —.027                .157        .145              .397            —.042        1.


!IMeasured as the log first difference of industry employment.                      The sample period is 1963—1982.

-1The partial correlations are based on the correlations of        the residuals of regressions of the log first difference of
     employment in   each   of the industries on the current value and first lag of the change in the log of U.S. GNP.
                                                   Tab1      2


         Means, Standard Deviations and Correlations for Provincial                Eynent      Growth'



A. Mean and Standard Deviation

                         NFLD1'       NS/NB'         QUEBEC       ONTARIO    MAN/SASK' ALBERTA              BCe!

Mean                    .0293           .0214        .0241          .0295      .0244        .0525        .0395
Standard Deviation     (.0287)         (.0206)      (.0241)        (.0182)   (.0175)      (.0213)      (.0290)




B.     Simple Correlations Above the Diagonal        /   Partial   Correlations Below the Diagonal-'

                         NFLD          NS/NB         QUEBEC        ONTARIO   MAN/SASK      ALBERTA          BC

NFLD                   1.               .853         .830           .818       .610         .263         .764
NS/NB                   .799           1.            .896           .768       .639         .558         .868
QUEBEC                  .731            .868        1.              .884       .707         .579         .877
ONTARIO                 .695            .697         .815          1.          .644         .493         .853
MAN/SASK                .582            .601         .705           .672      1.            .519         .673
ALBERTA                 .069            .497         .491           .351       .482       1.             .662
BC                      .617            .831         .802           .742       .669         .605       1.



-Measured as the log first difference            of industry employment.           The sample period
     is 1963—1982.

     NFLD denotes Newfoundland.

'Data for Nova Scotia     (NS) and New Brunswick (NB) combined.

"Data for Manitoba     (MAN)   and   Saskatchewan    (SASK)      combined.

'BC     denotes British Columbia.

-'The partial correlations are based on the correlations of the residuals of regressions of
  the log first difference of employment in each of the provinces on the current value and
  first lag of the change in the log of U.S. GNP.
                                                 TABLE   3



                          AVERAGE PERCENTAGE SHARE IN CANADIAN EMPLOYMENT-'
                                 BY PROVINCE AND INDUSTRY: 1961—1982




                                                                                           ROW
                   NFLD                            ONTARIO                         BC             b/
                              NS/NB     QUEBEC               MAN/SASK ALBERTA             TOTALS—

FORESTRY           .042       .132       .281       .170      .027      .034      .306     .992
MINING             .078       .129       .369       .509      .175      .427      .172    1.859

MANUFACTURING      .200       .934      7.499    12.078       .984      .844     1.956   24.495

CONSTRUCTION       .123       .339      1.445     2.125       .432      .689      .606    5.759

TRANSPORTATION     .229       .680      2.715     3.402      1.095      .883     1.272   10.276

TRADE              .281       .969     4.168      6.620      1.488     1.464     1.803   16.793

FINANCE            .040       .203      1.320     2.163       .366      .369      .527    4.988

SERVICES           .461      1.616     7.282     10.746      2.360    2.486      2.942   27.893

GOVERNMENT         .143       .521      1.607     2.761       .623      .587      .703    6.945

COLUMN TOTALSk/   1.597     5.523     26.686     40.574      7.550    7.783     10.287


'Deflned as sum over industries and provinces listed.

-"May not sum to 100% because of rounding.
                                                                     Table 4A

                               TSLS Results    for Emplyment'    by Industry and Province (Newfoundland Excluded)


Industry                                        -
                                                       Manu—         Con—        Trans—
Variable'°"                 Forestry     Mining                                              Trade      Finance     Services   Government
                                                     facturing     struction    portation

Intercept                   —0.0191     —0.0371      —0.0124       —0.1234      —0.0133     —0.0037      0.0062      0.0077     —0.0043
                            (0.0434)    (0.0303)     (0.0224)      (0.0367)     (0.0102)    (0.0116)    (0.0130)    (0.0086)    (0.0108)
Current Real                 0.7953      0.4855        1.1157       1.9591       0.1836      0.4132      0.3702      0.2068     —0.0928
  u.s. GNP                  (0.5163)    (0.3327)      (0.1037)     (0.3837)      (0.1263)   (0.1342)    (0.1526)    (0.0908)    (0.1469)
Lagged Real                  1.5409     —0.0856      —0.0407       —0.4132        0.1721     0.1377      0.1726      0.1536    —0.0523
    u.s.   GNP              (0.6164)    (0.3793)      (0.2541)     (0.4238)      (0.1615)   (0.1470)    (0.1749)    (0.1054)    (0.1589)
Lagged   Own                —0.1374      2.8884       0.8001        1.0831        1.3834
             Pr1vince                                                                        0.2916      1.1294      0.3192      0.2811
    Emp1oyment-             (1.3112)    (1.0252)     (0.4828)      (0.9388)     (0.3392)    (0.3217)    (0.4263)    (0.2502)    (0.3354)
Lagged                      —1 .7568    —1.5875      —1 .4558       2.4403      —0.8138     —0.0642
       Canadin                                                                                          —0.9940      0.1204      0.4687
  Employment2-              (1.4672)    (1.0173)     (0.6888)      (1.2768)     (0.4410)    (0.4885)    (0.4625)    (0.2957)    (0.3853)

Lagged     Own               0.4481     —0.2245       0.8460       —0.8788      —0.0809      0.3274
                 In1ustry                                                                                0.3955      0.2695      0.5746
    Employment2-            (0.2097)    (0.2526)     (0.4447)      (0.3251)     (0.2762)    (0.3601)    (0.1928)    (0.1933)    (0.1500)
                            0.1887       0.0942       0.4182        0.2130       0.1783      0.1402     0.1785      0.2108      0.2036
S.E.E.                       0.1166      0.0736       0.0343        0.0851       0.0288      0.0292     0.0351      0.0206      0.0305
n                              114            114       114           114          114         114         114        114          114

1Dependent       variable measured in log first—differences.      Standard errors in parentheses.

-'Independent variables measured in log first—differences.

21Treated as endogenous.        See text for,the list of instrumental variables.
                                                                Table 48

                            OLS Results for Employmental' by Industry and Province (Newfoundland excluded)


Industry                                          Manu—         Con—        Trans—
                         Forestry     Mining                                            Trade     Finance    Services   Government
Variable                                        facturing    struction     portation

Intercept                —0.0128     —0.0302     —0.0125      —0.1156      —0.0023     —0.0062     0.0136     0.0092     —0.0047
                         (0.0393)    (0.0246)    (0.0175)     (0.0334)      (0.0086)   (0.0102)   (0.0120)   (0.0077)    (0.0100)
Current Real              0.6308      0.4496      1.0521       1.9238        0.1355     0.4251     0.3360     0.2213     —0.0547
  U.S. GNP               (0.5023)    (0.2996)    (0.1573)     (0.3747)      (0.1142)   (0.1278)   (0.1483)   (0.0870)    (0.1423)

Lagged Real               1.7187      0.0974      0.0539      —0.4333        0.1466     0.1373     0.2022     0.1496    —0.0731
  U.S. GNP               (0.6021)    (0.3483)    (0.2285)     (0.4210)      (0.1454)   (0.1447)   (0.1722)   (0.1023)   (0.1566)
Lagged Own Province      —1 .2531     1.3706      0.4660       1.1056        0.7324     0.5692     0.8197     0.5839      0.4445
  Employment             (0.6863)    (0.4113)    (0.2028)     (0.5085)      (0.1582)   (0.1227)   (0.2076)   (0.1202)    (0.1813)

Lagged Canadian          —0.8058     —0.5555     —1 .0531      2.1110      —0.2254     —0.2799    —0.8038    —0.0448      0.3622
  Employment             (1.2367)    (0.7274)    (0.6252)     (1.1124)     (0.3388)    (0.4131)   (0.3837)   (0.2510)    (0.3269)

Lagged Own Industry       0.3108      0.0545      0.6860      —0.7206      —0.3243      0.3157     0.3392     0.1569     0.5007
  Employment             (0.1940)    (0.1869)    (0.3619)     (0.2743)     (0.2262)    (0.3021)   (0.1700)   (0.1642)   (0.1364)

R2                        0.2050      0.1203      0.4214      0.2329        0.2223      0.2160    0.2196      0.3266     0.2385

S.E.E.                    0.1149      0.0688      0.0339      0.0849        0.0264      0.028)    0.0347     0.0201      0.0303
n                           114         114         114          114          114         114        114        114        114

a!
—  Dependent   variable measured in log first—differences.   Standard errors in parentheses.

'Independent variables measured in log first—differences.
                                                Table 5A

         Minimum   Distance Estimates TSLS Residuals (ITewfound1and Excluded)


A. Industry Coefficients on National, Province and Industry Shocks

  Industry                 National Shock                Province Shock          Industry Shock
                                a!                            a/                           a!
                           1.0—                            1.0—
                            .6967 (.3393)-/
Forestry
                                                            .8561 (.5367)              1.0_
Mining                                                                                 l.0,,
Manufacturing               .5090      (.2317)              .4267   (.2579)
                                                                                       1.0•
Construction               1.3912      (.5958)              .2122   (.3018)
Transportation              .5149      (.2019)              .2376   (.1532)
                                                                                       1.0,,
                                                                                       1.0-i
Trade                       .3132      (.1653)              .2593   (.1663)            i.•,
Finance                     .3113      (.1826)              .3282   (.2321)            1.0-'
Services
Government
                            .2221
                           —.1347
                                       (.1182)
                                       (.1111)
                                                            .1396
                                                            .0359
                                                                    (.0962)
                                                                    (.1008)
                                                                                       l.0
                                                                                       1.0-s



B. Variances of National, Province and Industry Shocks
    i)     Variance of Canadian Shock': .1085 (.0859)
   ii)     Variances of Province Shocks-a":
              NS/NB      QUEBEC          ONTARIO MAN/SASK           ALBERTA       BC

             —.1395        .1492         —.0353       .3574          .1781       .0582
             (.1593)      (.1793)        (.1582)     (.4299)        (.2104)     (.1308)


  iii) Variances of Industry Shocks-b-":

  FOR.        M1N.      MANU.          CONST.   TRANS.      TRADE        FIN.     SER'.           GOV.

—.0680      .0362       .0289        —.0129      .0028      .0166       .0228     .0084          .0024
(.0766) (.0386) (.0142) (.0632) (.0060) (.0089) (.0125)                          (.0045)        (.0053)

'Norma1ized to 1.0.

-"Multip1ied by 100.

'Standard    errors of parameter estimates in parentheses.
                                            Table 5B
          tfinirnum Distance Estimates OLS Residuals (Newfoundland Excluded)


A. Industry Coefficients on National, Province and Industry Shocks
  Industry                 National Shock                 Province Shock          Industry Shock
Forestry                   l.0-'                 /        i.o!'                         i.o.
Mining                      .7303 (.3221)                  .7578    (.5608)             l.0'
Manufacturing               .5431 (.2292)                  .5820    (.4075)             i.o-
Construction               1.286      (.5105)              .5747    (.4296)             1.0•-
Transportation              .5020    (.1898)               .2122    (.1657)             1.0--
Trade                       .3278    (.1610)               .3803    (.2683)             1.0
FInance                     .3012    (.1771)               .3085    (.2576)             i.0
Services                    .1940    (.1110)               .1963    (.1519)
Government                 —.1339    (.1345)               .2284    (.2148)
                                                                                        1.&-,,
                                                                                        1.0-a-




B. Varijmc of National, Province and                 Industry   Shocks

    i)     Variance of Canadian Shock': .1152 (.0877)

   ii)     Variances of Province Shocks-p-":

               NS/NB      QUEBEC       ONTARIO MAN! SASK            ALBERTA        BC

             —.1196        .1175      —.0840            .1395        .1570        .0621
             (.1500)      (.1594)      (.1405)       (.2204)        (.2080)      (.1216)


  iii) Variances of Industry Shocks":
  FOR.         MEN.      MANU.      CONST. TRANS.           TRADE        FIN.     SEW.             COy.

—.0792      .0302      .0237        .0043       .0018       .0152        .0230     .0098          .0024
(.0759)    (.0341) (.0131) (.0500) (.0053) (.0085) (.0123)                       (.0047)         (.0059)


1Norrualized to 1.0.
-'Multip1ied   by 100.

1Standard errors of parameter estimates in parentheses.
                                                                   Table 6

                  Fitted Industry Covariances' across Different Provinces1         (OLS Residuals,    Newfoundland Excluded)


                                         .         Manu—          Con—       Trans—
                         Forestry    Mining                          .             .       Trade         Finance     Services   Government
                                                 facturing     struction     portatlon
Forestry                  .0360S1    .l208-"       .0457         .1187         .0294       .0348            .0517     .0274      —.0280
                                     .0842         .0626         .1482         .0579       .0377            .0347     .0224      —.0154

Mining                               .0917         .0394         .1123         .0309       .0709            .0240     .0149      —.0304
                                                   .0457         .1083         .0423       .0276            .0254     .0163      — .0127



Manufacturing                                      .0577         .0615         .0382       .0355            .0071     .0104      —.0142
                                                                 .0805         .0314       .0205            .0189     .0121      —.0084

Construction                                                     .0195         .0686       .0481            .0206     .0290       —.0273
                                                                               .0744       .0486            .0447     .0288       —.0198

Transportation                                                                 .0309       .0230            .0225     .0114       —.0143
                                                                                           .0189            .0174     .0122       —.0077
Trade                                                                                      .0276            .0077     .0109       —.0076
                                                                                                            .0114     .0073       —.0051

Finance                                                                                                     .0334     .0090        .0059
                                                                                                                      .0068       —.0047

Services                                                                                                              .0142       —.0081
                                                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                                                    .0030

Government                                                                                                                         .0045


1Multiplied by    100.

WDiagonal    elements are estimates of   fa2 +        while   off—diagonal   elements estimate
                                                                                                     f1fa
-Minimum distance and sample  averages jroduce identical estimates of diagonal elements.             These estimates are
  presented to provide the reader with an idea of the relative magnitudes.
jFor  the off—diagonal elements, bottom number is based on minimum distance estimator and top number is based on
  the sample average of the covariances.
                                                                   Table 7A

                                     Qimulative Impact of U.S. Shock (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Excluded)'


 Time                                                 Manu—        Con—        Trans—
                National    Forestry      Mining                                          Trade
Ho riz on                                                       struction                            Finance   Services   Government
                                                    facturing                 portation

        0        1.342       1.554        1.108       2.592       4.740          .334     1.047       0.828      .545       —.135
        1        1.486       2.548        1.729       2.058       1.509         1.032     1.425       1.098     1.368        .782
        2        1.131      —1.778        1.393        .890       4.214          .451     1.029        .536     1.104       1.558
        3         .367      —4.083         .860       —.239        .608          .293      .496        .016      .649       1.748
    4             .050      —2.553         .298       —.549        .597          .025      .164       —.095      .227       1.201
    5            —.044       —.699         .134       —.418       —.311          .035      .079       —.017      .078        .639
   10            —.017        .070        —.001       —.031       —.026         —.008     —.011       —.004     —.016       —.017
   15            —.001        .006           .001     —.001       —.003          .000      .000        .000      .000       —.005

.'All       entries are multiplied by 100.


                                                                   Table 7B

                                Qimulative Impact of Canadian Shock (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Exc1uded)a'


 Time                                                 Ilanu—       Con—        Trans—
                National    Forestry      Mining                                          Trade
Horizon                                             facturing   struction                           Finance    Services   Government
                                                                              portation

    0            1.348       3.395        2.479       1.843       4.367         1.704     1.113       1.022      .658       —.454
        1         .634     —1.728         1.230        .475       1.188          .097      .740        .368      .829        .858
    2            .352      —1.824            .601     —.047       1.187          .286      .417       .135      .472         .941
    3            .127      —1.272            .364     —.243        .286          .083      .235       .050      .265         .756
    4            .036       —.641            .178      .249        .213          .041      .113       .017      .112         .483
    5           —.012        .264            .093     —.199       —.025          .010      .049       .004      .040         .272
   10           —.008        .042            .002     —.012       —.016          .004     —.005      —.001     —.008        —.015
   15            .000        .003            .001      .001       —.001          .000      .000       .000      .000        —.003


'All        entries are multiplied by 100.
                                                            Table 7C

           Impact of Industry Shock on National Employment Growth (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Excluded)a'


 Time                               Manu—          Con—        Trans—
           Forestry    Mining                                               Trade      Finance     Services   Government
Horizon                           facturing     struction     portation

   0          .011       .031       .381          .038             .044     .207        .076        .276             .034
   1          .007      .013        .389         —.014             .000     .136        .052        .138             .029
   2          .001     —.002        .242          .008         —.003        .028        .012        .002             .012
   3          .000     —.001        .155         —.007         —.001        .002        .002       —.010             .005
   4          .000     —.003        .075          .001         —.004       —.019        .006        .027         —.001
   5          .000     —.002        .037         —.003         —.001       —.016        .006       —.018         —.002
  10          .000      .000       —.004          .000          .000       —.001       —.001       —.002         —.001
  15          .000      .000        .000          .000             .000     .000        .000        .000          .000


1Al1   entries are multiplied by 100.


                                                            Table 7D
                                                                                                                a!
          Impact of Industry Shock on Own   Industry   Employment Growth (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Excluded)


 Time                               Manu—          Con—        Trans—
           Forestry    Mining                                               Trade      Finance     Services   Government
Horizon                           facturing     struction     portation

   0         1.108      1.737      1.540          .654             .430    1.232       1.515        .991             .494
   1          .312       .137       .845          .349             .124     .449        .516        .305             .275
   2          .073       .032       .364          .207             .043     .183        .176        .123             .161
   3          .014       .011       .117          .124             .016     .067        .060        .022             .091
   4          .001       .007     —.006           .068             .006     .023        .020        .000             .050
   5          .000                                             —
                         .003     —.046           .044             .003     .003        .006       —.014             .025
  10          .000       .000     —.011           .028             .000    —.002        .000       —.002         —.001
  15          .000       .000       .000          .000             .000     .000        .000        .000             .000


'A11   entries are multiplied by 100.
                                                            Table 7E

                          Average Impact of Provincial Shocks (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Excluded)a/


 Time                                           Manu—        Con—       Trans—
          National    Forestry    Mining                                           Trade      Finance    Services   Government
Horizon                                       facturing   struction    portation

   0        .175       .470            .364      .273        .270         .100      .179        .145       .092        .107
   1        .113      -.213            .158      .086        .366         .054      .107        .052       .108        .194
   2        .053      —.295            .101     —.007        .098         .038      .066        .020       .078        .188
   3        .025      —.198            .055     —.037        .102         .014      .037        .007       .041        .138
   4        .006      —.109            .031     —.041        .008         .008      .019        .003       .020        .089
   5       —.001      —.044            .015     —.033        .015         .001      .008        .001       .007        .050
  10       —.001        .007           .000     —.002      —.004          .000     —.001        .000      —.001       —.002
  11        .000        .000           .000      .000        .000         .000      .000        .000       .000        .000

-1All entries are multiplied by 100.
                                                       Table   8A
               Variance in Innovation of Canadian Employment Growth (OLS                Newfoundland Excluded)
                                                                           Residuals,


                  Sum of Variance                                   Share of Variance Due to:
Employment           from all                            .                                 .                  .
                                          U.S.        National      All Industry    AllProvince      All
                   Sources x 100
                                                                                                            Idiosyncratic
Variable                                 ust            (ce)
                                                                         ••         (v ... vp)      (uiit                Upi)
                       (1)                (2)           (3)              (4)                 (5)                  (6)
National              .0417               .432          .438               .066           .037                    .029
Forestrj              .3806               .064          .303           0.1                .044                    .589
Mining                .2004               .061          .306               .151           .049                    .433
Manufacturing         .1342               .501          .253             .177             .030                    .040
Construction          .4726               .475          .404             .009             .008                    .104
Trans./Util.          .0350               .032          .829             .053             .016                    .070
Trade                 .0495               .222          .250             .307             .031                    .190
Finance               .0517               .133          .202             .444             .020                    .201
Services              .0207               .144          .210             .475             .021                    .150
Government            .0272               .007          .076             .090             .018                    .809
N.S./N.B.             .0467               .307         .368              .045           0.                        .281
Quebec                .0618               .313         .304              .050            .273                     .060
Ontario               .0454               .444         .399              .073           0.                        .085
Man./Sask.            .0495               .242         .312              .042             .309                    .094
Alberta               .0632               .231         .295              .032             .307                    .136
B.C.                  .0588               .268         .319              .038             .144                    .230

-1In this table (and Tables A—5, A—7, and A—9), 0. denotes a value that is zero because a
                                                                                          negative point estimate
  for a variance has been set to zero.
                                                      Table 8B

                  Steay-St ate    ya   ce_jn!p1oyment Growth   (OLS ResIduals,    Newfound land   Excluded)


                Sum of Variance                                      Share of Variance    Due to:
Employment         from all              U.S.       National         All Industry      All Province    All Idiosyncratic
 Change          Sources x 100
Virtable                                (c5)          (ce)
                                                                                             •. Vp)    (uii             upr)
                     (1)                 (2)          (3) ________        (4)              (5)         _______   (6)      ——
NatIonal            .0880                .617         .268                .064            .027                   .024

Forestry            .8795                .407         .227                .041            .032                   .293
Mining              .2888                .243         .284                .116            .048                   .309
Manufacturing       .2098                .589         .182                .164            .024                   .041
Constructloi        .7883                .550         .279                .050            .015                   .105
Trans./Uttl.        .0515                .285         .582                .057            .016                   .059
Trade               .0967                .462         .210                .189            .024                   .115
Finance             .0728                .301         .165                .357            .016                   .161
Services            .0710                .544         .201                .177            .021                   .057
Government          .1605                .502         .170                .078            .032                   .217

N.S./N.B.           .0912                .494         .245                .042            .000                   .218
Quebec              .1194                .482         .201                .054            .26                    .04
0ritirio            .0978                .614         .240                .075            .001                   .070
Man./Sask.          .0979                .403         .219                .041            .257                   .080
Alberta             .1328                .379         .214                .033            .259                   .115
B.C.                .1070                .443         .219                .036            .116                   .185
                                                                       Table A—i

                               TSLS Results for Employment' by Industry and Province (Newfoundland Included)

     INDUSTRY

                       FORESTRY      MINING    MANUFACTURING       CONSTRUCTION    TRANSPORT    TRADE     FINANCE    SERVICES   GOVERNMENT
VARIABLE h/

 INTERCEPT             —0.0202      —0.0332      —0.0151            —0.1264         —0.0196    —0.0066     0.0049     0.0054      0.0029
                       (0.0393)     (0.0309)     (0.0233)            (0.0351)       (0.0104)   (0.0114)   (0.0127)   (0.0080)    (0.0102)
CURRENT      REAL       0.8469       0.6036       1.0708              1.8040         0.2370     0.4021     0.3372     0.2818    —0.0292
    U.S.   C.N.P.      (0.4892)     (0.3652)     (0.1754)            (0.3761)       (0.1352)   (0.1378)   (0.1525)   (0.0847)    (0.1443)
LAGGED REAL             1.5229      —0.3044       0.0670            —0.3140          0.1980     0.2621     0.3426     0.1130    —0.1441
U.S. G.N.P.            (0.5834)     (0.4286)     (0.2750)           (0.4163)        (0.1738)   (0.1504)   (0.1760)   (0.0987)   (0.1565)
LAGGED OWN              0.2010       3.4424       1.1268             1.6077         1.6639      0.2420     0.9844     0.3694     0.2357
PROVINCE               (1.3286)     (1.2458)     (0.5675)           (0.9935)       (0.3811)    (0.3558)   (0.4490)   (0.2485)   (0.3566)
EMPLOYMENT

LAGGED                 —2.1992     —1.9791       —1.6055             1.9686        —1.0702     —0.1287    —1.099      0.1264     0.4495
CANADIAN               (1.5303)    (1.2985)      (0.7376)           (1.3205)       (0.5081)    (0.5258)   (0.5136)   (0.3089)   (0.4173)
EMPLOYMENT

LAGGED OWN              0.4154     —0.5323        0.5962            —0.9131        —0.0101      0.3838     0.5683     0.2508     0.4994
INDUSTRY               (0.1956)    (0.2830)      (0.4891)           (0.3139)       (0.2916)    (0.3558)   (0.1878)   (0.1752)   (0.1460)
EMPLOYMENT

R2                      0.1773      0.1051        0.3508             0.1794         0.1885      0.1483    0.2015     0.2326      0.1539
S.E.E.                  0.1196      0.0889        0.0395             0.0902         0.0332     0.0324     0.0382     0.0209      0.0325
n                        133         133           133                133            133        133        133        133         133

3/
     Dependent Variable measured in log first—differences.
b/
     Independent    Variables measured In log first—differences.
                                                                     Table A—2

                        OLS Results for Employment-s" by Industry and Province (Newfoundland
                                                                                             Included)

     I NDUS'I
            KY                     .

                      FORESTRY     MINING     MANUFACTURING    CONSTRUCTION      TRANSPORT    TRADE     FINANCE    SERVICES   GOVERNMENT
VARIABLEbI

INTERCEPT             —0.01811    —0.0332       —0.0099          —0.1143          —0.0106    —0.0091     0.0102     0.0082     0.0030
                      (0.0370)    (0.0258)      (0.0174)         (0.0326)         (0.0088)   (0.0104)   (0.0121)   (0.0073)    (0.0098)

CURRENT REAL           0.6865      0.5798        1.0130           1.7467           0.1890     0.4204     0.3168     0.2882    —0.0040
 U.S. G.N.P.          (0.4775)    (0.3244)      (0.1585)         (0.3671)         (0.1182)   (0.1323)   (0.1496)   (0.0830)   (0.1410)

LAGGED REAL            1.7089     —0.0480        0.1126          —0.3299           0.1802    (1.2547     0.3641     0.1100    —0.1644
U.S. G.N.P.           (0.5705)    (0.3824)      (0.2303)         (0.4131)         (0.1515)   (0.1481)   (0.1740)   (0.0974)   (0.1551)

LAGGED OWN            —0.8888      1.3692        0.2384           1.4854           0.7537     0.4834     0.1310     0.5109      0.2413
PROVINCE              (0.6414)    (0.4415)      (0.1996)         (0.4920)         (0.1604)   (0.1749)   (0.2061)   (0.1131)    (0.1769)
EMPLOYMENT

LAGGED                —1.1804     —0.3479       —0.8021           1.6475         —0.1819     —0.3477    —0.8772     0.0357      0.4853
CANADIAN              (1.1917)    (0.8042)      (0.6204)         (1.0972)        (0.3589)    (0.4273)   (0.3936)   (0.2436)    (0.3284)
EMPLOYMENT

LAGGED OWN             0.2821     —0.1389        0.5505          —0.7077         —0.2508      0.4106     0.4885     0.1553     0.4512
INDUSTRY              (0.1818)    (0.2007)      (0.3651)         (0.2696)         (0.2349)   (0.30/8)   (0.1710)   (0.1561)   (0.1363)
EMPLOYMENT

R2                     0.1830      0.1106        0.3655          0.2080           0.2233     0.1995      0.2300    0.3125      0.1675

S.E.E.                 0.1179      0.0811        0.0367          0.0900           0.0295     0.0321      0.0379    0.0207      0.0325
n                        133           133         133              133              133        133        133        133        133


a/Dependent      Variable measured in log first—differences.

b/Independent Variables measured in log first—differences.
                                                    Table A—3

          Minimum       Distance   Estimates 2 SLS Residuals (Newfoundland Included)




A. Industry Coefficients on National, Province and Industry Shocks


  Industry                       National Shock               Province Shock          Industry Shock

                                      a!                         a!                             a/
Forestry                         1.0—                         1.0—
                                                     cI                                   1.0-_I
Mining                            .8938      (.4064)—         1.3176    (.5991)
Manufacturing                     .5638      (.2242)           .6245    (.2744)
                                                                                          1.0,
                                                                                          1.0•,
Construction                     1.1037      (.5247)          —.3268    (.3815)
                                                                                          1.0—,
Transportation                    .4651      (.1744)           .4121    (.1930)           1.0—,
Trade                             .2290      (.1494)           .0060    (.1425)
Finance                           .2127      (.1656)           .0941    (.1662)
                                                                                          1.0
Services                          .2020      (.1111)           .1157    (.0799)
                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                          1.0—i
Government                       —.1570      (.1911)           .0648    (.1325)           1.0—


B. Variances of National, Province and Industry Shocks

    i)      Variance of Canadian Shock-":                 .1234 (.0924)
                                             b/
   ii)      Variances      of Province Shocks—
         NFLD           NS/NB          QUEBEC       ONTARIO     MAN/SASK ALBERTA               BC

     .4517              —.0799             .0656     .0065       .2510       .1179        —.0172
    (.3894)             (.0857)       (.0832)       (.0919)     (.2444)     (.1191)       (.0672)

  iii) Variances of Industry Shock":


  FOR.           MIN.        MANTJ.         CONST. TRANS.       TRADE       FIN.      SERV.          COy.

 .0173          .0756      .0159            .0596   —.0031      .0168      .0239       .0096         .0059
(.0739) (.0594) (.0127) (.0774) (.0062) (.0097) (.0134)                               (.0048) (.0067)

—
a!
   Normalized      to 1.0.

1Multiplied by 100.

.2iStandard errors of parameter estimates in parentheses.
                                                Table A—4

           Minimum Distance Estimates OLS Residuals (Newfoundland Included)



A. Industry Coefficients            onNational, Province and Industry Shocks
   Industry                     National Shock           Province Shock           Industry Shock

Forestry
Mining
                                l.0-'
                                 .9366   (.3599)—
                                                 c/
                                                         1.3317     (.7875)
                                                                                      1•0i
Manufacturing                    .5934   (.2062)          .5286     (.2863)
                                                                                      l.0-,
                                                                                      l.0•
Construction                     .1053   (.4303)         —.2948     (.4921)
Transportation                   .4566   (.1498)          .3527     (.2159)
Trade                            .2272   (.1353)         —.0853     (.1926)
                                                                                      1.O,
                                                                                      1.O,
Finance                          .2030   (.1525)         —.0233      (.2061)          1.07
Services                         .1639   (.0983)          .1003     (.1011)
Government                                                                            1.0-s
                                —.1475   (.1068)          .0254     (.1700)           1.O

B. Variances of National, Province and Industry Shocks

    1)      Variance of Canadian Shock': .1357 (.0916)
   ii)      Variances of Province Shocks-b':

         NFLD          NS/NB        QUEBEC     ONTARIO MAN/SASK ALBERTA                    BC

      .4352            —.0967        .0402     —.0048        .0665        .0666        .0431
    (.4414)            (.1001)     (.0809)     (.0966)      (.1195)     (.0993)       (.0766)

  iii) Variances of Industry Shocks—


  FOR.          MIN.       MANU.         CONST. TRANS.      TRADE       FIN.       SERV.          GOV.

 .0200       .0495   .0134   .0568  —.0012    .0160   .0242                        .0111         .0058
(.0643)     (.0482) (.0114) (.0661) (.0049) (.0094) (.0134)                       (.0051)       (.0066)


-1Normalized to 1.0.
--'Mu1tip1ied    by 100.

'Standard errors of parameter estimates in parentheses.
                                                       Table        A—5

            Variance in Innovation of Canadian Employment Growth (TSLS Residuals, Newfoundland Included)



                 Sum of Variance                                          Share of Variance Due to:
Employment          from all             U.S.        National             All Industry   All Province                          All Idiosyncratic
 Change           Sources x 100                                                     ...   11        )            ...           (u
                                        (E             (c       )                                       (v it
Variable                                                                                                                            lit          u1)
                                                                                                                       vPt )
                                             ust )          t             (fl it               It
                      (1)                (2)           (3)                          (4)                          (5)                      (6)



National             .0407               .487          .416                         .061                        .013                      .022


Forestry             .3967               .109          .311                         .044                        .016                      .521
Mining               .2875               .077          .343                         .263                        .075                      .242
Manufacturing        .1287               .541          .305                         .124                        .025                      .006
Construction         .4550               .434          .330                         .131                        .002                      .103
Trans./Util.         .0377               .091          .708                        0.                           .042                      .159
Trade                .0425               .231          .152                         .394                        .000                      .223
Finance              .0490               .141          .114                         .488                        .001                      .256
Services             .0223               .216          .226                         .433                        .005                      .120
Government           .0294               .002          .103                         .199                        .001                      .695

Newfoundland         .0853               .190          .212                         .026                        .318                      .254
N.S./N.B.            .0472               .346          .333                         .046                    0.                            .275
Quebec               .0508               .421          .350                         .052                     .093                         .084
Ontario              .0439               .499          .388                         .064                     .010                         .039
Man./Sask.           .0455               .302          .302                         .048                        .229                      .118
Alberta              .0538               .305          .315                         .047                        .096                      .236
B.C.                 .0539               .332          .320                         .041                    0.                            .307
                                                        Table A—6

               Steady—State Variance of Canadian Employment Growth (TSLS Residuals, Newfoundland    Included)



                 Sum of Variance                                    Share of Variance Due to:
Employment          from all              U.S.        National      All Industry   All Province      All Idiosyncratic
                  Sources x 100                                                          ...
Variable                                 (c5)           (ct)                      (v1          v)   (uiit          u)
                      (1)                 (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)
National              .0895               .670          .251             .051           .011                .017

Forestry             .9361                .446          .211             .059           .012                .272
MinIng               .4183                .167          .256             .258           .066                .253
Manufacturing        .1960                .628          .221             .115           .023                .013
Construction         .9195                .480          .196             .180           .020                .123
Trans./Util.         .0825                .463          .414             .017           .024                .082
Trade                .0837                .511          .112             .241           .000                .136
Finance              .0951                .368          .067             .369           .001                .194
Services             .0790                .589          .199             .160           .007                .045
Government           .1241                .488          .149             .106           .010                .247

Newfoundland         .2823                .176          .091             .017           .396                .320
N.S./N.B.            .1072                .458          .192             .035           .003                .312
Quebec               .1174                .551          .201             .045           .108                .095
Ontario              .1009                .653          .223             .059           .016                .049
Man./Sask.           .1085                .403          .175             .043           .247                .133
Alberta              .1546                .368          .173             .044           .118                .297
B.C.                 .1230                .439          .180             .030           .004                .347
                                                        Table A—7

               Variance in Innovation of Canadian Employment Growth (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Included)




                  Sum of Variance                                   Share of Variance Due to:
Employment           from all             U.S.        National      All Industry   All Province        All Idiosyncratic
                   Sources x 100                                                          .
Variable                                 uSt            (cr)        (hit           (vi        .. Vp)   (u11          ''PIt
                       (1)                (2)           (3)                 (4)           (5)                 (6)
National              .0401               .463          .449                .066         .004                 .024

Forestry              .3694               .077          .367                .005         .010                 .539
Mining                .2641               .077          .451                .188         .044                 .240
Manufacturing         .1267               .492          .377                .105         .009                 .017
Construction          .4358               .425          .345                .130         .001                 .098
Trans./Util.          .0340               .064          .832               0.            .016                 .088
Trade                 .0438               .245          .160                .365         .060                 .229
Finance               .0477               .128          .117                .508         .000                 .247
Services              .0226               .224          .162                .493         .002                 .120
Government            .0293               .000          .101                .199         .000                 .700

Newfoundland          .0754               .202          .250                .029         .233                 .287
N.S./N.B.             .0460               .332          .357                .047     0.                       .263
Quebec                .0488               .408          .389                .052         .037                 .115
Ontario               .0430               .476          .426                .062     0.                       .036
Man./Sask.            .0375               .347          .376                .060         .041                 .175
Alberta               .0487               .321          .359                .052         .037                 .231
s.c.                  .0523               .317          .347                .042     0.                       .294
                                                        Table A—8

               Steady—State Variance of Canadian Employment Growth (OLS Residuals, Newfoundland Included)




                 Sum of Variance                                    Share of Variance Due to:
Employment          from all              U.S.        National      All Industry      All Province          All Idiosyncratic
 Change           Sources x 100
Variable                                                (c )        (n   . .. ii    ) (v   . .. v )
                                                                                 It
                                         (c ust )
                                                                                       1              Pt
                                                          t           it                                   (u lit
                                                                                           t                              uft)
                       (1)                (2)           (3)                (4)                  (5)                (6)
National              .0796               .649          .283               .047                .003                .018
Forestry              .7846               .411          .267               .031                .006                .285
Mining                .3331               .214          .390               .161                .035                .200
Manufacturing         .1764               .587          .288               .099                .007                .019
Construction          .7268               .509          .248               .143                .005                .096
Trans./Util.          .0578               .390          .522               .017                .010                .061
Trade                 .0913               .527          .120               .217                .000                .136
Finance               .0822               .355          .072               .385                .000                .187
Services              .0708               .576          .186               .188                .002                .048
Government            .1090               .458          .170               .107                .002                .264
Newfoundland         .1328                .351          .185               .026                .195                .242
N.S./N.B.             .0859               .527          .240               .039                .000                .194
Quebec               .0914                .591          .257               .043                .027                .082
Ontario              .0845                .652          .270               .050                .000                .027
Man./Sask.           .0762                .545          .244               .051                .030                .130
Alberta              .1015                .504          .243               .046                .028                .179
B.C.                 .0935                .510          .234               .034                .000                .222
                                                           Table A—9
             Variance   in Innovation of   Canadian Employment Growth (TSLS Residuals, Newfoundland Excluded)


                 Sum of Variance                                       Share of Variance Due to:
Employment
 Change
                    from all                 U.S.        National      All Industry                  All Province           All Idiosyncratic
                  Sources x 100                                                 .   ..   ii                    .
Variable                                    (c ust )       (c t )      (q it                  It )
                                                                                                     (v 1 t        .. vPt ) (u11
                         (1)                 (2)           (3)                  (4)                           (5)                  (6)
National                .0416                .462          .420                 .072                          .026                 .021

Forestry                .4049                .095          .268                0.                             .048                 .590
Mining                  .2053                .070          .256                 .176                          .075                 .423
Manufacturing           .1362                .555          .206                 .212                          .020                 .006
Construction            .4952                .470          .424                0.                             .001                 .104
Trans./Util.            .0380                .054          .757                 .073                          .026                 .090
Trade                   .0464                .224          .229                 .359                          .021                 .167
Finance                 .0532                .156          .198                 .429                          .029                 .188
Services                .0194                .134          .276                 .435                          .015                 .139
Government              .0265                .020          .074                 .090                          .001                 .815

N.S./N.B.               .0470                .324          .358                 .046                     0.                        .272
Quebec                  .0573                .363          .313                 .059                      .196                     .068
Ontario                 .0440                .489          .390                 .084                     0.                        .036
Man./Sask.              .0546                .230          .280                 .039                          .375                 .076
Alberta                 .0584                .260          .318                 .034                          .198                 .190
B.C.                    .0574                .296          .318                 .041                          .075                 .269
                                                       Table A—b

             Steady—State Variance of Canadian Employment    Crth   (TSLS Residuals, Newfoundland      Excluded)



                 Sum of Variance                                    share of Variance Due to:
Employment          from all             U.S.        National       All Industry   All Province          All Idiosyncratic
 Change           Sources x 100
Variable                                (cust )        (c)                              ...
                                                                                    (v1          vp)    (uiit
                      (1)                (2)           (3)                (4)              (5)                     (6)

National             .0997               .641          .239               .086            .019                     .015

Forestry            1.0441               .438          .177               .070            .026                     .289
Mining               .3201               .264          .232               .139            .062                     .303
Manufacturing        .2531               .611          .139               .215            .019                     .016
Construction         .9316               .544          .268               .057            .012                     .120
Trans./Util.         .0737               .396          .462               .066            .022                     .054
Trade                .0870               .459          .190               .230            .017                     .104
Finance              .0917               .377.         .168               .302            .023                     .131
Services             .0716               .551          .212               .173            .015                     .049
Government           .1927               .537          .146               .106            .017                     .194
N.S./N.B.            .1010               .505          .221               .049            .001                     .219
Quebec               .1309               .527          .186               .080            .156                     .051
Ontario              .1110               .646          .211               .110            .003                     .031
Man./Sask.           .1155               .382          .194               .042            .316                     .067
Alberta              .1369               .407          .218               .039            .171                     .166
B.C.                 .1182               .465          .204               .043            .065                     .225
