                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO NEWSPAPERS SERVE THE STATE? INCUMBENT PARTY INFLUENCE ON
                        THE US PRESS, 1869-1928

                                          Matthew Gentzkow
                                             Nathan Petek
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro
                                          Michael Sinkinson

                                         Working Paper 18164
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18164


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012




We are grateful to Hoyt Bleakley, Maria Petrova, and numerous seminar participants for insightful
comments and suggestions. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets, the
George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation, the Centel Foundation / Robert P. Reuss Faculty Research Fund, the Neubauer Family
Foundation, the Kathryn C. Gould Research Fund, the Polsky Center, and the Gould Faculty Research
Endowment Fund, all at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Matthew Gentzkow, Nathan Petek, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Newspapers Serve the State? Incumbent Party Influence on the US Press, 1869-1928
Matthew Gentzkow, Nathan Petek, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson
NBER Working Paper No. 18164
June 2012, Revised May 2014
JEL No. D72,L82,N41

                                              ABSTRACT

Using data from 1869 to 1928, we estimate the effect of party control of state governments on the entry,
exit, circulation, prices, number of pages, and content of Republican and Democratic daily newspapers.
We exploit changes over time in party control of the governorship and state legislatures in a differences-in-
differences design. We exploit close gubernatorial elections and state legislatures with small majorities
in a parallel regression-discontinuity design. Neither method reveals evidence that the party in power
affects the partisan composition of the press. Our confidence intervals rule out modest effects, and
we find little evidence of incumbent party influence even in times and places with high political stakes
or low commercial stakes. The one exception is the Reconstruction South, an episode that we discuss
in detail.


Matthew Gentzkow                                      Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago                                 University of Chicago
Booth School of Business                              Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                            5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                     Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                              and NBER
gentzkow@chicagobooth.edu                             jmshapir@uchicago.edu

Nathan Petek                                          Michael Sinkinson
University of Chicago                                 Wharton School
Booth School of Business                              University of Pennsylvania
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                                   3620 Locust Walk
Chicago, IL 60637                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104
nathan.petek@chicagobooth.edu                         msink@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18164
1 Introduction

Governments everywhere have an interest in controlling the press. Dictatorships such as North Korea and
Cuba maintain nearly total control over media content. Moves toward autocracy in Russia and Venezuela
have been accompanied by reduced press freedom (Corrales et al. 2009). In the 1990s, Peru’s secret-police
chief Vladimiro Montesinos Torres paid 100 times more in bribes to media outlets than to all judges and
politicians combined (McMillan and Zoido 2004). Even in democratic countries, governments sometimes
use tools such as regulatory authority or privileged access to information to support sympathetic media
(Gentzkow and Shapiro 2008; Thomas 2006; Bennett et al. 2007).
    Two forces potentially restrain government capture. The first is legal protections, from constitutional
guarantees of press freedom to explicit laws limiting the scope of government patronage. The second is
market discipline. Theory suggests that greater commercial returns to media, private ownership, and com-
petition should all limit capture (Besley and Prat 2006). To what extent these forces are effective in restrain-
ing government influence is an empirical question with important implications for welfare (Besley and Prat
2006).
    In this paper, we study government influence on the US press from 1869 to 1928, a time when the
tension between forces supporting and undermining press freedom was especially strong. All newspapers
were privately owned, and newspaper markets were intensely competitive: 470 cities had two or more
daily newspapers in 1928, and 25 cities had five or more. Expanding advertising markets, falling costs, and
growing literacy created potent commercial incentives (Baldasty 1992; Petrova 2011; Gentzkow et al. 2006).
Yet legal and institutional constraints on government influence remained relatively weak. State officeholders
supported loyal newspapers with printing contracts and provided editors and publishers with patronage jobs
(Baldasty 1992, 21; Summers 1994, 47-48, 54, 60, 210-214). Politicians contributed money to start new
newspapers and bailed newspapers out when they were in financial trouble (Kaplan 2002, 61-63; Summers
1994, 49, 60). Half of US daily newspapers maintained explicit affiliations with political parties into the
1920s (Lee 1937, 182). Whether market forces succeeded in restraining government influence remains a
point of contention among historians.1
    We use panel data on all general circulation daily newspapers to estimate the effect of party control
     1 Kaplan (2002) writes that “The fourth estate of both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries... is quite weak and easily over-

powered by rival political powers. Indeed, the press is inevitably entangled in the debate of the public arena and influenced by the
political powers that be” (3). Referring to the end of the nineteenth century, he writes, “Politicians, desiring favorable publicity...
invested heavily in the journalistic market.... In the end, politics decisively influenced the structure of the market” (55). In contrast,
Baldasty (1992) argues that by the end of the nineteenth century, “advertisers replaced political parties as the key constituent (and
chief financial angel) of the press” (5). As a result, he writes, “In 1900, American newspapers bore little resemblance to the small
journals that had so earnestly debated politics in the 1820s and 1830s. Newspaper owners and editors were no longer primarily
political activists.... Most everyone in the newspaper industry claimed to be independent of party dictation” (139).


                                                                    2
of state governments on the entry, exit, circulation, prices, number of pages, and content of papers with
Republican and Democratic affiliations. Patronage from state governments—whether in the form of jobs,
contracts, or direct subsidies—increased the relative attractiveness of operating a paper affiliated with the
party in power. As a result, changes in the party control of state government could affect our outcome
measures by affecting the incentive to affiliate with the winning and losing parties.
    Our fundamental empirical challenge is separating the causal impact of incumbent politicians from
changes in the preferences of voters that affect both election outcomes and the demand for partisan news.
We address this using two strategies. First, we run panel regressions including the share voting Democrat
in presidential elections as a control for voter preferences, noting that the most obvious confounds in these
regressions would bias us toward over-stating the extent of political influence. Second, we use a regression-
discontinuity approach following Lee (2008) in which we focus on outcomes of close elections or on state
legislatures with small majorities.
    We find no evidence that incumbent governments influence the press in our sample as a whole. Our
main outcome variable is the Democratic share of circulation, which we expect to capture the combined
effect of many different margins of influence. Panel estimates suggest that shifting the governorship and
both houses of the state legislature from Republican to Democratic control decreases the Democratic share
of circulation by a small and statistically insignificant amount. Regression-discontinuity estimates confirm
the conclusions of the panel analysis, as do estimates allowing for a range of dynamics in the influence of
governments on the press.
    Our failure to find an effect of incumbent party on the evolution of the press does not arise from a lack of
power. Our data include a significant number of political transitions, many of which resulted in long-lived
changes in party control. In our panel estimates, we can rule out an effect of Democratic control greater than
1.7 percentage points per year or 2.2 percentage points cumulatively depending on the specification.
    We also look separately at the effect of the incumbent party on newspapers’ entry, exit, circulation of
continuing papers, prices, number of pages, and content, the last of which we capture by the frequency of
presidential candidate mentions in newspaper text. These outcomes correspond to specific channels through
which the historical record suggests that state government could influence the press. Newspapers could enter
in order to receive patronage from the state legislature (Summers 1994, 60) or be propped up by sympathetic
politicians (Kaplan 2002, 63). Legislators boosted circulation by ordering official copies (Dyer 1989, 18),
and governors attempted to influence content by withdrawing patronage from newspapers that did not toe
the party line (Abbott 2004, 171, 178-179). Newspapers used strategic price decreases to induce purchases
for political aims (Abbott 2004, 61).


                                                       3
    Examining these margins of influence individually, we find no evidence of any systematic effect of the
party in power. We use our results for the price and number of pages to argue that our findings do not result
from offsetting demand-side and supply-side effects.
    While the bulk of our analysis follows the historical literature in focusing on state government (Dyer
1989), in the online appendix we present a limited analysis of the effects of federal and local officeholders,
where we again find no effect. The online appendix also extends our results to a more recent period (and
additional dimensions of newspaper content) using data on newspaper endorsements between 1932 and
2004. This analysis shows no significant effects.
    In light of the negative results for the full sample, we turn next to examining whether incumbent party
influence may be important in sub-samples where market discipline was relatively weak, and the political
stakes were especially high. We re-estimate our panel specifications on data for counties with low average
advertising rates, average subscription prices, income, and literacy. We also present estimates for the early
part of our sample, when political patronage played a relatively larger role in newspaper finances; for state
capitals and county seats, where newspapers were believed to be most politically relevant; and for pres-
idential battleground states. In none of these settings do we find any clear evidence of incumbent party
influence.
    Finally, we consider the South during and after Reconstruction. This episode combined uniquely power-
ful political incentives, as Republican governments sought to build support among a hostile population, and
greatly weakened market discipline, as economic devastation reduced demand from both newspaper readers
and advertisers and dramatically limited press competition. The historical record suggests that these factors
translated into deliberate efforts by Republican governments to expand the reach of Republican papers (Ab-
bott 2004). We argue that the subsequent transition of state governments to solid Democratic control affords
credible variation for identifying the effects of interest.
    We estimate that the transition from Republican to Democratic control was associated with an increase
in the daily circulation share of Democratic newspapers of approximately 10 percentage points, an effect
well outside the confidence interval of the analogous estimate for the full sample. Supplementary data show
effects of similar magnitude on the weekly circulation share of Democratic newspapers. We interpret these
findings as evidence of an effect of the withdrawal of support for the Republican press, though we note that
some of the effect may come from Democrats using control of the state to suppress Republican papers and
provide patronage to Democratic papers.
    The Reconstruction results inform the broader conclusions of our paper in two ways. First, the fact
that the estimated Reconstruction effect is far outside our main confidence interval confirms that we have


                                                         4
the power to detect significant influence when it occurs. This test thus bolsters our conclusion that such
influence was not the norm in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Second, the Reconstruction
is a reminder that even if market forces discipline government intervention in most times and places, this
does not prevent governments from manipulating the press when the market is particularly weak and the
political incentives are especially strong.
    We stress three important limitations of our findings. First, we present only limited evidence on influ-
ence by local and federal governments, both of which played a role in the system of political patronage.
Second, we have only coarse measures of newspaper content. It is possible that incumbent governments
influence content in ways more subtle than our measures can detect. Finally, in exploiting party transitions,
our identification strategy presupposes some degree of political competition. We can therefore speak only
indirectly to the extent of state influence on the press in times and places where such competition is absent.
    An important literature views incumbents’ distortion of public policy to maintain electoral advantage
as a major source of inefficiency in competitive political systems (Besley and Coate 1998; Acemoglu and
Robinson 2000; Mulligan and Tsui 2008). While efforts to influence or capture the media are widely thought
to be among these distortions, little systematic evidence exists on their pervasiveness or importance.
    Ours is the first study to integrate evidence on the effect of incumbent parties on the entry, exit, readership
and content of the press, and to study how these influences vary with the strength of political and commercial
incentives. Di Tella and Franceschelli (2011) and Qian and Yanagizawa-Drott (2013) show evidence of state
influence on private media coverage of scandals in Argentina and of international human rights coverage in
the US, respectively. Boas and Hidalgo (2011) show that city councilors in Brazil preferentially approve
broadcasting applications of sympathetic media. Durante and Knight (2012) show that changes in control
of government affected the content and viewership of public and private TV stations in Italy from 2001 to
2007.
    Our study is also related to research on the agenda-setting power of the state (Edwards and Wood 1999),
on the role of media in the electoral advantage of incumbents (Ansolabehere et al. 2006; Prior 2006), and on
the emergence of a politically independent press in the United States (Gentzkow et al. 2006; Petrova 2011).
More broadly, the paper contributes to a growing empirical and theoretical literature on the sources of media
bias including owner ideology (Balan et al. 2009), tastes of reporters (Baron 2006), consumer preferences
(Mullainathan and Shleifer 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010), and preferences of the wealthy (Petrova
2008).




                                                        5
2 Data

2.1 US Newspaper Panel

We use data from the US Newspaper Panel (Gentzkow et al. 2011). The data contain the name, city,
circulation, and political affiliation of English-language daily US newspapers in presidential election years
from 1869 to 1928, hand-entered from G. Rowell & Co’s American Newspaper Directory (1869-1876) and
N. W. Ayer & Son’s American Newspaper Annual (1880-1928). (We use 1869 in place of year 1868 because
we are not aware of a directory of daily newspapers published prior to 1869.) We assume that the variables
in the directories are measured as of January 1 of the year in which the directory is published. We show in
the online appendix that our results are robust to varying this timing assumption and to excluding data from
1869.
    We define a time-constant measure of political affiliation for each newspaper. We classify a newspaper
as Republican if it ever declares a Republican affiliation and as Democratic if it ever declares a Democratic
affiliation. In the handful of cases in which a newspaper declares a Republican affiliation in one year and a
Democratic affiliation in another, we use the affiliation declared most often by the newspaper. Newspapers
that ever declare an affiliation represent 87 percent of the newspaper-years in our sample.
    We treat affiliations as static because that assumption provides a good match to data on newspaper
content (Gentzkow et al. 2011). In the online appendix, we show that our results survive if we use a
contemporaneous measure of affiliation instead of a time-constant measure. Contemporaneous affiliation is
available for 63 percent of the newspaper-years in our sample.
    We calculate the total number and circulation of Democratic and Republican daily newspapers in each
state in each year. Our key dependent variable of interest is the Democratic share of newspaper circulation.
Among newspapers whose circulation is observed in at least one year, we classify 1974 as Republican and
1748 as Democratic. We exclude newspapers that never declare a partisan affiliation or that always declare
their affiliation as “Independent.” We show in the online appendix that our results are robust to including
independent papers in the analysis.
    There are two drawbacks to using circulation to define our dependent measure. The first is that circula-
tion is missing in 13 percent of the newspaper-years in our sample. The second is that circulation is often
based not on independent audits but on newspaper self-reports, which could be inaccurate or stale.2 Both
problems are more severe in the early portion of our sample. In defining the Democratic share of newspaper


    2 Cases
          in which circulation is literally unchanged from one period to the next, an indicator for stale data, constitute 10 percent
of newspaper-years overall and 4 percent if we weight by circulation.


                                                                 6
circulation, we treat missing values as if they were zeros. We expect missing data and self-reporting to be
sources of noise in our estimates, but not sources of systematic bias. In the body of the paper, we report
separate results using the Democratic share of newspapers, entries, and exits, none of which depends on the
circulation data. In the online appendix, we show that our conclusions are robust to dropping observations
affected by missing or stale data.
    For a subset of newspaper-years, we have a direct measure of the newspaper’s content collected using
automated searches on the website newspaperarchive.com. For each newspaper, for each presidential elec-
tion from 1872 to 1928, and for each party, we search newspaperarchive.com for articles containing the last
names of both the presidential and vice presidential candidates and at least one of the words “Nominee,”
“Candidate,” “Nomination,” “Race,” “Ticket,” “Election,” or “Campaign.” We compute, for each state and
year, the average share of candidate mentions that go to the Democratic candidate among Democratic and
Republican newspapers. Our content measure is available for seven percent of newspaper-years in our data,
of which 36 percent are Democratic-affiliated newspapers (compared to 47 percent overall).
    For all years excluding 1880 and 1884 we obtain data on the annual subscription price of each newspaper.
For 1869 to 1912 we obtain data on the number of pages of a weekday issue of the newspaper. In cases in
which the directory reports the number of pages as a range, we use the midpoint. From these we calculate
the mean subscription price and the mean number of pages per issue by state, year, and political affiliation.
For the years 1880 and 1884 we obtain the publisher’s posted rate for a 10-line advertisement running for
one month. We use this to compute mean advertising price per copy in each county. We trim implausible
values of both subscription and advertising prices from our data.
    We check the accuracy of the subscription prices using prices quoted in a random sample of newspapers
for which scanned copies of the newspaper are available. For 75 percent of the random sample, the prices
quoted in these papers are within four percent of the prices in the newspaper directories. In the online
appendix we describe this audit in more detail and we present results for the subset of newspaper-years with
changes in the subscription price.
    We follow Berry and Waldfogel (2010) in treating number of pages as a proxy for newspaper quality,
consistent with narrative evidence that subscribers valued page expansions (Kaplan 2002, 127-128). In the
online appendix we show that in our sample, as in Berry and Waldfogel (2010), number of pages is correlated
with market size, which in turn affects the incentive to invest in quality (Shaked and Sutton 1987). We also
show that the newspapers with more pages have higher subscription prices, market share, and longevity, all
consistent with interpreting number of pages as a correlate of quality.
    We collect additional data on weekly newspapers to support our detailed case study of the Reconstruction


                                                      7
and post-Reconstruction South.3 The data include the number and circulation of non-daily Republican and
Democratic newspapers in each of the 11 Confederate states in 1869 and every presidential election year
between 1872 and 1896.4 The data are collected from the same newspaper directories as the data for the full
sample.5


2.2 Voting and Party Control

We obtain state-level gubernatorial and presidential voting data from 1868 to 1928 from data files generously
provided by James Snyder. These data include the total number of votes cast by party in each election. In a
few cases we supplement these data with information on party control of the governor’s office from ICPSR
Study 16, Partisan Division of American State Governments, 1834-1985 (Burnham 1984), and from the
National Governors Association (2011).
    We obtain state-level counts of the number of Republicans, Democrats, and others in the upper and lower
houses of state legislatures from ICPSR Study 16.
    For each gubernatorial election, we define the Democratic margin of victory as the difference between
the Democratic vote share and the vote share of the Democrat’s strongest opponent. (The strongest opponent
is a Republican in 838 out of 947 elections.) For each state legislative chamber, we define the Democratic
margin of control as the difference between the Democratic and Republican seat shares. If Democrats and
Republicans make up fewer than half of the seats, we consider the Democratic margin of control to be
missing. (This occurs in 14 out of 1374 state-years for the lower house and 14 out of 1375 state-years for
the upper house.)
    We assume that transitions in office occur at the beginning of the year following an election. We consider
the Democrats to be the incumbent gubernatorial party if the Democratic candidate won the most recent
election. We consider the Democrats to be the incumbent party in a given chamber of the state legislature
if the Democrats have strictly more seats than the Republicans. We show in the online appendix that our
results are robust to changes in our timing assumptions, and to dropping state-years in which Democrats and
Republicans have an equal number of seats in a chamber of the state legislature.
    A significant number of transitions of party control occur during our sample period. All but two states

    3 We  refer to all non-daily newspapers as “weeklies” throughout, although some are published at lower frequencies such as
bi-weekly.
     4 We define a weekly newspaper as Republican or Democratic using its contemporaneous affiliation.
     5 We compare our data with Abbott’s (2004) list of all Republican newspapers in the eleven formerly Confederate states from

1865 to 1877. The correlation of the change in the state-level Democratic share of newspapers across the two series is 0.86 for
weekly newspapers and 0.70 for daily newspapers. An inspection of discrepancies suggests that most are due to short-lived papers
that do not exist for long enough to be present in a directory in a presidential election year. Our series therefore is weighted towards
long-lived newspapers, which are likely to have had larger-than-average circulations (Gentzkow et al. 2011).


                                                                   8
have at least one office transition. The median state has four transitions in the governors office, three
transitions in the lower house of the state legislature, and two transitions in the upper house of the state
legislature. Following the average party transition, the party in power retains control for an average of 11
years in the governorship, 13 years in the lower house of the state legislature, and 19 years in the upper
house. In the online appendix, we report the number of party transitions by state and office and by time
period and office.


2.3 Area Demographics

We match each newspaper’s headquarter city to a county and a Census place as described in Gentzkow et al.
(2011).
    We obtain county demographics from the US Census via ICPSR Study 2896, Historical, Demographic,
Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 (Haines 2005). We extract data on the literate
share of the population from the 1870, 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930 Censuses. We extract data on manufac-
turing output and agricultural output (value of crops) from the 1920 and 1930 Censuses. We extract data on
population for all years. We construct a proxy for county per-capita income as the sum of manufacturing
and agricultural output, divided by county population.
    We obtain information on the name of each county’s seat from ICPSR Study 8159, Basic Geographic
and Historic Data for Interfacing ICPSR Data Sets, 1620-1983 (Sechrist 1984). We identify the correspond-
ing city in our newspaper panel, filling in missing data using information from the Census Bureau, National
Association of Counties, individual official county websites, and articles.



3 Government Patronage and the US Press

Newspapers in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries received significant patronage from state
governments. Weak legal and institutional restraints meant that this patronage was disproportionately
handed out to newspapers affiliated with the party in power.6
    The most important form of patronage was contracts to print government documents (records of legisla-
tive proceedings, official forms, notices, laws, and so forth); these contracts were often allocated at inflated

    6 Some states did enact laws intended to limit government influence. New York, Ohio, and New Jersey enacted laws in the late-
1800s explicitly requiring printing contracts to be awarded to one paper from each of the two major parties (New York Legislature
1892; Ohio General Assembly 1876; New Jersey Legislature 1889). In counties with more than 10,000 people, Oregon required
contracts to go to the two largest papers in a county by circulation (Oregon Legislative Assembly 1891). California specified that
contracts had to go to papers “of general circulation” which had been publishing for at least one year, limiting the use of patronage
to support the entry of new papers (California Legislature 1906).


                                                                 9
prices to newspapers affiliated with the incumbent party (Baldasty 1992, 21; Abbott 2004, 45; Summers
1994, 48, 54, 60, 210-214). A second form of patronage was the allocation of lucrative government jobs to
newspaper editors. Wisconsin state governments awarded editors jobs including chief clerk, state librarian,
postmaster, sergeant-at-arms, and night watchman (Dyer 1989, 22-23). In Ohio in 1868, the Democratic
legislature appointed the editor of the Democratic Columbus Ohio Statesman clerk to the state senate, and
paid him for 462 days of work in a single year (Summers 1994, 48). A third form was purchases of news-
papers at government expense. In Wisconsin, in 1852, each legislator was permitted to order 30 newspaper
copies per day (Dyer 1989, 18).7
    Newspapers also received patronage from both federal and local governments (Dyer 1989; Baldasty
1992). The federal government awarded large printing contracts and lucrative jobs which especially bene-
fited papers in Washington DC. Local governments awarded printing and government advertising contracts
which were small in magnitude relative to state patronage, but significant for local papers outside of state
capitals.
    The most detailed evidence on the quantitative importance of patronage comes from the period before the
Civil War. In a detailed study of Wisconsin newspapers from 1849 to 1860, Dyer (1989) shows that printing
contracts from the state government accounted for roughly half of the revenue of large party newspapers
in the state capital, and ten to twenty percent of the revenue of smaller English-language papers near the
frontier (29-31). Abbott (2004) similarly finds that printing patronage was the “most important” revenue
source for many papers throughout the Reconstruction South (45). There is broad agreement that the relative
importance of patronage declined over the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (Baldasty 1992; Lee
1937; Gentzkow et al. 2006).
    In the online appendix, we show a simple economic model of the news market in which patronage leads
to a relationship between party control of government and the composition of the press. The mechanism in
the model is simple: the presence of patronage increases the relative return to newspapers affiliated with the
party in power. As a result, changes in party control signal an increase in the incentive to open newspapers
affiliated with the winning party, increase net entry of these papers, and decrease net entry of papers of the
opposite affiliation. Importantly, this force will be present regardless of whether patronage takes the form of
contracts, jobs, promises of newspaper purchases, or any other inducement, so long as it flows differentially
to the incumbent party’s papers.

    7 Newspapers   were also supported in some cases by direct subsidies from party committees, from local partisans, and from
candidates themselves. Dyer (1989, 24) and Baldasty (1992, 22) both suggest that these transfers were small relative to the direct
government patronage discussed above. These transfers are also less relevant to our analysis because they were not controlled by
the party in power.


                                                               10
    Historically, although it is clear that state patronage created an economic bounty on allegiance to the
incumbent party, it is less clear whether this incentive was large enough to significantly alter the composition
or content of the local press. State patronage could certainly have sustained ailing newspapers or allowed
them to expand their circulation area (Summers 1994, 48). But then, as now, owners of newspapers faced
powerful commercial incentives to tailor the content of their newspapers to the demands of the market.
Gentzkow et al. (forthcoming) find that a 10 percentage point change in the Republican share of the two-
party vote in an area translates into a 10 percent increase in the relative circulation of Republican newspapers.
It would have been economically costly to maintain a newspaper out of step with market demand, and
patronage would have had to outweigh such costs in order to influence newspaper content.
    Market incentives may also have provided discipline in the form of lost readership to newspapers seen
to be in the pocket of the state. George Booth, from 1906 publisher of the Detroit Evening News and head
of a large regional newspaper chain, rejected an offer by the governor to appoint his brother Ralph to a
vacant Senate seat (Kaplan 2002, 165). Booth saw both ethical and business sense in avoiding partisan
entanglements: “It is not a bad thing to have the local business atmosphere permeated with the idea that the
other paper is a machine paper supported by public pap and is largely operated for private ends and... for
private advantage” (quoted in Kaplan 2002, 166).
    Ultimately, then, it is an empirical question whether state patronage served to increase the health and
circulation of the sympathetic press or, restrained by commercial forces, merely to distribute inframarginal
rents to officeholders’ allies. We take up this question in the analysis that follows.



4 Empirical Models and Identification

In this section we lay out our empirical model and identification strategy. To motivate these, we outline a
simple economic model of the affiliation decision, underpinned by a formal model in the online appendix.
    Suppose that a state consists of several local newspaper markets. Each year, there is a chance that an
existing newspaper exits and/or a new newspaper enters. Opportunities for such change may arrive exoge-
nously due to the arrival of scarce inputs (editors) or due to endogenous startup/shutdown decisions. News-
paper profits come from two sources. The first is market profits, which are increasing in the newspaper’s
political alignment with the local population. The second is a political bounty paid to any newspaper affili-
ated with the party in power. Elections occur at regular intervals, and newspaper owners make permanent,
forward-looking affiliation decisions at the time of entry.
    Such a model has two important implications. First, around a close election that induces a transition in


                                                       11
political power, there will be a trend break in the share of the state’s newspapers that are Republican. After
the Republicans take office, there is a discrete increase in the incentive to affiliate with the Republican party.
However, this does not result in a discrete jump in the market share of Republican papers, because changes
in the flow of papers into affiliation with the Republicans do not induce an immediate change in the stock of
Republican newspapers.
    Second, even absent any political rents, changes in party power will be correlated with changes in
the composition of the news market, because both newspaper profits and election results depend on the
underlying ideological trends in the state.


4.1 Empirical Models

Let a index states and t index calendar years. We model an outcome of interest yat (e.g., the share of
newspaper circulation that goes to Democratic papers). Let ∆ be the first difference operator so that ∆yat =
yat − ya(t−1) . Let wat be an indicator for whether the Democrats control a particular political office in state a
at time t. Let µat represent area- and time-level characteristics that may be correlated with both Democratic
control and trends in newspaper circulation, and let εat represent idiosyncratic shocks to the newspaper
market that are unrelated to Democratic control.
    Our first model specification is:


                                          ∆yat = β wa(t−1) + µat + εat ,                                      (1)


where we assume that E εat |wa(t−1) , µat = 0. In this model, if the Democrats take office in state a at time
                      !                  

t − 1, the growth in the Democratic share of circulation during the subsequent time period is increased by β .
We will refer to this model as our “slope-change” specification. The assumption that political officeholders
influence the trend in circulation rather than the level of circulation is motivated by a model in which in-
cumbent governments influence gradual processes such as the opening and closing of newspapers (see the
online appendix).
    Our second model specification is:


                                              yat = β wat + µat + εat ,                                       (2)

where we assume that E (εat |wat , µat ) = 0. In this model, when the Democrats take office there is an im-
mediate and contemporaneous effect on the news market. We will refer to this model as our “on-impact”
specification.

                                                         12
    In general, we view the on-impact specification in equation (2) as less realistic than the slope-change
specification in equation (1), because in most times and places newspapers will not open or close immedi-
ately in response to a change in political power. However, both models are plausible, and we will see below
that model (2) captures important dynamics in some cases.
    In our empirical analysis we estimate the effect of Democratic control using the dynamics implied by
equations (1) and (2), and explore the sensitivity of our findings to other dynamics that combine elements
of both equations. When we estimate equation (2), we exclude data from the final presidential election year
in our newspaper panel so that the series wat has the same termination date as in the estimation sample for
model (1).


4.2 Econometric Assumptions

As discussed above, we assume political transitions occur at the beginning of the year following an election,
and that our newspaper variables are measured as of January 1 of a directory’s publication year. Thus, if a
Democrat defeats a Republican incumbent in a November, 1900 gubernatorial election, we set wa(1900) = 0
and wa(1901) = 1, and equation (1) predicts that the change in yat between the 1901 and 1902 newspaper
directories will be greater by an amount β than the change between the 1900 and 1901 directories. In the
online appendix, we show that our results are robust to varying these timing assumptions.
    We cannot directly estimate equation (1) because our dependent measures are only observed in pres-
idential election years. To take the model to our data, we average the model over the four-year intervals
between presidential elections to yield for presidential years t:


                                                 ∆yat = β wa(t−1) + µ at + ε at ,                                          (3)


where we define xat = 14 ∑3s=0 xa(t−s) for each variable x ∈ {∆y, w, µ , ε }.8
    Our panel identification strategy assumes that µat is a linear function of observable area- and time-level
characteristics. In all specifications we control for year fixed effects. In some specifications we control
for the Republican share of the two-party vote in the last presidential election. The presidential vote share
control captures readers’ political leanings, which in turn affect newspaper circulation and affiliation choices
(Gentzkow et al. forthcoming). In some specifications we include area fixed effects to allow for an area-
specific time trend. (Time-constant area characteristics are “differenced out” in equation (1) because our
dependent measure is in first differences.)

   8 Because   equation (2) assumes that the effect of Democratic control is instantaneous, we can estimate it directly.


                                                                 13
    Although we cannot rule out the possibility that there are components of µat that are not captured by
these proxies, following the discussion above we expect that exogenous shocks to the ideology of a state’s
voters will induce a positive correlation between wa(t−1) (Democratic control of government) and trends in
newspaper circulation. Such a positive correlation will be reinforced by any indirect effects of government
control on readership, such as a preference for reading the incumbent party’s news. We therefore view our
panel estimates as a plausible upper bound on the extent of political influence. At the end of this section, we
discuss the possibility that oppositional shifts in news demand generate a downward bias in our estimates.
    Our regression-discontinuity identification strategy assumes that µat is piecewise linear in the margin of
victory in the last election (for governors), or the margin of control (for state legislatures), with a slope that
differs depending on whether the Democrats have control. We restrict attention to cases in which the absolute
margin of victory is less than 10 percentage points for governors and the absolute margin of control is less
than 20 percentage points for state legislatures. This second identification strategy parallels Lee’s (2008)
regression-discontinuity estimates of the incumbency effect in House elections.9 However, we note that we
apply the approach here not only to elections but also to the party composition of legislative chambers, in
which cases the assumption that close contests are “as good as random” may be less plausible.
    Our main dependent measure yat is the Democratic share of daily circulation. Because of the large
differences in content between Democratic and Republican papers (Gentzkow et al. 2006; Gentzkow et al.
2011), the circulation share can be taken as a measure of the share of news consumed that takes a Democratic
point of view. The circulation share captures many ways in which the incumbent party can influence the
newspaper market, including encouraging the entry of favorable newspapers and the exit of unfavorable
ones, subsidizing the cost of newspapers so that own-party papers can offer lower subscription prices, etc.
In section 6 below we separately estimate the effect of the incumbent party on these various margins.
    The circulation share does not capture within-affiliation changes in content which might occur following
a change in party control. In our empirical analysis we use a measure of news content to explore such effects.


4.3 “Watchdog” Effects

Our results could understate the extent of political influence if voters respond to a party’s victory by shifting
readership from incumbent to opposition media, perhaps because of a perception that opposition media serve
as a “watchdog” monitoring government corruption (Durante and Knight 2012). In this case, an outward
shift in the supply of Democratic newspapers caused by Democratic patronage could be offset by an inward

    9 Closeelections pass standard tests of the regression-discontinuity identifying assumptions for a wide range of offices, though
not for US House elections in the late 20th century (Eggers et al. forthcoming).


                                                                14
shift in the demand for Democratic papers, with the total circulation of Democratic papers remaining the
same.
    We present a range of evidence relevant to this hypothesis. First, we look at effects of incumbent party
control on newspaper prices. If the relative supply of Democratic papers shifts out (due to patronage)
and the relative demand for Democratic papers shifts in (due to “watchdog” effects), the relative prices of
Democratic papers should fall. Second, we look at the circulation of continuing papers. If political patronage
mainly affects the entry-exit margin (as we would expect if it is primarily a fixed-cost subsidy), the offsetting
watchdog demand effects should be visible as a drop in the relative circulation of continuing Democratic
papers. Finally, we use number of pages as a proxy for quality to test whether Democratic patronage funds
improvements in the quality of Democratic newspapers that might offset any drop in demand.
    We present direct tests of all three of these hypotheses in section 6 below, and additional supporting
evidence in the online appendix. In each case, our findings are inconsistent with changes in control leading
to meaningful shifts in demand either towards or away from the incumbent party’s papers.



5 Effect of Party Control on Daily Newspapers

5.1 Estimates

Table 1A presents estimates of the slope-change specification in equation (1) using our panel identification
strategy. The dependent variable ∆yat is the change in the share of partisan newspaper circulation going to
Democratic papers. Each column corresponds to the effect of Democratic control of a given state office.
The first column shows the results for the governor’s office, the second for the lower house of the state
legislature, and the third for the upper house of the state legislature. The fourth column shows the combined
effect of Democratic control of the governor’s office and of both houses of the legislature.
    The specifications in the first row include year fixed effects. The specifications in the second row add
dummies for each 10 percentage point increment of the Democratic share of the vote in the previous pres-
idential election. The specifications in the third row add state fixed effects. Although the specifications
in the first row show some evidence of a correlation between party control and newspaper market shares
(consistent with newspapers responding to changes in the political tastes of consumers), the magnitudes in
all cases are small, and no statistically significant relationship remains when we control for presidential vote
shares and state fixed effects. In our final specification, we estimate that switching the incumbent party from
Republican to Democratic in all state offices would decrease the growth rate of the Democratic share of
newspaper circulation by 0.001 percentage points.


                                                       15
    Figure 1 illustrates the estimates in table 1A graphically, showing the change in Democratic circulation
in the years before and after a transition to Democratic control. We see no significant pre-trends, and no
evidence that our slope-change specification is masking important dynamics.
    Table 1B presents results from three specifications that encode different assumptions about the dynamics
of government influence. The first specification is an estimate of the on-impact specification in equation (2).
The second specification is a variant of equation (2) in which the independent variable is the share of the
preceding four years in which the Democrats held the office. This specification allows for a slower-moving
impact than equation (2). The third specification is a variant of equation (1), in which we include a four-year
lag of the Democratic control indicators and report the sum of the contemporaneous and lag coefficients.10 In
no case do we find evidence of an effect of Democratic incumbency on the Democratic share of circulation.
    Table 2 presents estimates of model (1) using our regression-discontinuity strategy. In no case do we find
a statistically significant effect of party control on the growth rate of the Democratic share of circulation.11
Figure 2 illustrates these findings graphically. We show in the online appendix that the estimates in table 2
are robust to tightening or loosening the restriction on the margin of victory used to select the sample, and
to using a local polynomial RD estimator for a wide range of bandwidths.
    In the online appendix, we present evidence on influence by federal and local officeholders, as well as
holders of other state offices. We find no evidence that the party in control in any of these offices influences
the Democratic share of circulation. In the online appendix, we present estimates of the effect of the incum-
bent party on newspaper presidential endorsements from 1932 to 2004. We find no evidence of any such
effect.


5.2 Discussion of Magnitudes

Table 3 presents a set of quantitative comparisons for the panel identification estimates of our slope-change
and on-impact specifications. These comparisons confirm that our data allow us to detect nontrivial effects
of the incumbent party on newspaper market shares.
    The first row of table 3 shows the point estimate of the effect of control of the governor’s office and both
houses of the state legislature from row (3) of table 1A and from row (1) of table 1B. The second row of table
3 shows the upper bound of the 95-percent confidence interval of these estimates: 1.7 percentage points per
   10 Where  appropriate, we average the model over the four-year intervals between presidential elections as with equation (1).
   11 We  use a relatively narrow bandwidth in table 2 to focus the estimation on close contests where it is plausible that the bias in
our RD estimates will be small. The bandwidth for the state legislature is larger than for governors because a change in the winner
of just a few seats results in a relatively large percentage change in the margin of control. We use a piece-wise linear functional
form because figure 2 shows that it is a reasonable approximation of the relationship between margin of victory and circulation
share, and local linear regression is one of the approaches to RD estimation recommended in the literature (e.g., Lee and Lemieux
2010).


                                                                 16
year using the slope-change specification and 2.2 percentage points using the on-impact specification. The
upper bound from the confidence interval is the smallest positive magnitude whose value we can distinguish
statistically from the point estimate.
    The third row of the table shows the upper bound of the confidence interval as a share of the between-
state standard deviation in the Democratic share of circulation. We can rule out increases in the Democratic
share of circulation of more than 5.2 percent of a cross-state standard deviation using the slope-change
specification and 6.7 percent using the on-impact specification.
    The fourth row of the table uses the contemporaneous relationship between the change in the Democratic
share of the two-party presidential vote and the Democratic share of newspaper circulation to estimate the
change in presidential vote share necessary to produce effects of the size in row (2). A change in presidential
vote share of only 1.1 to 1.5 percentage points would be sufficient to produce changes of this magnitude.
This test can be thought of as comparing the importance of political control to the importance of consumer
preference in determining newspaper circulation.
    The fifth row of the table uses Gentzkow et al.’s (2011) findings to estimate the implied effect that in-
cumbent influence exerts on voters through the media market. Gentzkow et al. (2011) find that the entry of a
Democratic newspaper increases the Democratic share of the Congressional vote by a statistically insignif-
icant 0.21 percentage points, with the upper end of the 95 percent confidence interval at 0.57 percentage
points. Their estimates imply that the entry of a Democratic newspaper increases the Democratic share of
circulation by 25 percentage points.12 Because 1.7 percentage points is about 6.8 percent of the effect of the
entry of a Democratic newspaper, at the upper end of our confidence interval we find that control of all state
offices for a two-year congressional term would increase the incumbent party’s vote share by 0.03 percent-
age points in the next congressional election,13 and we obtain an effect smaller than 0.1 percentage points
even using the upper bound of Gentzkow et al.’s (2011) confidence interval. The corresponding effects on
vote share using the on-impact estimates are 0.04 percentage points and 0.1 percentage points, respectively.
    The sixth row of the table uses Gentzkow et al.’s (forthcoming) empirical model of newspaper entry to
estimate the cost of implementing a targeted fixed-cost subsidy for Democratic papers that would produce
a change in circulation share equivalent to the upper bound of our confidence intervals from the given
specification. We find that the implicit subsidy for the average state is equivalent to 0.1 percent of the
revenue of in-state newspapers, consistent with Baldasty’s (1992) view that patronage was small relative to

   12 Gentzkow     et al. (2011) report that the entry or exit of a partisan newspaper changes the difference between Democratic
circulation share and Republican circulation share by 51 percentage points, which is equivalent to a 25 percentage point increase in
circulation share for a specific party.
    13 Specifically, 0.068 × 0.0021 × 2 [years] × 100 = 0.03 percentage points.



                                                                17
commercial incentives during the period we study.



6 Evidence on Specific Margins of Influence

Table 4 presents estimates of models (1) and (2) with several alternative dependent measures. Each measure
corresponds to a specific margin on which the incumbent party could exert influence over newspapers.
Looking at these margins individually allows us to test for effects of incumbent control through specific
channels, such as preventing the exit of sympathetic newspapers, encouraging their entry, or expanding their
circulation.
    The first specification reproduces the all offices results from row (3) of table 1A and row (1) of table 1B
for comparison.
    The second specification uses the share of newspapers that are Democratic. The number of newspapers
is better measured than circulation early in the sample period, so estimates using this variable may be more
precise than estimates of the effect on circulation share. It also weights each paper equally, allowing us to
detect an effect if the circulation of newspapers influenced by the incumbent is very small, if affected papers
cannibalize the circulation of same-affiliation papers, or if the effects are on the entry and exit margins rather
than changes in the size of existing papers.
    The third and fourth specifications use the share of entering newspapers that are Democratic and the
share of exiting newspapers that are Democratic, respectively. We will observe an effect in this specification
if incumbent politicians are able to affect the affiliation of entering papers or the affiliation of exiting papers,
but not the circulation of established papers.
    The fifth specification uses the relative subscription prices of Democratic newspapers. If we observe a
decrease in relative subscription prices, it may indicate that incumbents are subsidizing sympathetic news-
papers to allow them to lower their prices, or withdrawing subsidies from opposition newspapers, even if
the effect of prices on circulation is too small to be detectable.
    The sixth specification uses the Democratic share of circulation of continuing newspapers. We will
observe an effect in this specification if incumbents are able to affect the circulation of existing papers—for
example, through marginal subsidies—but are unable to affect entry or exit. We will also observe an effect
in this specification if the identity of the incumbent party directly influences demand for Democratic and
Republican newspapers.
    The seventh specification uses the relative number of pages of Democratic newspapers, a proxy for
relative quality. If we see an increase in relative quality, it may indicate subsidies from incumbents on the


                                                        18
quality rather than cost margins.
    The eighth and ninth specifications use our direct measure of newspaper content, the share of candidate
mentions going to the Democratic candidate for president or vice-president. These estimates should be read
with some caution as content measures are only available for a small fraction of the newspapers in our
sample, but they provide a check on whether incumbents influence content in a way that is not captured by
affiliations.
    We find almost no evidence that the party in power affects the newspaper market through these channels.
The most important exception is that we find a statistically significant effect of incumbent party on the
Democratic share of papers using the on-impact specification. Plots shown in the online appendix reveal
significant pre-trends in this specification.
    In the online appendix, we reproduce this table using the RD specification and find no evidence that
the incumbent party affects newspaper markets to its benefit except for the content measures which are
estimated using very small samples. We also show using the slope-change specification that the incumbent
party has no detectable effect on the share of people living in a county with Democratic newspapers but no
Republican newspapers, or vice versa.
    As discussed in section 4 above, the results on relative prices, relative circulation of continuing papers,
and relative page length speak directly to the possibility that shifts in demand toward opposition newspapers
(as found by Durante and Knight 2012) mask significant countervailing effects of party control. We find that
following a change in office the incumbent party’s newspapers become if anything slightly more expensive
and slightly worse in quality, and attract no additional readership. These findings are not consistent with a
meaningful shift in demand towards or away from the incumbent party’s papers. In the online appendix, we
show that similar patterns hold when we restrict attention to a sub-sample with high-quality circulation data
and when we use price per page as a dependent measure.



7 Estimates for Sub-Samples

In this section we ask whether the effect of party control of state government on the evolution of the press is
greater when the market restraints on government capture are especially weak or where the political incen-
tives are especially strong. In the online appendix we use an index of commercial and political incentives
to measure the effect of control of the state government in places with both relatively strong political in-
centives and relatively weak commercial incentives, and find no evidence of an effect of control of the state
government in such places.


                                                      19
7.1 Places where Market Incentives are Weak

Table 5A presents results for sub-samples in which we expect the profitability of newspapers to be relatively
low. In such places, state patronage may have gone further in influencing the entry, exit, and circulation of
sympathetic newspapers.
    The first row reproduces row (3) of table 1A for comparison. The following rows present results for
counties with below-median advertising rates, subscription prices, incomes, and literacy rates respectively.
In the first two cases, but not the last two, we find qualitative support for the hypothesis that state influence
is greater in less commercially valuable areas. In no case do we find a statistically significant effect of
incumbent party on political affiliation.
    The online appendix presents results using the on-impact specification introduced in table 1B, where we
again find no evidence of an effect of the incumbent party.
    It is worth noting that the hypothesis that greater commercial value reduces the influence of the state
may be less plausible if commercial value is correlated with political value. For example, if individuals that
are more attractive to advertisers (say, those with higher incomes) also play an outsize role in the political
process, then the hypothesis we are testing is theoretically ambiguous and hence our findings do not admit
a straightforward interpretation.
    On the view that commercial and political value vary independently, it is suggestive that we find evidence
consistent with Petrova’s (2011) hypothesis that greater advertising rates reduce the influence of political
parties on the press. In contrast to Petrova (2011), this effect is not statistically significant in our context. A
possible explanation is that Petrova (2011) estimates the effect of all patronage on a newspaper’s decision to
affiliate with a political party (rather than remain independent), whereas we estimate the effect of a change
in control of state-government patronage on the market for affiliated newspapers.
    In the online appendix, we decompose each of the sub-sample results above using the entry, exit, cir-
culation, and price measures shown in table 4 for the main sample. We find a wrong-signed statistically
significant effect on the circulation of continuing papers in low-income counties, and no other statistically
significant effects of the incumbent party on newspaper affiliation.


7.2 Times and Places where Political Incentives are Strong

Table 5B presents results for sub-samples in which we expect the political incentives or scope for capture to
be relatively strong. As in panel A, we reproduce row (3) of table 1A as a benchmark.
    The following rows present results for the period before 1900, for newspapers in county seats, for news-



                                                        20
papers in state capitals, and for presidential battleground states, which we define as states that have a two-
party vote margin less than or equal to 10 percentage points in at least half of the elections in our sample
period. Historical evidence supports thinking of these sub-samples as cases in which political incentives
and the scope for incumbent influence were especially strong. Newspapers in county seats and state capitals
received a disproportionate share of state spending (Abbott 2004, 45; Baldasty 1992, 21-22, 133; Summers
1994, 54, 60-61). Presidential battleground states contained a significant fraction of electoral votes during
much of our sample period (Glaeser and Ward 2006) and were by definition important sites of political
competition.
    In no case do we find a statistically significant effect of incumbent party on political affiliation. The on-
line appendix presents results using the on-impact specification introduced in table 1B. We find no evidence
of an effect of the incumbent party in any subsample.
    In the online appendix, we decompose each of the sub-sample results above using the entry, exit, cir-
culation, and price measures shown in table 4 for the main sample. Of the 18 new specifications reported,
one (Democratic share of newspapers in state capitals) is statistically significant with a sign consistent with
political influence. All other coefficients are statistically insignificant. The online appendix also shows re-
sults in which we split the sample according to the closeness of the presidential vote in the county. In the
competitive counties there is a positive but statistically insignificant effect of control of the state on the share
of circulation, and in the non-competitive counties the effect is negative, very small in absolute value, and
not statistically significant.
    The results in this section suggest that even in sub-samples where market forces were relatively weak
and political incentives were relatively strong, incumbent influence over the press remained limited. These
results confirm the broad finding that political influence was small in the US during this period, and suggest
that commercial incentives may have provided strong discipline even in the half of the country where they
were weaker than average. In the next section, we consider a far more extreme example that shows state
capture can indeed emerge when market discipline becomes sufficiently weak.



8 Case Study: Reconstruction South

We continue the theme of the last section by considering a final sub-sample of our data: Southern newspa-
pers during and after Reconstruction (1869 to 1892). This episode stands out in our sample period for its
combination of uniquely powerful political incentives and greatly weakened market discipline.
    The chaotic environment of the post-Civil-War era provided unusually strong political incentives for


                                                        21
Republican governments to support the entry and growth of Republican newspapers. The Radical Republi-
can program of enacting profound economic and social change was widely believed to require the support
of favorable newspapers (Abbott 2004, 55). Yet the hostility of much of the Southern population, along
with low literacy among Republican supporters, meant that few Republican papers would be viable without
government support (Summers 1994, 209-210). The usual institutional constraints on efforts to aid friendly
newspapers had largely evaporated, as aggressive rebuilding and economic development efforts led to a dra-
matic expansion of state government spending, and with it a deluge of patronage and political favors of all
kinds (Foner 2002, 379-392).
    Market forces that might otherwise have restrained the desire to control the press for political aims were
especially weak in the postbellum South, where newspapers faced low demand, high costs, and limited
market competition (Abbott 2004, 40-44). Southern newspaper circulation per capita was only a small
fraction of that in the rest of the country. Subscription prices were also relatively low. The war’s high
death toll meant printing labor was scarce, and almost all inputs such as newsprint had to be imported from
the north at high prices. Local advertising markets were limited. Roughly two-thirds of incumbent papers
existing before the war had ceased publication by its end.
    It seems reasonable to suppose that these conditions led to greater scope for the party in power to use
state government to influence the press. Indeed, Abbott (2004) argues that these factors resulted in a program
of widespread government support for Republican newspapers under Republican incumbents, followed by
the rapid withdrawal of this support when Democrats regained power.
    We test quantitatively for the effects of Republican intervention in the newspaper market. Our test ex-
ploits sharp transitions in control plausibly unrelated to trends in the demand for partisan news. In particular,
the historical record suggests that the shift in political control was often driven by changes in who could vote
(and whose vote counted) rather than changes in voters’ preferences.14 At the beginning of 1869, all 11 for-
mer Confederate states were controlled by Republicans. Black suffrage and the disenfranchisement of many
former Confederates—both of which were mandated by Congress and enforced by the Union Army—had
given Republicans a commanding position in the elections of 1867 and 1868. Over the following decade,
blacks were kept from the polls through “force and threat of force” (Key 1949, 536) as federal troops ceased
supervising elections. Democratic vote shares increased dramatically as a result, and by 1877 the governor-
   14 Two potentially important confounds    deserve note. First, the transition to Democratic control could have slowed the migration
of northern Republican “carpetbaggers,” who presumably were more likely to read Republican newspapers. Because carpetbaggers
accounted for no more than two percent of the population in the South (Gao 2000, 200), we expect this confound to be quantitatively
small. Second, the effective disenfranchisement of black voters could have reduced the demand for Republican news, if black
citizens exhibited less demand for newspapers when they lost the vote. Given the low literacy rates of blacks in Confederate states
we also expect this effect to be small: the 1870 Census found that in the former Confederate states only 8 percent of the voting-age
males who could write were black.


                                                                 22
ship and legislatures of all eleven states were controlled by Democrats.
    Figure 3 and an online appendix figure give a view of our data on daily and weekly newspapers, respec-
tively. We limit the sample to the eleven Confederate states in the years 1869 to 1892. We show the share of
circulation accounted for by Democratic newspapers by state and year. For each state, we indicate the first
year in which Republicans controlled all branches of the state government (indicated by a red dashed line),
and the first year in which Democrats regained control of all branches of government (indicted by a blue
dashed line). Circulation figures for 1869 are partially imputed from 1872, and plotted with open circles to
emphasize this. The raw data underlying these figures, and analogous plots using newspaper counts in place
of circulation shares, are reported in the online appendix.
    In the states where Republicans did not control state government for an extended period—Georgia,
Texas, and Virginia—Republican papers never gained a large share of circulation, and there is no noticeable
increase in Democratic circulation associated with the resumption of Democratic control. In almost all of the
remaining states, Republican papers achieved a meaningful share of both daily and weekly circulation while
Republicans were in power, and Republicans’ share declined sharply around the time Democrats retook
control.15 The timing of the circulation change matches the timing of the political change closely,16 and the
magnitude of changes in circulation is large. For example, Republican shares of weekly circulation rose to
50 percent or more in Arkansas, Florida, and Louisiana while the Republicans were in control, but never
exceeded 20 percent in these states thereafter.
    Table 6 presents regression results that parallel the graphical evidence in figure 3 and the analogous
online appendix figure for weeklies. The specifications in this table differ from those we use for the full
sample in three ways.
    First, based on the graphical evidence in figure 3 and in the online appendix figures, we expect the data
to be better approximated by the on-impact specification.
    Second, we use as our main independent variable a single indicator for Democratic control, which is
turned on after the Democrats retake all three offices and is never again turned off. We do this because
transitions are highly correlated across different offices. We do not include indicators for the three instances
when Republicans took control of the state during our sample period. In the online appendix we present
results from a less parsimonious specification that more closely parallels the specifications we estimate on
the full sample.
   15 In Florida, this statement only applies to weeklies, as the first Florida daily in our sample enters after the Democrats retake

control. In Alabama, where we see a relatively small increase in the Democratic circulation share, control alternated between
Democrats and Republican during the period between the red and blue dashed lines.
   16 In Florida and North Carolina, where the increase in the Democratic circulation share leads the blue dashed line slightly,

Democrats took control of the state legislature several years before they took full control of the state.


                                                                23
    Third, we exclude the controls for the Democratic share of the presidential vote. We do this because we
want to exploit variation in political control driven by changes in the composition of the electorate, which
directly affect the presidential vote. It makes sense to control for the presidential vote in the specifications
estimated on the full sample, where identification comes from the discontinuous relationship between vote
shares and political control, and from idiosyncratic variation in state relative to national votes. By contrast,
including presidential vote controls in the models in table 6 would be akin to controlling for Democratic
control of state government, our independent measure of interest. Consistent with this view, we show in
the online appendix that the coefficient of interest is insignificant in regressions that do control for the
presidential vote share.
    The first panel of the table reports results for the Democrats’ share of circulation. The second panel
presents results for the Democrats’ share of newspapers, to check sensitivity to missing circulation data.
For robust small-sample inference, we report in addition to asymptotic standard errors the p-values from a
permutation test in which the indicator for Democratic control is randomly reshuffled within each state.
    The on-impact specifications in table 6 show economically large and statistically significant effects of
Democratic control on the share of both Democratic dailies and weeklies. For daily papers, the effect on
circulation share is 10 percentage points, well above the top of the confidence interval for the slope-change
specification estimated on the full sample. For weekly newspapers, the effect is even larger, at 19 percentage
points. Using our slope-change specification we find a counterintuitive wrong-signed effect: a mechanical
consequence of the fact that after the return of Democratic control the newspaper market is so heavily
Democratic that there is little room for further growth. Estimates are similar whether we use the Democratic
share of circulation or of newspapers as our dependent measure. In the online appendix we show that,
while the estimates decrease and the standard errors increase when we shorten the sample period, our key
conclusions survive removing several years of post-Reconstruction data from the sample.
    It is worth stressing two caveats to these results. First, because we find large effects, upward bias
induced by correlated trends in reader preferences and political control no longer works against us, as it
does in the specifications we estimate on the full sample. Second, although we follow Abbott (2004) in
emphasizing the removal of state support for the Republican press, it is possible that at least some of the
effect of political control is attributable to deliberate (legal and extralegal) efforts by Democrats to suppress
Republican newspapers and bolster Democratic ones in the period following the Democrats’ return to power.
Both of these concerns are mitigated by the fact that Republican dailies in the Reconstruction South were
commercially weak, consistent with their having been propped up by state funds.17

  17 In   1872, the prices of Republican and Democratic newspapers in the average non-Confederate state were about the same; in


                                                               24
    With those caveats in mind, the evidence from the Reconstruction and post-Reconstruction South shows
that state governments did sometimes exert meaningful influence on the press, and suggests that such influ-
ence was at its height when political stakes were greatest and market forces weakest.
    The results in this section also confirm that our methods and data have the power to detect large-scale
political influence on the press when it occurs. Comparing our point estimate in table 6 to the upper end
of our confidence interval in the slope-change specification for the full sample, we know that any influence
exerted by the average state government in our sample must be significantly smaller than the estimated
influence of the Reconstruction governments.



9 Conclusion

Incumbent officials wield powerful tools of influence. Nixon famously threatened the renewal of the broad-
cast licenses of the Washington Post’s parent corporation in the wake of its coverage of the Watergate scandal
(Graham 1997). Thomas (2006) writes of the modern era, “There is management and manipulation of news
by government and a supine press.... One has to wonder how much General Electric (NBC), Viacom (CBS),
and Disney (ABC) care about freedom of the press when access to the White House is at stake” (xv). If
public officials use their authority to distort media coverage, the result may be a less informed electorate and
a less effective political system.
    In this paper we study government influence on the US press at a time when the tension between forces
supporting and undermining press freedom was especially strong. We find little evidence that incumbent
party support affects the entry, exit, circulation, or content of like-minded newspapers. The one excep-
tion is the South during and after Reconstruction, where Republican governments made a coordinated and
concerted effort to sustain a Republican press amidst limited political and market competition.
    Some have argued that the economic and institutional development of the United States in the late
nineteenth century was similar to that of countries like Russia and Argentina today (Åslund 2005; Shleifer
and Treisman 2005). Given evidence for significant government influence over the press in those countries
(Corrales et al. 2009; Di Tella and Franceschelli 2011), our finding of limited influence in the United States
raises the question of what factors created such a different outcome. The historical record suggests candidate
explanations—a more competitive political system, a stronger tradition of press freedom—but determining
the precise role each played remains a task for future research.
the average Confederate state Republican newspapers were 22 percent cheaper. Republican newspapers in Confederate states had
circulations less than half that of Democratic newspapers on average, a much larger gap than in the rest of the country. The dif-
ferences between Confederate and non-Confederate states on these two dimensions remain economically large even in a regression
that controls for the Democratic share of the presidential vote.


                                                               25
   The elimination of most forms of direct patronage and the continuing competitiveness of most media
markets make it possible that incumbent influence on the press today is weaker than during the period we
focus on. Consistent with this, the results in the online appendix show no relationship between incumbent
control and newspaper endorsements in the 1932-2004 period, and Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) find no
correlation between the party of the incumbent governor or congressional representative and the political
slant of newspapers in 2005.
   We stress, however, that in the present paper we offer only limited evidence on influence by local and
federal officeholders. In addition, we have only coarse measures of newspaper content. Finally, the Recon-
struction episode is a reminder that incumbent influence may play an important role when stakes are high
and constraints are weakened.




                                                   26
References

Abbott, Richard H. 2004. For Free Press and Equal Rights: Republican Newspapers in the Reconstruction
   South. Athens, GA: The University of Georgia Press.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Political losers as a barrier to economic development.”
   American Economic Review 90(2): 126-130.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, Erik C. Snowberg, and James M. Snyder Jr. 2006. “Television and the incumbency
   advantage in US elections.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 31(4): 469-490.
Åslund, Anders. 2005. “Comparative oligarchy: Russia, Ukraine and the United States,” CASE Network
   Studies and Analyses No. 296.
Balan, David J., Patrick DeGraba, and Abraham L. Wickelgren. 2009. “Ideological persuasion in the
   media.” Mimeo, Federal Trade Commission.
Baldasty, Gerald J. 1992. The Commercialization of News in the Nineteenth Century. Madison, WI: Univer-
   sity of Wisconsin Press.
Baron, David P. 2006. “Persistent media bias.” Journal of Public Economics 90(1-2): 1–36.
Berry, Steven and Joel Waldfogel. 2010. “Product quality and market size,” The Journal of Industrial
   Economics 58(1): 1-31.
Bennett, W. Lance, Regina G. Lawrence, and Steven Livingston. 2007. When The Press Fails: Political
   Power and the News Media from Iraq to Katrina. Chicago, IL and London: University of Chicago
   Press.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1998. “Sources of inefficiency in a representative democracy: A
   dynamic analysis.” American Economic Review 88(1): 139-156.
Besley, Timothy and Andrea Prat. 2006. “Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media capture and government
   accountability.” American Economic Review 96(3): 720-736.
Boas, Taylor C. and F. Daniel Hidalgo. 2011. “Controlling the airwaves: Incumbency advantage and
   community radio in Brazil.” American Journal of Political Science 55(4): 869-885.
Burnham, W. Dean. 1984. “Partisan division of American state governments, 1834-1985.” [Computer file].
   ICPSR Study No. 16. http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/16.
California Legislature. 1906. “Title. V. § 4458 and § 4460,” in The Political Code of the State of California.
   San Francisco, CA: Bancroft-Whitney Company.
Corrales, Javier, Daniel Kimmage, Joshua Kurlantzick, Perry Link, Abbas Milani, and Rashed Rahman.
   2009. Undermining Democracy: 21st Century Authoritarians. Freedom House, Radio Free Europe/Radio



                                                     27
   Liberty, Radio Free Asia.
Di Tella, Rafael and Ignacio Franceschelli. 2011. “Government advertising and media coverage of corrup-
   tion scandals.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(4): 119-151.
Durante, Ruben and Brian Knight. 2012. “Partisan control, media bias, and viewer responses: Evidence
   from Berlusconi’s Italy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(3): 451-481.
Dyer, Carolyn S. 1989. Political Patronage of the Wisconsin Press, 1849-1860: New Perspectives on the
   Economics of Patronage. Columbia, SC: Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communi-
   cation.
Edwards, George C. and B. Dan Wood. 1999. “Who influences whom? The President, Congress, and the
   media.” American Political Science Review 93(2): 327-344.
Eggers, Andrew C., Anthony Fowler, Jens Hainmueller, Andrew B. Hall, and James M. Snyder Jr. Forth-
   coming. “On the validity of the regression discontinuity design for estimating electoral effects: New
   evidence from over 40,000 close races.” American Journal of Political Science.
Foner, Eric. 2002. Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877. New York: Harper
   Perennial Modern Classics.
Gao, Chungchan. 2000. African Americans in the Reconstruction Era. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin. 2006. “The rise of the fourth estate: How
   newspapers became informative and why it mattered.” in Corruption and Reform: Lessons from Amer-
   ica’s Economic History 187-230. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2008. “Competition and truth in the market for news.” Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 133–154.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. “What drives media slant? Evidence from US daily
   newspapers.” Econometrica 78(1): 35-71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. 2011. “The effect of newspaper entry and
   exit on electoral politics.” American Economic Review 101(7): 2980-3018.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. Forthcoming. “Competition and ideological
   diversity: Historical evidence from US newspapers.” American Economic Review.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Bryce A. Ward. 2006. “Myths and realities of American political geography.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2): 119-144.
Graham, Katharine. 1997. Personal History. New York: Alfred Knopf, Inc.
Haines, Michael. 2005. “Historical, demographic, economic, and social data: The United States, 1790-
   2002.” [Computer file]. ICPSR Study No. 2896. http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/2896.


                                                  28
Kaplan, Richard L. 2002. Politics and the American Press: The Rise of Objectivity, 1865-1920. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Key, V.O. 1949. Southern Politics in State and Nation. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Lee, Alfred M. 1937. The Daily Newspaper in America: The Evolution of a Social Instrument. New York:
   Macmillan.
Lee, David S. 2008. “Randomized experiments from non-random selection in US House elections.” Journal
   of Econometrics 142(2): 675-697.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression discontinuity designs in economics.” Journal of
   Economic Literature 48(2): 281–355.
McMillan, John and Pablo Zoido. 2004. “How to subvert democracy: Montesinos in Peru.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 18(4): 69-92.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. “The market for news.” American Economic Review
   95(4): 1031-1053.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Kevin K. Tsui. 2008. “Political entry, public policies, and the economy.” NBER
   Working Paper w13830.
National Governors Association. 2011. “Search all governors past and present.” Accessed in March 2011
   at http://www.nga.org/portal/site/nga/menuitem.216dbea7c618ef3f8a278110501010a0/.
New Jersey Legislature. 1889. “An act relative to the publication of the financial statements of counties,”
   April 25, 1889, chapter CCII, in Acts of the One Hundred Thirteenth Legislature of the State of New
   Jersey. Trenton, NJ: MacCrellish & Quigley.
New York Legislature. 1892. “An act for the publication of session laws in two newspapers in each county
   of this state,” May 21, 1892, chapter 715, in The General Statutes of the State of New York. Albany, NY:
   Weed, Parsons, and Co.
Ohio General Assembly. 1876. “An act to fix the price of legal advertising,” March 25, 1876, in The General
   and Local Laws and Joint Resolutions Passed by the Sixty-Second General Assembly of the State of Ohio
   at its First Session. Columbus, OH: Nevins & Myers.
Oregon Legislative Assembly. 1891. “An act to authorize the publication in county newspapers of the
   proceedings of county courts, and fix compensation therefor,” February 21, 1891, in The Laws of Oregon
   and the Resolutions and Memorials of the Sixteenth Regular Session of the Legislative Assembly Thereof.
   Salem, OR: Frank C. Baker.
Petrova, Maria. 2008. “Inequality and media capture.” Journal of Public Economics 92(1-2): 183-212.
———. 2011. “Newspapers and parties: How advertising revenues created an independent press.” Ameri-


                                                    29
   can Political Science Review 105(4): 790-808.
Prior, Markus. 2006. “The incumbent in the living room: The rise of television and the incumbency advan-
   tage in US House elections.” Journal of Politics 68(3): 657-673.
Qian, Nancy and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013. “Government distortion in independently owned media:
   Evidence from US Cold War news coverage of human rights.” NBER Working Paper w15738.
Sechrist, Robert P. 1984. “Basic geographic and historic data for interfacing ICPSR data sets, 1620-1983.”
   [Computer file]. ICPSR Study No. 8159.
   http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/8159.
Shaked, Avner and John Sutton. 1987. “Product differentiation and industrial structure.” The Journal of
   Industrial Economics 36(2): 131-146.
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Treisman. 2005. “A normal country: Russia after communism.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 19(1): 151-174.
Summers, Mark W. 1994. The Press Gang: Newspapers and Politics, 1865-1878. Chapel Hill, NC: Univer-
   sity of North Carolina Press.
Thomas, Helen. 2006. Watchdogs of Democracy? The Waning Washington Press Corps and How It Has
   Failed the Public. New York: Scribner.




                                                   30
                        Table 1: Effect of incumbent party on newspaper circulation share

                                   Panel A: Baseline dynamics (slope-change model)
                                                Effect of Democratic incumbent on change in Democratic circulation share

                                                Governors     State lower house     State upper house       All state offices
    Specifications:                                 (1)                (2)                  (3)                   (4)


    (1)   Year fixed effects                      0.003              0.006                0.005                  0.003
                                                  (0.002)            (0.003)             (0.003)                (0.002)
    (2)   Year fixed effects and                   0.003              0.007               0.005                  0.003
          presidential vote share indicators      (0.003)            (0.005)             (0.004)                (0.005)
    (3)   Year and state fixed effects, and       0.002              0.008                0.004                -0.00001
          presidential vote share indicators      (0.004)            (0.010)             (0.008)               (0.00842)

          Number of state-years                    591                624                  622                    582



                                               Panel B: Alternative dynamics
                                                     Effect of Democratic incumbent on Democratic circulation share

                                                Governors     State lower house     State upper house       All state offices
    Specifications:                                 (1)                (2)                  (3)                   (4)


    (1)   On-impact effect                        -0.011             -0.019               -0.006                 -0.018
                                                  (0.011)            (0.019)             (0.016)                (0.020)
    (2)   Slow on-impact effect                   -0.020             -0.047               -0.018                 -0.052
          (four-year weighted average)            (0.018)            (0.029)             (0.022)                (0.032)
    (3)   Baseline specification                  -0.007             -0.001               -0.007                 -0.002
          with a four-year lag                    (0.004)            (0.008)             (0.007)                (0.007)

Notes: Data cover the 1869-1928 period. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state-decade. The table reports the
estimates of the coefficient on an indicator for Democratic incumbency for 24 separate regressions models. The dependent
variable in all rows in panel A and row (3) of panel B is the change in the Democratic share of daily newspaper circulation, and the
dependent variable in rows (1) and (2) of panel B is the level of the Democratic share of circulation. In both panels column (4) is
estimated from a model that includes indicators for Democratic control of the Governor’s office and the upper and lower houses of
the state legislature. The estimates reported in column (4) are for the sum of the coefficients on the three state office incumbent
variables. Panel A: row (1) includes year fixed effects, row (2) adds dummies for each 10 percentage point increment of the
Democratic share of the vote in the previous presidential election, and row (3) adds state fixed effects. Number of observations
differs across columns due to missing data on party affiliation of state officeholders. Panel B: in row (1) the independent variable
is an indicator for contemporaneous Democratic control of the state office and in row (2) the independent variable is the share of
the preceding four years Democrats held the office. Row (3) adds a four-year lag of the key independent variable to our baseline
specification. The coefficient reported is the sum of the contemporaneous effect and the lag effect. All specifications in Panel B
include presidential vote share indicators and year and state fixed effects.




                                                                31
  Table 2: Effect of incumbent party on newspaper circulation share - Regression-discontinuity model

                                        Effect of Democratic incumbent on change in Democratic circulation share

                                        Governors      State lower house     State upper house      All state offices
            Variables:                      (1)               (2)                   (3)                      (4)


            Democratic incumbent          -0.008             0.004                 0.014                   -0.006
                                          (0.005)           (0.017)               (0.020)                  (0.017)

            Democratic margin              0.186             -0.017                -0.083                  0.077
                                          (0.066)           (0.056)               (0.057)                  (0.090)

            Democratic incumbent          -0.094             0.062                 0.089                   -0.009
            × Democratic margin           (0.076)           (0.060)               (0.057)                  (0.086)


            Number of state-years           254               136                    91                     582

Notes: Data cover the 1869-1928 period. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state-decade. The dependent variable in
each regression is the change in the Democratic share of daily newspaper circulation. Democratic margin is the Democratic
margin of victory in the last election for governor, and the Democratic margin of control for the state legislature. Regressions are
limited to observations in which the absolute value of the Democratic margin is less than 0.1 in column (1) and less than 0.2 in
columns (2) and (3). Column (4) is estimated by simultaneously including all of the independent variables from columns (1)
through (3), an indicator for each office if the absolute value of the margin is greater than our threshold for inclusion in the sample,
and an interaction between each variable listed in the table and its respective out-of-sample indicator.




                                                                32
                                       Table 3: Magnitude of the panel estimates

                                                                                             All state offices

                                                                                       Slope-change     On-impact

              Baseline estimates
              (1)   Effect of switching all state offices from Republican to             -0.00001          -0.018
                    Democratic control on Democratic circulation share

              (2)   Upper bound of confidence interval (from row 1)                        0.017           0.022

              Interpretation of upper bound of confidence interval
              (3)   Effect on circulation share divided by the between-state               0.052           0.067
                    standard deviation in the level of circulation share

              (4)   Change in presidential vote share necessary to                         0.011           0.015
                    produce this change in circulation share

              (5)   Increase in incumbent party’s vote share in US Congressional          0.0003          0.0004
                    elections from incumbent’s effect on circulation share

              (6)   Fixed-cost subsidy to Democratic firms from each state                 0.001           0.001
                    necessary to produce this change in circulation share,
                    as a fraction of total newspaper revenue


Notes: Data cover the 1869-1928 period. Results in column (1) are from the slope-change model presented in table 1A and results
in column (2) are from the on-impact model presented in table 1B. Row (1) reports the estimate of the effect of control of all three
state offices on circulation, and row (2) reports the upper bound of the confidence interval of that point estimate. Row (3) reports
the value in row (2) divided by the between-state standard deviation in the average Democratic share of circulation in each state.
Row (4) reports the change in presidential vote share necessary to produce the change in circulation in row (2) from a
contemporaneous cross-sectional estimate of the effect of the Democratic vote share in Presidential elections on the Democratic
share of circulation. Row (5) uses Gentzkow et al.’s (2011) estimate of the effect of the Democrat’s share of circulation on the
Democratic vote share in US Congressional races to compute the effect of a change in circulation equivalent to the upper bound of
the confidence interval on the Democratic share of the vote in Congressional elections. Row (6) uses the entry model estimated in
Gentzkow et al. (forthcoming) to estimate the average total cost, as a fraction of newspaper revenue, of a fixed-cost subsidy to
firms choosing Democratic affiliation required to induce an equivalent change in circulation share. See section 5.2 for details.




                                                               33
         Table 4: Decomposition of the effect of incumbent party on newspaper circulation share

                                                                                All state offices

                                                                          Slope-change      On-impact

                           (1)   Baseline                                   -0.00001          -0.018
                                                                            (0.00842)        (0.020)

                           (2)   Democratic share of                         -0.0003          0.033
                                 newspapers                                  (0.0063)        (0.016)

                           (3)       Democratic share of                      0.128           0.142
                                     newspaper entries                       (0.083)         (0.048)

                           (4)       Democratic share of                      0.095          -0.019
                                     newspaper exits                         (0.101)         (0.049)

                           (5)   Ratio of Democrat to Republican              0.008           0.020
                                 mean subscription prices                    (0.015)         (0.043)

                           (6)   Democratic share of                          -0.001          0.013
                                 circulation of continuing papers            (0.003)         (0.036)

                           (7)   Ratio of Democrat to Republican              -0.013          0.020
                                 mean number of pages per issue              (0.018)         (0.045)

                           (8)   Democratic share of candidate                -0.004          0.040
                                 mentions in Republican newspapers           (0.033)         (0.070)

                           (9)   Democratic share of candidate               -0.037          -0.019
                                 mentions in Democratic newspapers           (0.052)         (0.104)


Notes: Data cover the 1869-1928 period unless otherwise specified. The sample is restricted to observations where the baseline
outcome variable is non-missing. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state-decade. The specifications in column (1)
parallel row (3), column (4) of table 1A, and the specifications in column (2) parallel row (1), column (4) of table 1B. The rows
indicate the dependent variable used in the regression. The table reports estimates of the sum of the coefficients on indicators for
Democratic incumbency. Row (1) presents the baseline results from table 1. Unlike all other rows, the outcomes in the first
column of rows (3) and (4) are in levels, and the indicators for control of the state in the second column of rows (3) and (4) are in
changes. Subscription prices are not available in 1880 and 1884. Number of pages is available 1869-1912. Mentions of
presidential and vice-presidential candidates are available from 1872-1928. All specifications include presidential vote share
indicators and year and state fixed effects.




                                                               34
         Table 5: Estimates for samples with weak market incentives or strong political incentives

                  Panel A: Weak market incentives                         Panel B: Strong political incentives
                                                  All state offices                                    All state offices


            (1)    Baseline                          -0.00001            (1)    Baseline                  -0.00001
                                                     (0.00842)                                            (0.00842)

            Counties with below-median :                                 Sub-samples:


            (2)    Advertising price per copy          0.007             (2)    Before 1900                -0.009
                                                      (0.009)                                              (0.017)

            (3)    Subscription price                  0.018             (3)    Only county                -0.002
                                                      (0.014)                   seats                      (0.008)

            (4)    Income per capita                   -0.010            (4)    Only state                  0.006
                                                      (0.008)                   capitals                   (0.009)

            (5)    Literacy rate                       -0.009            (5)    Presidential                0.003
                                                      (0.010)                   battleground states        (0.009)



Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state-decade. The specifications correspond to the all state offices
specification in row (3) of table 1A. All specifications include presidential vote share indicators, state and year fixed effects. Row
(1) contains the baseline results from table 1A. In rows (2) - (5) of Panel A we include in our dependent measure only those
newspapers located in counties that are below the state median on the dimension shown. “Advertising price per copy” refers to the
mean advertising price per copy across all newspaper-years in our data. “Subscription price” refers to the mean subscription price
across all newspaper-years in our data. Both of these prices are deflated to real dollars using a GDP deflator. “Income per capita”
refers to the sum of manufacturing output and agricultural output per capita averaged across the 1920 and 1930 Censuses.
“Literacy rate” refers to the fraction literate averaged across the 1870 and 1900-1930 US Censuses. Rows (2) through (5) of Panel
B restrict the sample of states, time periods, or newspaper locations as indicated. Presidential battleground states are those in which
the presidential vote margin is at or below 10 percentage points in at least half of the presidential elections in our sample period.




                                                                 35
                                             Table 6: Reconstruction South
                                        Panel A: Democratic share of circulation
                                                    Daily newspapers               Weekly newspapers
                     Specification             Slope-change      On-impact     Slope-change     On-impact
                                                     (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)


                     Democratic control            -0.021           0.097         -0.031           0.188
                     of all state offices          (0.013)          (0.050)       (0.019)         (0.068)

                     [permutation p-value]         [0.058]          [0.000]       [0.001]         [0.000]

                     Number of state-years           83               83            77              88


                                        Panel B: Democratic share of newspapers
                                                    Daily newspapers               Weekly newspapers
                     Specification             Slope-change      On-impact     Slope-change     On-impact
                                                     (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)


                     Democratic control            -0.017           0.119         -0.036           0.199
                     of all state offices          (0.021)          (0.057)       (0.014)         (0.055)

                     [permutation p-value]         [0.096]          [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]

                     Number of state-years           86               86            77              88

Notes: Data cover the 1869-1900 period. All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by state-decade. Permutation p-values in brackets are from a test of the null hypothesis of no effect of Democratic
control based on 1000 permutations of the independent variable within state. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the change in
the Democratic share of circulation of [daily/weekly] newspapers (slope-change specification) or the Democratic share of
circulation of [daily/weekly] newspapers (on-impact specification). In Panel B, the dependent variable is the change in the
Democratic share of [daily/weekly] newspapers (slope-change specification) or the Democratic share of [daily/weekly]
newspapers (on-impact specification). The independent variable is a dummy for whether the year is after the Democrats first take
control of the Governor’s office and the upper and lower houses of the state legislature. Differences in sample size across panels
are due to a small number of state-years in which no daily newspaper reports circulation. Differences in sample size between daily
and weekly newspapers are due to (i) states with weekly newspapers and no daily newspapers and (ii) the fact that our weekly
newspaper series ends in 1896, so that the change in weekly circulation share from 1896 to 1900 cannot be calculated.




                                                               36
                  Figure 1: Incumbency effect on newspaper circulation share - Panel estimates




                                                                          .02
                                  Change in Democratic share of circulation
                                          −.02            0
                                                         −.04
                                                                                −8




                                                                                     −4




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                             4




                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                      Years relative to Democratic control


Notes: To construct this figure we augment the “all offices” specification of table 1A row (3) with leads and lags of the Democratic
control indicators. We then plot the sum of the three state office indicators for each lead and lag coefficient along with their
confidence intervals (constructed using standard errors clustered by state-decade).




                                                                                                  37
      Figure 2: Incumbency effect on newspaper circulation share - Regression-discontinuity estimates
                                                                                     Governor incumbency effect on newspaper circulation




                                   Coefficient on change in Dem circulation share
                                    −.04     −.02      0       .02        .04




                                                                                    −.1          −.05             0              .05         .1
                                                                                                           Margin of victory

                                                                                                                 Local average
                                                                                                                 Linear fit


                                                                                    Lower house incumbency effect on newspaper circulation
                                   Coefficient on change in Dem circulation share
                                    −.4        −.2       0         .2        .4




                                                                                    −.2   −.15   −.1    −.05      0        .05   .1    .15   .2
                                                                                                           Margin of control

                                                                                                                Local average
                                                                                                                Linear fit


                                                                                    Upper house incumbency effect on newspaper circulation
                                   Coefficient on change in Dem circulation share
                                    −.6      −.4     −.2     0       .2      .4




                                                                                    −.2   −.15   −.1    −.05      0        .05   .1    .15   .2
                                                                                                           Margin of control

                                                                                                                Local average
                                                                                                                Linear fit



Notes: Data points are constructed by regressing the dependent measure on a vector of indicators for whether the margin of victory
(in the first panel) or control (in the second and third panels) falls in a given interval, averaged over the four-year period since the
last presidential election. Following Lee (2008), the intervals are 0.005 in all three plots. The line shows the best linear fit allowing
the slope to differ for positive and negative margins of victory.




                                                                                                              38
                                                       Figure 3: Reconstruction South (Democratic share of daily circulation)

                                    AL                                       AR                                        FL                                       GA




                1
                                                          1
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                            1




                .8
                                                          .8
                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                            .8




                .6
                                                          .6
                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                            .6




                .4
                                                          .4
                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                            .4




                .2
                                                          .2
                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                            .2
                     1868   1876    1884        1892           1868   1876    1884       1892           1868   1876    1884        1892          1868    1876    1884       1892
                              Calendar year                             Calendar year                            Calendar year                             Calendar year
                                    LA                                       MS                                        NC                                       SC




                1
                                                          1
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                            1




                .8
                                                          .8
                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                            .8




                .6
                                                          .6
                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                            .6




                .4
                                                          .4
                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                            .4




                .2
                                                          .2
                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                            .2




39
                     1868   1876    1884        1892           1868   1876    1884       1892           1868   1876    1884        1892          1868    1876    1884       1892
                              Calendar year                             Calendar year                            Calendar year                             Calendar year
                                    TN                                       TX                                        VA




                1
                                                          1
                                                                                                   1




                .8
                                                          .8
                                                                                                   .8




                .6
                                                          .6
                                                                                                   .6




                .4
                                                          .4
                                                                                                   .4




                .2
                                                          .2
                                                                                                   .2




                     1868   1876    1884        1892           1868   1876    1884       1892           1868   1876    1884        1892
                              Calendar year                             Calendar year                            Calendar year


     Notes: The figure shows the Democratic share of daily newspaper circulation by state and year. The red and blue dashed lines, respectively, reflect the years in which the Republicans
     and Democrats first took control of the state after the Civil War, where control is defined as occupying the governor’s office and the majority of both houses of the state legislature. In
     Tennessee, Republicans took control of the state in 1866, indicated by the dotted red line. In Virginia there was never a Republican civilian government; federal occupation continued
     until late in 1869. In Alabama, partial control alternated between Republicans and Democrats between 1868 and 1874. In Texas, Florida and North Carolina, Democrats retook
     control of the legislature before they retook full control of the state government. Circulation data for daily newspapers is unavailable for South Carolina and Louisiana in 1869, and
     for Florida in 1876. There were no daily newspapers in Florida in 1869 and 1872. For papers that existed in both 1869 and 1872, but for which 1869 circulation is missing, 1869
     circulation was replaced with 1872 circulation. This is indicated by the hollow circles for 1869.
