NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXED PRICE VERSUS
SPOT PRICE CONTRACTS:
A STUDY IN RISK ALLOCATION

A. Mitchell Polinsky

Working Paper No. 1817

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1817

January 1986

Fixed Price Versus Spot Price Contracts:
A Study in Risk Allocation

ABSTRACT

This

paper is concerned with the risk-allocation effects of

alternative types of contracts used to set the price of a good to

be delivered in the future. Under a fixed price contract, the
price is specified in advance. Under a spot price contract, the
price is the price prevailing in the spot market at the time of
delivery.

These contract forms are examined in the context of a

market in which sellers have uncertain production costs and buyers

have uncertain valuations. The paper derives and interprets a
general condition determining which contract form would be pre-

ferred when the seller and/or the buyer is risk averse. In
addition, an example is provided in which a spot price contract
with a floor price is superior both to a "pure" spot price contract and a fixed price contract.

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305

—11.

Introduction

When a seller and a buyer enter into a contract for the
future delivery of some good, they can set the price to be paid

in several ways. For example, they can specify the price in
advance, which will be called a fixed price contract. Or they
can agree to the price prevailing in the spot market for the
good on the date of delivery, which will be referred to as a

spot price contract.1 This paper is concerned with the effects
of these two contract forms on the allocation of risk between
the parties when at least one of them is risk averse.-"

(A

hybrid form -— a spot price contract with a floor price --

also

will be discussed.)

Variations of these contract forms are widely used in

practice. For example, in a survey of members of the National
Association of Purchasing Management, it was found that 90%
used fixed price contracts, 65% used "price at delivery" contracts (what I am calling spot price contracts), 50% used
renegotiated price contracts (price adjustments only in unusual
circumstances), 39% used "escalator clause" contracts (price

affected by increases or decreases in the costs of specific

inputs), and 20% used "cost plus" contracts.1' Contracting
practices in specific industries also illustrate the variety of

contract forms used. For example, contracts for the sale of
nuclear reactors have, at different times, been of the "turn—

key" (fixed price) form and of the cost—plus form.-/ Similarly,
contracts for the sale of natural gas, petroleum coke, and coal
have included fixed price contracts and several different kinds
of contracts with variable prices, including some with

price

-.2—

floors and ceilings./
To begin to see how fixed price and spot price contracts
allocate risk, consider a simple example (the details of which
are discussed in section 4 below) .

Suppose there are a large

number of sellers with identical, but uncertain, production

costs in an industry with a flat supply curve. Because of the
firms' cost uncertainty, the supply curve also is uncertain,
And because the supply curve is flat, the equilibrium price
in the spot market equals the realized value of the firms'

Costs (regardless of the demand curve). Suppose further that
there are many buyers (also firms) whose valuations are not
uncertain.

In this example, a spot price contract would insure a

seller against risk for the following reason. If that seller's
costs are high, so are all other sellers' costs, and so also

is the supply curve and the spot price. The increase in revenue
from the higher spot price exactly offsets the increase in pro-

duction costs. Thus, in this example, a spot price contract
provides perfect insurance for the seller against production

cost uncertainty. A fixed price contract would leave all of
the risk of production cost uncertainty on the seller.

However, a fixed price contract would insure a buyer

against risk in this example. This is because, assuming the
value of the good to the buyer is fixed, a fixed price contract

would guarantee the buyer a certain level of profits. A spot
price contract would cause the buyer's profits to be uncertain.

—3—

Thus, in this example. a spot price contract insures the

seller and a fixed price contract insures the buyer. A spot
price contract will be chosen over a fixed price contract if and
only if the seller is more risk averse than the buyer.
The main contribution of this paper is to derive and
interpret the condition determining whether a spot price contract or a fixed price contract is superior in a model in which

the following complications are added: First, it is assumed
that the industry supply curve may be rising (rather than flat),
and that the seller's uncertain production cost is positively,

but imperfectly, correlated with shifts in the industry supply

curve. Second, it is assumed that the buyer's valuation and the
industry demand curve are uncertain and that the buyer's valuation
is positively, but imperfectly, correlated with shifts in the

industry demand curve. Note that, if the supply curve is rising,
the equilibrium spot price will depend on fluctuations of both
the industry supply curve and the industry demand curve.
In this more general framework, a spot price contract will
still tend to insure the seller against production cost uncer-

tainty. The reason is similar to that discussed in the previous
example, although the upward slope of the industry supply curve
and the less than perfect correlation between the seller's costs
and shifts in the industry supply curve reduces the value of a
spot price contract as insurance against production cost uncer—
6/

tainty . —

However, as noted, the spot price also will fluctuate
because of shifts in the industry demand curve. A

—4—

fixed price contract would insure the seller against these

demand—side uncertainties. Thus, in general, neither contract
can protect the seller against both supply-side and demand-side
risk.

The results regarding the buyer are the mirror image of

those regarding the seller. A spot price contract will tend
to insure the buyer against valuation uncertainty, while a
fixed price contract will insure the buyer against supply—side
uncertainties.

The preceding discussion shows that neither contract form
is best in terms of risk allocation in all circumstances.

Whether a spot price or a fixed price contract is preferred
depends on: the parties' relative aversion to risk;
the magnitudes of the supply-side and demand-side uncertainties;

the degree of correlation between the seller's costs and shifts
in the industry supply curve; the degree of correlation between
the buyer's valuation and shifts in the industry demand curve;
and the slopes of the supply and demand curves.

In the next section the basic framework is described,
including the general condition determining which contract form

is preferred. In section 3. this condition is interpreted
by examining some special cases. In section 4, an example is
presented in which a spot price contract with a floor price
dominates both a "pure" spot price contract and a fixed price

contract. And in section 5, some concluding remarks are made./

—5--

Basic Framework

2.

This section presents the basic framework. First, the
spot market equilibrium is described. Then the seller's and
buyer's utility under spot price and fixed price contracts

is stated. Finally, the general condition determining whether
a spot price contract is preferred to a fixed price contract
is derived.

The industry supply curve in the spot market is assumed to

be of the form
p =

(2.1)

k1

+

k20

+

F,

where P is the price of the good, Q is industry output,
k1 >

0

0 are positive constants, and F is a random

and k2

Similarly,

variable with mean zero and variance a2 (F) ./

the

industry demand curve is assumed to be of the form:
P =

(2.2)

where k3 >

k3

-

k4Q

+

and k4 > 0 are constants and S2 is a random

0

variable with mean zero and variance a2 ()

The random variables

and F are assumed to be independent.2-"

Setting supply equal to demand and solving for the equi10/

librium spot price gives:—
=

(2.3)

+ Ar

+

where
(2.4)

—

+
k1k4
k2k3
________

k4
________
_______
Xlk+k

=

k2
+

—6—

The corresponding expression for the equilibrium output is

omitted because it will not be used below. Industry equilibrium
is shown graphically in Figure 1.

Now consider a particular seller (hereafter "the Seller")
and a particular buyer ("the Buyer") who are contemplating
entering into a contract for the future exchange of one unit
of the good, but who do not yet know their respective costs

and vaiuationsj!/ The Seller's cost of producing the good is
(2.5)

C = c +

where c >

0

y,

is a constant and 'y

zero and variance a2 (y)

is

a random variable with mean

The random variable representing the

Seller's cost uncertainty is assumed to be positively correlated with the random variable representing supply curve uncertainty:

p(.F.

'2 • 6'/

—

=

Cov(F,

y)

a(r)a(y)

>

0,

where p(.) is the correlation coefficient, Cov(.) is the
covariance, and o(.) is the standard deviation of the respective arguments.

Similarly, the Buyer's value from having the good is
(2.7)

V=v+w

where v >

0

is a constant and w is a random variable with mean

zero and variance o (w) .

The random variable representing the

Buyer's valuation uncertainty is assumed to be positively corre—
lated with the random variable representing demand curve uncertainty:
(2,8)

p(Q, w)

>

0.

—7—

Figure

1

Spot Market Equilibrium

+ c2

S

slope =

k2

'I

slope =

P

—k4

a)

k1 + I'
D

Q

—8—

The Seller's cost and the Buyer's valuation are assumed to
12/

be independent.—

The parties are assumed to have the following mean—variance
utility functions:
(2.9)

Seller: U = E(ir)

(2.10)

Buyer:

where i

is

—

sVar(iT),

V = E(lr) - bVar(IT),

the relevant party's profit and s

0 and b

0 are

constants measuring the Seller's and Buyer's risk aversion.--"
The Seller's profit under a spot price contract is
= P* —

(2.11)

(2.11) can be rewritten as:

Using (2.3) ,

(2.12)

= (P

ii

y].

[c +

—

c) + (X1F +

—

Thus, under a spot price contract, the Seller's expected profit is P

c and the variance of his profit is (X1F +

—

Similarly,

the Seller's profit under a fixed price contract

with contract price P is:
(2.13)

rr =

P —

[c

+

y].

This results in an expected profit of P - c and a variance of
profit of a2 (y)

The Buyer's profit under a spot price contract is
(2.14)

It

=v

+

—

P,

or, using (2.3),
(2.15)

if

= (V —

+

—

AJJ

—

—9--

The resulting expected profit is v variance of profits is a2(ai —

and the resulting

- X22).

Similarly, the Buyer's

profit under a fixed price contract with contract price P is:
(2.16)

ii

= v +

w —

p,

leading to an expected profit of v -

P

and variance of profit

of a2(w). The results of the preceding cases are summarized
in Table 1.

It is shown in the Appendix that, with mean-variance
utility functions, the optimal contract form minimizes the
weighted sum of the parties' variances of profits, where the

weights are the parties' risk aversion coefficients.-/ Thus,
a spot price contract is preferred to a fixed price contract
if and only if:
Sc2

(2.17)
<

(X1F

sa2

+
(y) +

—

y) +

b2(j

—

X1F

—

be2 (w)

The left-hand side of (2.17) can be interpreted as the parties'
disutility due to the bearing of risk under a spot price contract, while the right—hand side is their comparable disutility
under a fixed price contract.

—10—

Table 1

Expected Profits and Variances of Profits

(a) Spot Price Contract

(b) Fixed Price Contract

Seller

Expected Profit

Variance of Profit

P—c

o2(y)

Buyer

v—P

2(w)

—ii--

3.

Interpretation
In order to understand better the condition determining

which contract form is preferred, this section will consider

several sp9cial cases. First, it will be assumed that only
one of the parties is risk averse,

then that both re

risk averse.

3.1 Seller Risk Averse, Buyer Risk Neutral
In this case, condition (2.17) reduces to:
(3.1)

—
a2 (A1F + x2c2

y)

< a2

It will be useful to examine this condition when either supply—
side uncertainty or demand—side uncertainty is absent.
Suppose first that the only source of uncertainty is with
respect to the demand curve; therefore, a2(F) = 0 and a2(i) = 0.
Then (3.1) becomes
(3.2)

a2(A2c2) <0,

implying that a fixed price contract is preferred to a spot

price contract. This makes sense intuitively. If the Seller's
production costs are fixed, then the Seller bears no risk if
his revenue is fixed, as it would be under a fixed price contract.

A spot price contract would make his revenue uncertain because
the spot price would vary with fluctuations in the demand curve.
Thus, a fixed price

contract

insures the Seller against

side uncertainty.

Now suppose that the only sources of uncertainty are on
the supply side, both with respect to the Seller's production

—12—

costs and with respect to the supply curve; therefore,
a2(c) = 0.
(3.3)

Now (3.1) becomes:

a2(XF -

')

< a2(y)

After some manipulation, this can be rewritten as:

(3.4)

p(F,y) >

+ k)

Clearly, this condition may or may not be satisfied. Therefore,
with respect to supply-side uncertainty, either a spot price
contract or a fixed price contract may be preferred.
To understand the circumstances in which each contract

form would be preferred, consider the terms in (3.4). Everything else equal, the higher is p(F,y)——the (positive) correlation between the Seller's production cost and the industry
supply curve-—the more likely a spot price contract is pre-

ferred to a fixed price contract, The reason, suggested in
the introduction, is easy to see. Suppose, for example, that
the Seller's costs turn out to be high. Since i(F,i) > 0,
the industry supply curve, and hence the spot price, is likely

to be high as well. Therefore, a spot price contract can be
viewed as a form of insurance for the Seller against production

cost uncertainty. High costs will tend to be associated with
high revenue, and vice versa)-/
This conclusion needs to be qualified for the following

reason. As can be seen from (3.4), ii a(F)/c(y)——the ratio
of the standard deviation of the industry supply curve to the
standard deviation of the Seller's costs--is sufficiently high,
then a fixed price contract would be preferred to a spot price

--13—

contract regardless of the magnitude of p(F,y). Under these
circumstances, the implicit insurance provided by the spot

price contract is "too much of a good thing." For example,
if the Seller's costs rise, the spot price is likely to rise
by so much more that the Seller's profits become more variable

rather than less variable under a spot price contract. Thus,
in order for a spot price contract not to "overinsure" the
Seller in this sense, the variance of the industry supply curve
must not be too large relative to the variance of the Seller's
16/
costs . —
One final factor needs to be taken into account. Every-

thing else equal, the extent to which shifts in the industry
supply curve lead to changes in the spot price depends on the

slopes of the industry supply and demand curves. This is
accounted for in (3.4) by the term k4/2(k2 +

k4).

For example,

the flatter the demand curve (i.e., the lower is k4), the smaller
the impact on the spot price of a shift in the supply curve.

Consequently, a spot price contract would be more likely to
be superior because the problem of "overinsuring" would be less
likely.

To summarize: A fixed price contract insures the Seller
against demand—side uncertainty, while a spot price contract
tends to insure the Seller against production—cost uncertainty

(although it might overinsure him). Therefore, when the Seller
is risk averse and the Buyer is risk neutral, which contract

form is preferred will depend on the relative importance of the
two sources of uncertainty (unless the spot price contract
overinsures the Seller against production cost uncertainty,
in which case a fixed price contract would be preferable)

—14—

3.2 Buyer Risk Averse, Seller Risk Neutral
In this case, condition (2.17) reduces to:

2(w —

(35)

-

X1F

X2)

< a2(w),

—

<

or, equivalently,
a2(X1F +

(3.6)

a2(w)

Note that (3.6) is identical to (3.1) with w--the Buyer's
valuation uncertainty——substituted for y—-the Seller's pro-

duction-cost uncertainty. Thus, the results of section 3.1
apply here in reverse.
If the only source of uncertainty is with respect to the
supply curve, (3.6) becomes
(3.7)

2(X1F)

<

0,

implying that a fixed price contract is preferred to a spot

price contract. For reasons analogous to those discussed
earlier, a fixed price contract insures the Buyer against
supply-side uncertainty.

If the only sources of uncertainty are on the demand side,
(3.6) can be written as:
k
(3.8)

p( ,w) >

2

2(k2 + k4)

ThT

The interpretation of this condition is analogous to that of
(3.4) : A spot price contract can be viewed as a form of

ance for the Buyer against valuation uncertainty. However, if
it overinsures the Buyer, a fixed price contract may be preferred.

—15—

3.3 Both Parties Risk Averse
In this section limiting values of the slope of the industry supply curve will be considered when both parties are risk
averse.

Suppose first that the industry suoplv curve i flat;
i.e., k2 = 0.

Then A1

1 and A2 =

0

(see (2.4)), and the

condition determining whether a spot price contract is preferred
to a fixed price contract, (2.17), becomes:

F).

SG2(F — y) + ba2(w —

(3.9)

<

sc2(y)

+ ba2(w)

After some manipulation, (3.9) can be rewritten as
(3.10)

b <

s{2PFii

----

— i}.

Since the expression in braces may be positive or negative,
either a spot price or a fixed price contract may be preferred.

Condition (3.10) can be interpreted in terms of the results

in sections 3.1 and 3.2. First note that when the supply curve
is flat, only supply—side uncertainty matters since shifts in
the industry demand curve will not affect the spot price.

From the Seller's perspective,21 recall that a spot price
contract is preferred with respect to supply—side uncertainty
unless it "overjngures" the Seller; the condition for a spot

price contract to be preferred was given by (3.4), which,
when k2 = 0, can be rewritten as:
(3.11)

2p(F,y)

cf)

- 1 >

0.

Note that the left-hand side of (3.11) is identical to the

—16—

expression in braces in (3.10). From the Buyer's perspective,
recall that a fixed price contract is preferred with respect
to supply—side uncertainty because it fully insures the Buyer

against this source of risk. Therefore, (3.10) can be given
the following interpretation. If the Seller prefers a fixed
price contract too——that is, if the expression in braces is
negative—-then (3.10) clearly implies that a fixed price con-

tract will be superior to a spot price contract. However, if
the Seller prefers a spot price contract—-that is, if the

expression in braces is positive-—then whether a spot price or
a fixed price contract is superior depends on the risk aversion
of the Seller relative to that of the Buyer and on the extent
to which a spot price contract insures the Seller against

production cost uncertainty (as measured by the magnitude of
the expression in braces in (3.10>).

Now suppose that the slope of the industry supply curve

approaches infinity. Then l approaches zero, A2 approaches
unity, and (2.17) becomes:
(3.12)

sa2(Q — y) + bc2(w — A2c2)

<

sa2(y) ÷ b2(w).

This condition can be rewritten as:
(3.13).

s

<

b{2P(cw) ¶____ — 4.

The interpretation of (3.13) is analogous to the

interpretation

of (3.10). In the limit, as the slope of the industry supply
curve approaches infinity, only demand—side uncertainty

matters.'

With respect to this source of uncertainty, the Seller prefers

—17—

a fixed price contract, whereas the Buyer prefers a spot price

contract unless it overinsures him. Therefore, if the Buyer
prefers a spot price contract, then which contract form is
superior depends on the strength of this preference and the

relative aversion to risk of the parties, whereas if the Buyer
prefers a fixed price contract, then that contract form will
be superior.

Other special cases easily can be worked out. Note, for
example, that the results when the slope of the industry demand
curve approaches (minus) infinity are identical to those when
the slope of the supply curve is zero (since X1 approaches

unity and A2 approaches zero). Similarly, when the slope of
the demand curve approaches zero, the results are identical
to those when the slope of the supply curve approaches infinity.

—18—

4.

Spot Price Contracts with Floor Prices: An Example
There are many other types of contracts that could be

considered by the parties in order to better allocate supply—

side and demand—side risks. One additional contract form
will be examined in this section——a spot price contract with

a floor price. Under this contract, the Buyer pays the Seller
the spot price or a prespecified floor price, whichever is

greater. Since the floor price can be made arbitrarily low,
this contract form can approximate a "pure" spot price contract.
Moreover, if the floor price is set sufficiently high and
the Buyer is made to pay the spot price or the floor price,

whichever is higher, less a positive constant, a spot price
contract with a floor price can also approximate a fixed price

contract. Clearly, therefore, a spot price contract with a
floor price cannot do worse than the other two contract forms.
This section presents an example in which it does better.
The example is a special case of the model described in
section 2.

It is characterized by the following assumptions.

First, the industry supply curve is flat: k2

0. Second,

the random variable representing the Seller's production
cost uncertainty is identical to the random variable representing supply curve uncertainty: y = F.

(This common random

variable will be referred to as y) Together, these two assumptions have a natural economic interpretation; they describe
a competitive industry in long-run equilibrium in which all of

the firms' costs are identical, but uncertain. Third, the
supply-side uncertainty is binary:

—19—

-ra,

with probability (1-r),

—ra + a,

with probability r,

y =

(4.1)

r

where 0. <

<

1 and a > 0 are constants. Note that E(Y) = 0

and
(4.2)

a2(y)

r(l—r)a2.

Given these three assumptions, the equilibrium spot price is
—

(4.3)

P -

ra,
ra + a,

with probability (1-r),
with probability r,

is a constant. Fourth, there is no demand—side uncer-

where
tainty.

Since the analysis of different contract forms in this
example parallels the analysis in the preceding two sections,
only a few details concerning the spot price contract with a

floor price will be discussed here. From (4.3), the low value
of the spot price is P — ra and the high value is P Therefore, let the floor price be P -

ra

+

f,

where 0

ra

÷ a.
f

a.

If f = 0, the spot price contract with a floor price is equiva-

lent to a pure spot price contract and if f = a, it can be made
equivalent to a fixed price contract by having the Buyer pay
the floor price less a positive constant.

(Since a reduction

of the contract price by a constant would not affect the variance of either party's profit, the possibility of such an
adjustment will be ignored in the remainder of this section.)
The Seller's profit under a spot price contract with floor
price f >

0

is, using (4.1) and (4.3):

—20—

— [C +

=

(4.4)

P —c +
P

y)

f,

with probability (l—r),

- c,

with probability r.

The variance of the Seller's profit is r(1-r)f2

Similarly,

the Buyer's profit is:

v — P ÷ ra —
(4.5)

—

V-P

+

ra

-

f,

with probability (l-r),

a,

with probability r.

The variance of the Buyer's profit is r(l-r) (a-f)2.

As noted in section 2, the optimal contract minimizes
the weighted sum of the variances of profits, where the weights

are the parties' risk aversion coefficients. Thus, the optimal
floor price, P
(4.6)

- ra

+

f*,

can be determined by minimizing

sr(l—r)f2 + br(1—r) (a—f

19/
over f. This leads to:—
(4 7)

f* =

r ab
[s+b

Inserting (4.7) into (4.6) gives the minimum of the weighted
sum of the variances of profits under a spot price contract
with a floor price:
(4.8)

r(l—r)a2.

Under a pure spot price contract the weighted sum of the
variances of profits is
(4.9)

[b}r(l—r)a

2

—21—

while under a fixed price contract it is
(4.10)

[s]r(1-r)a2.

Note that, as between a pure spot price contract and a fixed
price contract, the former is superior if and only if the Seller
is more risk averse than the Buyer.

A comparison of (4.8) through (4.10) shows that when both
parties are risk averse the spot price contract with the optimal
floor price is preferable both to a pure spot price contract
and to a fixed price contract since
(4.11)

is

[]=

[]b= []

less than both b and s when s > 0 and b > 0.

This result

can be exp1ained intuitively. In the example, a pure spot
price contract fully insures the Seller against production

cost uncertainty, leaving all of the risk on the Buyer. A
fixed price contract does just the opposite. When both parties
are risk averse, it is better to share the risk, which can be
accomplished by a spot price contract with a floor price.
There is a simple way in this example to measure the
advantage of a spot price contract with a floor price over the

other two contracts. Expressions (4.8) through (4.10) represent the disutility to the parties from the bearing of risk.

In each case, the term in brackets multiplies the variance of

the Seller's production cost (see (4.2)). Therefore, the
ratio of the risk—bearing costs under a spot price contract
with an optimal floor price to the risk-bearing costs under the

—22—

other two contracts equals the ratio of sb/(s+b) to s or to b.
For example, suppose the Buyer and the Seller are equally risk

averse. Then the risk—bearing costs under a spot price contract with an optimal floor price are exactly half of the riskbearing costs under either a pure spot price contract or a

fixed price contract. Or, for example, suppose the Buyer is
twice as risk averse as the Seller (i.e., b = 2s). Then a
fixed price contract is superior to a pure spot price contract,
but a spot price contract with an optimal floor price reduces
risk-bearing costs by a third from what they would be under a
fixed price contract.

—23—

5.

Concluding Remarks

Although many simplifying assumptions have been made in

this paper, the principal observations seem quite general: A
spot price contract tends to insure a seller against production
cost uncertainty and a buyer against valuation uncertainty

(although it may "overinsure" them). A fixed price contract
insures a seller against demand—side uncertainties and a buyer

against supply—side uncertainties. Thus, which contract form
will be preferred by the parties depends on their relative
aversion to risk and the magnitudes of the supply-side and
demand—side uncertainties.
The analysis in this paper can be used to help explain

contracting practices in different industries. Consider, for
example, the uranium industry, in which the sellers usually
are private firms and the buyers frequently are public utilities

(using the uranium to produce electricity). It would seem
reasonable to assume that the sellers are more risk averse
than the buyers with respect to fluctuations in the price of
uranium (since the price of uranium constitutes a small fraction

of the utilities' cost of producing electricity and they usually
can pass input price changes through to consumers)
The contracting practices in the uranium industry changed

during the early 1970's. Before then, fixed price contracts
were the norm. Afterwards, spot price contracts were used

—24--

more frequently (often with a floor price). Assuming for
simplicity that the buyers (public utilities) are risk neutral,
this change would have to be explained by the risks borne by

the sellers. As noted earlier, sellers would prefer spot price
contracts with respect to production cost uncertainty (unless
such contracts overinsure them, which does not seem likely in
this context) and fixed price contracts with respect to demand

uncertainty. About the time that contracting practices began
to change in the uranium industry, there was a significant
increase in production cost uncertainty due to the effects of
environmental and mine safety regulations passed in the late

1960's and early 1970's. Thus, the change in contracting form
might be explained by these regulatory changes.

—25—

Appendix

The following result will be demonstrated in this appendix:
Suppose the parties' utility functions are of the mean—variance
form, the sum of their expected profits is constant, and lump-

sum transfers can be made between them. Then one situation is
Pareto superior to another if and only if the weighted sum
of the partiest variances of profits, where the weights are the
respective coefficients in the parties' utility functions, is
lower under that situation.

The notation used will be adapted from the text. Let
represent the expected profit of party i (i = S,B) in
J

1,2)

situation j (j =

Then the assumption that the sum of the

parties' expected profits is constant becomes:
(A.l)

IrS

Let

=

+

1

1

+
2

2

represent the variance of profit of party i in situation
J

j, and

>

let

k. =

0

represent a lump—sum transfer from S (the

Seller) to B (the Buyer) in situation j.

First it will be shown that if the weighted sum of the

variances of profits is lower under one situation, then that
situation can be made Pareto superior to the other situation
by appropriate lump-s urn transfers. Without loss of generality,
suppose the weighted sum of the variances is lower under situ—
ation 1:
2

(A. 2)

S

2

+ boB
1
1

2

2

< sc 2

+

boB

2

Also without loss of generality, suppose the Seller's utility

26—

is the same in both situations:
2

—

(A.3)

SOS

1

—

= TrS — so

—

2

1

2

—

S2

k2

The Buyer's utility in situation 1 is:
2

-

(A.4)

boB

1

+

k1.

1

Solving for k1from (A.3) and substituting the resulting expression into (A.4) gives:
—

(A.5)

+

(11

From (A.1) ,

equals m

—

boB —

÷

SOS )

÷ k

the expression in the first set of parentheses

Therefore,

(A.5) can be written as:

2
2

2

(A.6)

2

2

2

—

— TTS ) — (SOS

ii

TTB
— (so5 1
2
>

+

—

boB 1

2

+

50s 2

k2

B 2 -boB2 +k2,

where the inequality follows from (A.2). Hence, the Buyer's
utility is higher in situation 1.

Now it will be shown that if one situation is Pareto
superior to another, the weighted sum of the variances of

profits is lower under that situation. Without loss of generality, suppose situation 1 is Pareto superior to situation 2
and that the Seller's utility is strictly higher in situation 1:

(A.7)

—

2

—

1

(A.8)

—

1

so 1
2

ba 1

—

2

—

k1

— so

>
2
—

B 2-

Adding (A.7) and (A.8) gives:

—

k2,

boB 2 +

k2.

2

—27—

(A.9)

—

2

+ ii ) — so

(

—

2

bB

>

—

—

S + 7TB2)

2

SOS

—

2

boB

2
2
1
B1
From (A. 1), the terms in parentheses cancel. Multiplying the

S1

resulting expression by —l gives the desired result.

2

—28—

Footnotes

*/ Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper grew out of work I did in 1980 for the
defendants in Westinghouse Electric Corporation V.

Rio Algom

Limited, et al. (an antitrust suit by Westinghouse against

domestic and foreign uranium producers). The actual writing
of the paper, as well as the derivation of most of the results
in the present version, occurred after the case was settled in

1981. Work on the paper during the summer of 1982 was supported

by the Stanford Legal Resarch Fund, made possible by a bequest
from the Estate of Ira S. Lillick and by gifts from Roderick E.
and Carla A. Hills and other friends of the Stanford Law

School. Helpful comments were provided by Lucian Bebchuk,
Jeffrey Perloff, Ivan P'ng, Michael Riordan, William Rogerson,
Steven Shavell, Edward Sherry, and participants in seminars
at Berkeley and Stanford.

1/ If the spot market is competitive, which is consistent
with what will be assumed in section 2 below, then a spot price
contract is equivalent to transacting in the spot market.
Although there are reasons why the parties might prefer to enter
into a contract rather than to transact in the spot market
(such as reduced transaction costs from dealing with the same
person over time) ,

these reasons are not incorporated into the

model to be analyzed.
2/

Both the seller and the buyer will be presumed to be

firms (although the assumption that the buyer is a firm is not
essential to the analysis) .

The assumption of risk aversion

in the case of firms has both theoretical and empirical support.

—29—

See, for example, Amihud and Lev (1981) and Marcus (1982).

3/ See Long and Varbie (1978). Although many of the
respondents obviously utilized more than one type of contract,

the use of multiple contract forms will not be considered in
this paper.

4/ See, for example, Burness, Montgomery, and Quirk
(1980)

5/ See, for example, Pierce (1982), Goldberg an
Erickson (1982), and Joskow (1985)

6/ There is also the possibility, discussed in section
3 below, that a spot price contract will "overinsure" the
seller, in which case a fixed price contract could be preferable with respect to production cost uncertainty.

7/ Although, to my knowledge, the problem addressed in
this paper has not been studied previously, there is much work

on risk allocation that is related in one way or another. Of
general relevance are articles that consider risk allocation
issues in specific contractual settings--such as employment
contracts, defense procurement, and products liability.

Apparently, the first article of this sort was the study by
Cheung (1969) of employment contracts in agriculture.
There is also a large literature on the behavior of the
firm under uncertainty that is complementary to the problem

addressed here. Especially relevant are those papers which
consider what fraction of a firm's output it should sell

forward at a fixed price rather than in the spot market. An
early classic in this literature is McKinnon(1967) and more
recent examples include Feder, Just, and Schmitz (1980) and

—30—

Hoithausen (1979). Perloff (1981) applies this framework
to the excuse doctrine in contract law. This literature does
not, however, consider the risk aversion of buyers.
Probably of most relevance to the present analysis is the
book by Newbery and Stiglitz (1981) on commodity price stabilization schemes and the paper by Shavell (1976) on deferred

compensation schemes. However, in the Newbery—StiglitZ framework, if a firm's output were fixed, then a fixed price contract
(perfect commodity price stabilization) would eliminate all
This is not the case in my analysis. The general results

risk.

in the Shavell paper are consisten t with those presented here,
al thoug h he does not consider the specific contract forms and

market structure that I do. Also in the spirit of the present
study i s the paper by Sebenius and Stan (1982) analyzing profit
sharing

royalties, and fixed fees

although they assume that

one of the parties is risk netural.
8/

Obviously, F must be such that P >

0

(Analogous

comment s apply to the other random variables defined below.)
9 /

but

This assumption may be reasonable in some contexts

not others.

It

would be appropriate, fo r example, if

demand uncertainty is due to fluctuations in the real income
of consumers while production cost uncertainty is due to regulatory changes or the vagaries of the weather.

10/ Since the focus in this paper is on the contract
choice of a single seller and a single buyer who treat the
spot price as exogenous, it is not necessary in deriving (2.3)
to explicitly take account of the behavior of all
buyers and sellers in the market (although it is necessary to

assume that enough choose to trade in the spot market)

—31—

11/ It will be assumed that the realized values of the
uncertain costs and benefits are such that the parties will

want to complete the contract in the way originally contemplated by them--that is, by having the Seller produce the good
(as opposed to securing one unit in the spot market) and by

having the Buyer keep the good (as opposed to reselling it in
the spot market).

12/ The comment in note 9 above is applicable here too.
However, in a paper analyzing the effects of demand—side and
supply-side uncertainties on the output exchanged in a bilateral

trading situation, Weitzman (1981) has suggested why the
relevant random variables might be negatively correlated.

13/ Although mean-variance utility functions are widely
used because of their simplicity, their justification requires

some well—known assumptions. See, for example,Newbery and
Stiglitz (1981, Ch. 6)

14/ The conditions assumed in the Appendix include that
the sum of the parties' expected profits is constant and that

lump—sum transfers can be made between them. That the sum of
the parties' expected profits is constant across contract forms

is clear from Table 1. That lump—sum transfers can be made
between the parties follows from their ability to adjust the

contract price by a constant amount. Since such an adjustment
would not affect the variance of either party's profit, it is
not explicitly taken into account in the analysis.

15/ Note that this implicit insurance need not be perfect
in order for a spot price contract to be preferred.

16/ A possible response to this problem would be to make
the contract price only partly dependent on the spot price.

—32—

I am indebted to Michael Riordan for suggesting this point.
17/

I will use phrases like "from the Seller's perspective"

or "what the Seller would prefer" to refer to what the parties

would jointly choose if the Seller were risk averse and the

Buyer were risk neutral. Similar phrases will be used with
respect to the Buyer.

18/ Note that if shifts in the industry supply curve were
horizontal rather than vertical, then supply—side uncertainty
would matter even when the supply curve is perfectly inelastic.

j/

The second—order condition for a minimum is satisfied.

—33—

References

Amihud, Yakov, and Baruch Lev, "Risk Reduction as a Managerial
Motive for Conglomerate Mergers," Bell Journal of Economics,
Vol. 12, No. 2 (Autumn 1981), pp. 605—617.
Burness, H. Stuart, W. David Montgomery, and James P. Quirk,
"The Turnkey Era in Nuclear Power," Land Economics, Vol. 56,
No. 2 (May 1980), pp. 188—202.

Cheung, Steven N.S., "Transaction Costs, Risk Aversion, and
the Choice of Contractual Arrangements," Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1 (April 1969), pp. 23—42.

Feder, Gershon, Richard E. Just, and Andrew Schmitz, "Futures
Markets and the Theory of the Firm under Price Uncertainty,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 94, No. 2 (March 1980)
pp. 317—328.

Goldberg, Victor P., and John E. Erickson, "Long—Term Contracts
for Petroleum Coke," Working Paper No. 206, Department of
Economics, University of California, Davis, California,
September 1982.

Hoithausen, Duncan M., "Hedging and the Competitive Firm under
Price Uncertainty," American Economic Review, Vol. 69,
No. 5 (December 1979), pp. 989—995.
Joskow, Paul L., "Vertical Integration and Long Term Contracts:
The Case of Coal Burning Electric Generating Plants,"

Working Paper No. 85-OOlWP, Energy Laboratory, M.I.T.,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, January 1985.

Long, Brian G., and Dale L. Varble, "Purchasing's Use of
Flexible Price Contracts," Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management, Vol. 14 (Fall 1978) , pp. 2—5.

—3 4--

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Futures Markets, Buffer Stocks, and
Income Stability for Primary Producers," Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 75 (December 1967) , Pp. 844—861.

Marcus, Alan J., "Risk Sharing and the Theory of the Firm,"
Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2 (Autumn 1982)
Pp. 369—378.

Newbery, David M.G., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, The Theory of
Commodity Price Stabilization: A Study in the Economics of
Risk (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).

Perloff, Jeffrey, "The Effects of Breaches of Forward Contracts
Due to Unanticipated Price Changes," Journal of Legal
Studies, Vol. 10, No. 2 (June 1981), pp. 221—235.

Pierce, Jr., Richard J., "Natural Gas Regulation, Deregulation,
and Contracts," Virginia Law Review, Vol. 68, No. 1
(January 1982) ,

pp. 63—115.

Sebenius, J.K., and P.J.E. Stan, "Risk-Spreading Properties of
Common Tax and Contract Instruments," Bell Journal of
Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2 (Autumn 1982), pp. 555—560.

Shavell, Steven, "Sharing Risks of Deferred Payment," Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No. 1 (1976), pp. 161—168.
Weitzman, Martin L., "Toward a Theory of Contract Types,"
unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, M.I.T.,
October 1981 (revised).

</ref_section>

