                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    AN ALTERNATIVE FRAMEWORK FOR EMPIRICALLY MEASURING THE SIZE
                      OF COUNTERFEIT MARKETS

                                       Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                         Srikanth Kadiyala
                                           Priscillia Hunt
                                        Alessandro Malchiodi

                                        Working Paper 18171
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18171


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




This research was supported by a contract from the European Commission, Directorate General Internal
Market and Services to RAND Europe. We are grateful for research assistance and comments from
Stijn Hoorens, Lila Rabinovich, and Barrie Irving. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the RAND
Corporation.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Srikanth Kadiyala, Priscillia Hunt, and Alessandro Malchiodi.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Alternative Framework for Empirically Measuring the Size of Counterfeit Markets
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Srikanth Kadiyala, Priscillia Hunt, and Alessandro Malchiodi
NBER Working Paper No. 18171
June 2012
JEL No. H32,K42

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper develops a new method for estimating trends in the size of counterfeit markets. The method
draws on principles of microeconomic theory and uses aggregated product-level data to estimate counterfeiting
activities in various geographic markets. Using confidential firm unit forecasts and actual sales information,
a two stage approach is employed that first accounts for unexpected but observable factors that could
lead to forecasting error and then, in the second stage, considers the influence of market susceptibility
to IPR infringement. Data are analysed for 45 related products sold by a single firm operating in 16
countries during the period 2006-2011. Our models predict larger amounts of counterfeiting in countries
with higher corruption norms, lower government control and effectiveness. Predictions of the level
of counterfeiting obtained from the second stage are then compared to estimates of counterfeiting derived
internally by the firm using shadow-shopping methods. While our two stage model generally under-predicts
the level of counterfeiting in each year, it generates trends in counterfeiting that are broadly consistent
with those obtained using more costly and intensive methods.


Rosalie Liccardo Pacula                               Priscillia Hunt
RAND Corporation                                      RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street                                      1776 Main St.
P.O. Box 2138                                         P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                           Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER                                              and IZA, Institute for the Study of Labor
pacula@rand.org                                       Priscillia_Hunt@rand.org

Srikanth Kadiyala                                     Alessandro Malchiodi
RAND Corporation                                      RAND Corporation
1776 Main St.                                         1776 Main St.
P.O. Box 2138                                         P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                           Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Srikanth_Kadiyala@rand.org                            amalchio@rand.org
   I.     Introduction
As controversy over regional agreements and national legislations heat up in Europe, North

America, and Asia over intellectual property rights (IPRs), it is important to take a step back

and consider why this has become such a contentious issue and what is really at stake here.

IPRs refer to protections granted to firms and/or individuals who are the creators of ideas,

products, or methods that allow the creators /inventors a period of time in which they can

earn exclusive returns on these intangible and tangible products as a way of rewarding them

for the risky investment they initially made to produce the product. These protections,

however, are only recognized (and legally enforced) within specific borders defined by the

agency granting the IPR (a national government or regional authority, for example). IPRs

conferred by one country (e.g. Germany, the U.S.) are not always recognized as legitimate

protections by other countries (e.g. China). How to deal with violators of IPRs residing in

other countries, therefore, becomes a matter of international policy.

       Trends in globalisation and the integration of markets in recent decades seem to have

facilitated a rapid spread of violations of these IPRs, namely counterfeiting and piracy.

Widespread access to computers, internet and other technological developments that help

illicit businesses duplicate designs, labels, logos, packaging and documentation with speed,

accuracy and relative anonymity have also contributed to the recent rise (Treverton et al.

2009; Yao, 2005; Alcock et al., 2003).        Although counterfeiting began with just a few

product groups, such as luxury clothing and personal accessories, it has now spread to a wide

range of industries, including those affecting the health and safety of populations (Cheung &

Prendergast, 2006; OECD, 2008). Recent estimates of the size of the global counterfeit and

piracy market is in the range of $250-$650 billion and growing (Frontier Economics 2011).

Counterfeiting as a share of authorised trade in particular has increased by 5.4% from 2000 to

2007 (OECD, 2008).
       The protection of IPRs is not a universally accepted idea and debate continues over

whether there are positive economic gains from it. On the one hand, intellectual property

rights (IPRs) are argued to encourage investment in research and development that lead to

further economic growth.      Protection of IPRs, therefore, plays an important role in

innovation, creativity and competitiveness, and ultimately in economic growth of a

knowledge-based economy (GAO, 2010; Grossman and Shapiro 1988). On the other hand,

some argue that IPRs generate barriers to entry and slow innovation since some firms cannot

enter markets legitimately or smaller firms do not know how nor have the resources to

navigate the system and acquire IPRs (Boldrin and Levine, 2002, 2008). What is clear is that

by copying and selling unauthorised material, counterfeiters and pirates undermine the role of

IPRs and lead to an inefficient allocation of productive resources as legitimate firms and

government attempt to deter and punish violators of these patents (Balfour, 2005). At least

one study finds limited effects of IPRs on economic growth (Lerner 2009).

       To understand whether it is indeed still economically beneficial to grant these rights

in an environment where protection of them is becoming increasingly more difficult, one

must consider the economic net benefit in a real world setting. While identification and

calculation of the economic gains associated with protected production/distribution of

intellectual property are easily quantified, one must know something about the lost wealth

caused by counterfeiters / pirates who try to steal from these markets (i.e. the size of the

illegal market), the public health and safety consequences of substandard counterfeits on the

market, and the (public and private) resources dedicated toward reducing these counterfeits/

pirated goods and enforcing IPR protections in order to obtain a true assessment of the net

societal benefit and their impact on economic growth and innovation.

       This paper focuses its attention on the first component of costs mentioned above: the

size of the illegal market. Measurement of the size of any illegal market is always tricky, but
models have developed for other informal or “black” markets, including illicit drugs, human

trafficking, and firearm trade (Kilmer and Pacula, 2009; Laczo and Gramegna, 2003; Levitt

and Venkatesh, 2000; Cook, Moliconi, and Cole, 1995).           Many of these models rely on

seizure data or self-reported use of illegal items. As such, they remain open to significant

criticism by scientists and practitioners. In particular, seizure data is susceptible to variation

in levels caused by changes in law enforcement and intelligence rather than a true change in

the amount of goods passing through a given border/market. Self-reported consumption data

is susceptible to known reporting biases caused by unwillingness to report behaviour that is

sensitive or illegal.

        A key difference in the case of IPR violations is that these markets operate with

legitimate sellers that have legally protected rights which confer economic profits on them,

which is why illegal producers move into the market in the first place. As such, economic

theory regarding firm behaviour in these legal markets can be used to generate estimates of

the amount of illegal sales that are derived from the legal market. While several economic

theories have emerged describing these markets and the supply and demand factors that

might be important for influencing them, very few have been used to try to estimate the

number of counterfeited/pirated goods available on a market and we are not aware of any that

have been used to measure the overall size of a counterfeit market.

        In this paper we develop and test an empirical model of unmet demand which can be

derived from the theory of vertically differentiated products, oligopoly competition, or

monopoly supply to estimate the potential size of a single counterfeited market. While some

of the unmet demand may be due to broader market factors, such as product or market shocks

(e.g. new release of a substitute product from a competitor, break in the supply chain due to

an earthquake or tsunami), such factors are known to the firm ex post. The key to this model

therefore is to make use of historical product-specific information on forecasts and actuals to
obtain unexplained (post-hoc) differences in unmet demand and determine whether country-

level policies related to counterfeiting can explain a portion of the remaining amount of

unmet demand. We empirically test this theory using proprietary individual firm-level data

of a global technology that is widely known to be targeted by counterfeiters. Estimates of the

size of counterfeiting (in units) generated from this model are then compared to estimates

produced internally by the firm on the level of counterfeits sold using shadow-shopping and

survey techniques. Ninety five percent confident intervals are generated around our model

estimates and we assess the extent of the time to which the firm’s predictions fall within these

confidence intervals. Thus we can evaluate the extent to which estimates from our relatively

low cost estimation strategy approximate estimates of counterfeiting that are obtained from

using the industry’s gold-standard.

       The main contribution of this study is the development of a broad empirical

methodology that can be applied systematically and at relatively low cost annually to

multiple firms, products and industries to approximate the size of the counterfeit market and

trends in this market. The methodology can therefore be applied by national policy makers,

regional policy makers, and/or trade organizations to assess general policies, programs and

practices aimed at reducing overall counterfeiting rather than counterfeiting of any particular

product or good. While in principle the general model might also apply to pirated goods, we

leave it to future work to consider the reliability of this approach vis-à-vis other economic

models that have emerged focusing on measuring these markets (see for example Liebowitz

2008; Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf, 2007; Hui and Png, 2003).

       A second contribution of our work is to demonstrate quantitatively how the share of

unmet demand for an authorized supplier of a technology good varies with economic, legal

and infrastructure constraints. Similar to what has been shown in previous studies, we find

that control of corruption and having a strong rule of law are strong deterrents to
counterfeiters within a national market, even when the social norms/attitudes about buying

illegal goods are held constant through country fixed effects. Thus, policies can be effective

at influencing the level of counterfeiting in the market as well as trends. Moreover, we find

that countries that have higher levels of international tourism, a correlate with strong demand

for national products and one-time shoppers, experience higher levels of counterfeiting.

           The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide a review of

the relevant literature pertaining to theories of counterfeiting and estimation of the size of the

counterfeit market. In Section III, we structure a model based on Singh and Vives (1984) to

develop the analytical implications of deciding outputs. The empirical strategy for estimating

the model described is then provided in Section IV. We discuss the confidential firm-level

data used to estimate the model as well as source of policy variables in Section V. In Section

VI we present our results and we provide conclusions and discuss implications for future

methods for estimating the size of counterfeit markets in Section VII.

     II.      Background Literature on the Counterfeit Goods Market
           The counterfeiting literature can be broken into three general strands of work: (1)

Studies that attempt to model the behaviour of firms (legitimate and counterfeiters) operating

in markets experiencing competition from illegal markets; (2) Studies that attempt to

understand and/or model behaviour of consumers in these markets and social welfare1; and

(3) estimates of the size of the market.                 All three literatures are relevant to understand the

basis for developing a regional or global estimate, as they each bring important insights

regarding the unique dynamics of these markets.

           Studies on the behaviour of firms. A very large literature exists trying to describe

theoretically the behaviour of specific types of firms in markets with illegal competition, all


1
  This presumes that studies focusing on the impact of counterfeiting on price of the authentic good would be included in the
literature on social welfare, as social welfare as it is used here refers to changes in consumer surplus, producer surplus, and
deadweight loss.
prescribing to the following general description of markets. The vast majority of the

theoretical work in this area treats the owners of intellectual property as monopoly sellers, in

the sense of having exclusive rights to sell the matter containing the right which limits entry

into the market (Bate, Jin and Mathur, 2011; Yao, 2005; Kitsch, 2000; Higgins and Rubin,

1986), although models do exist describing other frameworks including oligopolies

(Grossman and Shapiro, 1988) and competitive markets with differentiated goods (Scandizzo,

2001; Shaked and Sutton, 1982, 1983; Gabszewicz and Thisse, 1979). Firms may use a

trademark as one way of differentiating their product. However, the more successful a firm is

at differentiating its product, the greater the incentive for counterfeiters and pirates to enter

that market.

       As described in a recent study by Qian (2011), counterfeit sales of goods is an

endogenous process where the more successful the authentic producer is (in terms of

sells/profit), the greater the likelihood counterfeiters will enter the market and try to copy the

brand. As such, there is a positive correlation between the number of authentic products sold

and the number of counterfeits on the market (i.e. the more successful is a brand, the more

counterfeiting there is). It is not necessarily the case that counterfeiting causes increased

demand for authentic products, although it can occur in that counterfeit and pirated products

can inform consumers about the authentic good and increase demand for the authentic good

(Shapiro and Varian, 1999; Conner and Rumelt, 1991).

       An important element weaved into the key theoretical developments in this area is the

problem of asymmetric information. Grossman and Shapiro (1988) describe it as two types

of markets functioning side-by-side with different forms of asymmetry, one with “non-

deceptive” counterfeit goods and one with “deceptive” counterfeit goods. According to

Grossman and Shapiro (1988), non-deceptive counterfeiting refers to sales of fake goods to

perfectly informed consumers aware they are purchasing a counterfeit because they can
distinguish the fakes from the legitimate by where they buy the goods or by close inspection.

“Deceptive” counterfeiting, on the other hand, refers to trade of fake goods with imperfectly

informed consumers that may not be aware the good being purchased is a counterfeit. This

can happen if the counterfeit is being sold through legitimate supply channels (i.e. a

manufacturer distributes product through its retail outlet that has been infiltrated by

counterfeit) or when the quality of the fake good is difficult or costly to assess at point of

purchase.

       While lots of studies have used variants of the basic model just described to evaluate

firm behaviour within these markets (both the legitimate firm and the counterfeiter), the

emphasis of the empirical work drawing on these theories has been on (a) impact on or

response of authentic firm (Qian, 2011; Varian, 2005), (b) the price of authentic goods and

counterfeit goods (Qian and Xie, 2011), and (c) the effectiveness of enforcement at deterring

counterfeiting (Qian, 2008). We are not aware of any studies that attempt to structurally

estimate the size of the counterfeit market using information about authentic firm sales.

       Studies on the Behaviour of Consumers and Social Welfare. The second broad area of

literature pertaining to counterfeiting has to do with consumers’ behaviour and social welfare.

A number of marketing studies have considered the determinants of consumers’ willingness

to buy counterfeit products in the context of non-deceptive goods. Studies based in the United

Kingdom unveil the relative importance of different factors. Bian and Moutinho (2009) use

focus groups and interviews to show that the construct of “brand personality” is the most

powerful predictor of the consideration of the counterfeit product. Swami et al. (2009)

highlight the role of attitudes towards counterfeiting and age (older consumers tend to show

lower willingness to buy counterfeits) in their structural equation models, comparably to the

hierarchical regression models in the study of Furnham and Valgeirsson (2007). Studies

based in developing countries show similar patterns. Cheng et al. (2011) also employ
structural equation modelling to Vietnam data and come to similar conclusions about the

importance of subjective norms for willingness to buy counterfeits, together with perceived

affordability. Data on Slovenian consumers is analysed in the work of Koklic (2011),

confirming the importance of what he calls “moral intensity” and risk perceptions.

Furthermore, different types of goods rely on specific taste patterns in the demand for

counterfeits. For example, the willingness to buy counterfeits of luxury goods typically stems

from social motives, as found by Wilcox et al. (2009).

       Another way of gaining insights into the unobserved nature of the demand for

counterfeit goods is through revealed preferences, as opposed to the preferences that can be

reported in consumer interviews or surveys. An experiment was run by Harvey and Walls

(2003) in which subjects were assigned real money to make a decision between an original

and a fake good under varying scenarios of prices, probability of detection and penalty. They

find that equivalent increases in the price of the authentic good and the expected penalty

(probability of detection x penalty) induce consumers to substitute away from the counterfeit,

and also that there are significant differences in the propensity to buy counterfeits across the

two experimental locations (Las Vegas and Hong Kong).

       Several studies have evaluated the impact of counterfeits entering the market on

consumer welfare or social welfare (Yao, 2005; Scandizzo, 2001; Higgins and Rubin, 1986),

but most have been theoretical in nature. In general counterfeiting is believed to reduce

consumer welfare from the stand point that it leads to a higher price of the authentic good, in

an effort to differentiate itself from the counterfeits (Qian, 2008; Yao, 2005). Scandizzo

(2001), however, provides a particularly interesting theoretical model that considers the

importance of a country’s income distribution when assessing the effects of counterfeiting. A

key insight from his theory is that consumer welfare will actual rise in the presence of

cheaper imitations when the typical income within a country is low. This is because the
presence of imitations/counterfeits makes otherwise unobtainable goods available to the

general population, who might not care so much about quality. Of course, in the case of

pharmaceutical products and other public health/safety goods, poorer quality imitation goods

that are substandard or fake certainly hurt consumer welfare even in poor countries (Khan

and Ghilzai, 2007).

       Studies Attempting to Measure the Size of the Counterfeit Market. While the

importance of counterfeiting has been recognized by the private and public sectors for quite

some time, the intrinsic difficulty in building a practical and empirical understanding of the

phenomenon is reflected in the relative scarcity of estimates of its magnitude in the literature,

particularly the academic literature.

       A number of studies exist in the non-academic realm that try to quantify the

magnitude of counterfeiting across a broad variety of products. The general structure of the

estimation process is built off of information on the number of infringements, the substitution

rate (i.e. the number of legitimate goods that would have been bought in absence of the

counterfeit), and the price at which such units would have been sold. The product of these

three factors represents the value of sales lost by the IPR holder and is typically used as a

measure of the value of counterfeiting. Each of these factors poses key challenges for

measurement, due to the illicit and thus unrecorded nature of the phenomenon and the

difficulty of getting at a meaningful substitution rate and counterfactual price, as testified by

the richness and complexity of demand drivers and feedback effects (on equilibrium

quantities and prices) documented in the academic literature. The majority of existing

estimates thus stem from one-time sector-specific efforts that often lack transparency and are

forced to make simplifying, sometimes implicit, assumptions. Examples of studies following

this type of structure include studies by the Center for Economics and Business Research

(2000) and Allen Consulting (2003). They rely on incidence factors of counterfeiting
provided by industry associations or other studies to compute the size of infringement, and on

consumer surveys to compute substitution rates.

       The first study attempting to get at the global counterfeit market across sectors,

including only internationally trade goods, was an estimate by OECD (2008) of $250 billion

in 2005. Frontier Economics (2011) built off of this analysis by using the OECD method for

internationally traded goods and including domestically produced and consumed counterfeit

and pirated products and digitally pirated products. The OECD method is “data driven” in

that the volume and value of counterfeiting and piracy is based on the amount of illicit trade

(proxied by number of seizures) and legitimate trade between countries using estimates of

value added by industry. A major criticism of this method is that it is based on law

enforcement data, particularly seizures of counterfeit goods. The difficulty with using seizure

figures to understand the scale of counterfeiting is that there are a variety of factors

completely unrelated to the number of counterfeit goods that influence seizure numbers. For

example, the counterfeit articles must be detected and identified as counterfeit by customs

officials and therefore the number of counterfeits will increase if, for example, the skills of

customs agents improve, technology to identify counterfeit goods improves and/or companies

provide more intelligence to customs agents.

       One alternative to the flawed estimation strategies just described relies on so called

“mystery shopping”, which consists of purchases of the same specific products from a

random sampling of outlets that are then sent to experts for examination to determine if the

goods are authentic or counterfeit. An example of a recent study using this approach comes

from the European Alliance for Access to Safe Medicines (2008), which found from their

mystery shopping study that 62% of medicines in their sample are substandard or counterfeit.

The power of this technique is that it is possible to identify counterfeit goods even when the

consumer is unable to distinguish the actual authenticity. The challenge of this approach, of
course, consists in developing a robust sampling design in a cost-effective manner such that

broad inferences can be drawn about the various targeted products on the whole population.

Doing so can be extremely expensive and cost-prohibitive if done on a regular basis.

        It is the lack of an empirically satisfying methodology that drives the efforts behind

the current paper. We look to apply an economic model structurally derived from theory to

generate a method for estimating the size of counterfeit markets that can be generally applied

to a large range of counterfeited products.       The key advantage of estimates based on our

economic model is that it can incorporate a variety of simultaneously considered factors

(unknown quality, price, replacement ratio) to project anticipated sizes of the market for

either different goods or a country as a whole. Further, it can be easily (and at relatively low

cost) modified to consider alternative factors not yet incorporated. The disadvantage is that

the model is only as good as the logic and data that underlies it. It therefore suffers from

whatever omitted variable biases might exist for factors not considered or those that are

poorly measured. Thus, to help us assess the extent to which the logic of this model holds,

we apply the model to estimate the level of counterfeit for a single technology product with

data from a single firm and compare estimates from our model to those generating by the firm

using their “gold-standard” shadow-shopping methodology.

III. Theoretical framework
    The theoretical framework we adopt builds off Singh and Vives (1984) in which an economy

contains a monopolistic or oligopolistic sector competing on quantity, depending on the

substitutability of competitors’ goods. We add to this theory a mechanism for counterfeiters to enter

and obtain a share of authentic producer’s submarket, incorporating aspects of the model by

Grossman and Shapiro (1988). We now summarize the key features and insights of the model.

    Beginning with the supply-side and nature of firm competition, Singh and Vives (1984) describe a

market in which there is varying degrees of substitution between goods and of heterogeneity in the

products themselves (e.g. product differentiation). For firms producing closely substitutable although
differentiated goods, the model implies an oligopoly market. In this setting, firms choose a quantity

contract and are committed to supply a predetermined quantity, independent of the action of a

competitor. Singh and Vives (1984) present a two-stage option where firms first simultaneously

commit themselves to a type of contract, either price or quantity, and afterwards compete on the type

of contract selected.

    On the demand-side, a representative consumer purchases products by maximizing utility subject

to a budget constraint. Given quantities selected by firms, prices are determined through consumer

demand; although oligopolistic firms have some control over pricing. Demand is downward sloping in

its own price and increases with increases in the price of the competitor’s good (if the goods are

substitutes). When goods are substitutes rather than complements and demand is linear, quantity

competition is a dominant strategy equilibrium and thus Pareto superior from firms’ point of view

(Singh and Vives 1984). This supports the idea that firms in monopolistic and oligopoly markets

initiate supply decisions by setting quantity. In these markets, firms consider the total demand curve

and commit to supply a predetermined quantity as a share of total demand.

    At the margin, a change in production observed by an authentic firm in an oligopoly or market

leader in a monopolistic market would generate a measureable change in total supply in the market

since by definition they maintain a sizeable share of the total market. Because of this, these firms act

as if they face some known share of total demand and set quantity accordingly. Conditional upon

assumptions of its competitors’ behaviours2 , a firm selects quantity and hence determines price in the

market at a level that maximises its profit given the known market demand and market share.

    As described earlier, authentic firms compete to sell quantity in a second stage. During this stage,

we allow counterfeiters to enter a firm’s submarket (e.g. share of total demand). Grossman and

Shapiro (1988) show counterfeiters enter when an authentic firm credibly offers surplus in excess of

that offered by other brands and/or consumers are imperfectly informed about products. Consumers

then expect counterfeits may account for some fraction of a labelled product. Grossman and Shapiro


2
  This differs from a market of monopolistic firms in which production changes do not alter price and quantity of its
competitors.
(1988) describe how consumers form such expectations, which influences their brand choice. When

counterfeits enter a market, the share of counterfeits is determined by an authentic firm’s decisions

regarding price, quality and output.

       An authentic firm utilizes information, such as market share, in predetermining, or setting

expectations, of quantity and makes purchasing and supply-chain decisions accordingly. At the

margin, the authentic firm can drive counterfeiters out of its submarket by changing its price-quality

vector slightly in an appropriate direction; however, it would not do so if such a deviation was not

profitable (Grossman and Shapiro 1988). As such, firms may maximise profit with counterfeiting

levels above zero. Its decisions influence whether and how much of its demand it shares with

counterfeiters. The extent to which firms achieve expected sales depends on a number of multi-level

factors, including product, firm and market, which may result in expected quantities deviating from

actual quantities in the short-run.3 Furthermore, counterfeiting may be one potential factor

contributing to a deviation between annual forecasted and actual quantity (Goel and Nelson 2009).

       With this general framework, we can describe an empirical specification that links counterfeiting

to increased deviations between expected and actual quantities supplied.

IV. Empirical strategy
       Relying on the assumption that counterfeiters are only interested in entering markets for which

there are some sort of rents, we can adopt the following two-stage empirical strategy to identify the

amount of unexplained forecasting error that is caused by counterfeits and aggregate that up across

markets to get the total impact.                We consider for now the case of non-competitive markets,

specifically an oligopoly, where a firm is able to set its own price. 4 Based on this price, it determines

the quantity supplied to the market, meeting either the entire market demand for its product or its

anticipated share based on that price. Thus, variation in price/quantity, in the absence of counterfeits,

would only occur because of one of the following occurring: (1) Firm factors shifting the cost of

production unexpectedly and hence profit-maximising output; (2) Demand-side factors shifting the


3
    We assume the long-run difference between expected and actual quantities is zero.
4
    The model can be similarly applied to a monopolist or discriminating monopolist producing a differentiable good.
market demand (e.g. change in disposable income, new product substitutes (or complements) enter

(leave) the market, etc); or (3) Market factors altering the structure of supply or demand (e.g. natural

disaster affecting supply-chain; government regulation change). If these factors are held constant and

the quantity of product a firm is able to sell (at its selected price) is below expected, this is an

indication that a counterfeiting product has entered the market and taken away some of the market

demand. In other words, the amount of counterfeit product can be ‘backed out” by considering how

much the oligopoly or monopolistic competitive firms expected to sell and how much they actually

sold.

         More formally, consider the oligopoly firm selects a price (p) and, hence, the quantity (q(p)) it

will produce conditional upon setting that price. The firm is not yet sure it can sell its entire quantity

for that price; it is a prediction or forecast of quantity it expects to sell ( q e ( p) ). It may over- or under-

estimate how much it can sell at that price and it will actually sell another amount, q a ( p) . Therefore,

the firm will have some amount of a forecast error, q* ( p) , which is the difference between the amount

expected to sell and the amount actually sold, or q* ( p ) = q e ( p ) − q a ( p ) .


         As described above, there are a number of factors completely unrelated to counterfeiting that

might vary unexpectedly from the firms’ forecast leading the firm to sell a different number of units

than expected. It is presumed that the firm develops expectations about the product, market and

demand factors that will influence its forecasts, but the firm is not always correct about how all

relevant factors will move. For example, there may be an unexpected amount spent on marketing of

the product because of a marketing campaign going better/worse than expected (product-specific).

Similarly, the firm might unexpectedly gain entry into a new market that it had previously not

anticipated to enter for another six months (firm-specific). Alternatively, there may be a financial

crisis in a given market that impacts consumers’ willingness to buy consumer goods (market-

specific). Each of these can contribute to a different quantity sold than originally expected, but we

would label those as “explained” factors that could be easily identified post-hoc. Nonetheless, they

lead to a legitimate over- or under-estimate of quantity sold that is different than that caused by
unobservable factors (like counterfeiting) and we want to take these post-hoc known factors out of the

estimate.

    In the first stage then, we calculate the proportion of the forecast error that can be explained by

these ex-post unanticipated market or industry specific factors. More formally, we expect that each

firm can estimate some form of the following equation:

     *
    qijkt = β1 xijt + β 2 yijt + β 3 z jkt + ε ijkt ,                 (1)


           *
    where qijkt is the total forecast error at time t for firm i in a market (which we define as by

product j and country k ); x is a matrix of product-specific variables that were not anticipated so

not included in the original forecast of q e ( p) ; y is a matrix of firm-specific variables that reflect

unexpected changes in relevant firm factors, and z is a matrix of market and demand-level variables

that might contribute to a forecast being off (and is therefore product-country specific (jk), not firm

specific).

    The regression specified in equation (1), therefore, includes as regressors only those things that

the firm did not accurately know when developing its original forecast for the period but learned post-

hoc. The coefficients β 1 , β 2 , β 3 tell us the relative importance of these factors, firm and market

shocks, respectively, in predicting the error. The term ε ijkt represents unobservable factors that also

influence the forecasting error, which might include random noise but would also include unobserved

fluctuations in the amount of counterfeiting going on in the particular product market.

    By estimating equation (1) empirically, each firm can generate an estimate of the predicted

              *
residuals ( εˆijkt ) which partials out the explained variation in the forecasting errors (caused by

unpredictable changes in x, y or z).                    It is this unexplained variation in the forecasting error,

                                                        *
represented by the predicted residuals ( εˆijkt ) that is then used in our second stage model. It is used to

understand what fraction of the unexplained variation in authentic product sales is accounted for by

counterfeiting.
      Of course, the key to being able to use this market logic to estimate the size of the counterfeit

market depends on having good information in which to base expected sales holding actual market

conditions constant (or, more accurately econometrically accounting for them). The current

assumption that firms will have this information is based on an understanding that they need to be

able to have an appropriate amount of inventory available and plan resources (e.g. labour costs,

interest payments, etc). For this reason, firms make forecasts about how much quantity they expect to

sell. In practice, this may be done through a variety of approaches including simple approaches of

considering past trends in sales and sales of similar products to more sophisticated econometric

techniques accounting for a variety of factors. 5

      The second stage of the empirical process is to assess what proportion of the remaining

forecasting error can be attributable to counterfeiting. In a second regression, we estimate the

                                                         *
relationship between the “unexplained forecast error”, εˆijkt , for firm i operating in product market

    jk at time t and factors of counterfeiting in those same markets. Formally, the second stage

regression is of the following form:

         *
       εˆijkt = β c jkt + u ijkt ,                                      (2)

            ˆ*
      where ε ijkt is the amount estimated previously for the unpredicted forecast error of a product by

firm i at time t and c is a matrix of variables related to counterfeiting that contribute to the

unpredicted error in forecasting (discussed in greater length below). Firms may over- or under-sell

the amount forecasted because of reasons completely unrelated to counterfeiting and for market

factors not yet taken into consideration by the model6; this is captured by the new error term uijkt .




5
  We recognize that not all firms may be able to estimate a formal model to generate their unexplained forecasting error measure,
which will lead to an overstatement of the unexplained forecasting error in the second equation. Assuming that variation in
counterfeiting is not systematically linked to unexpected changes in firm, factor, or market characteristics, the use of a grosser
measure of unpredicted forecasting error would just add noise to our second stage of the model.
6
 In practice, this can mean demand out-stripping supply and firms need to make additional purchase orders to the normal
purchase schedule.
        Upon estimation of equation (2), one can generate a prediction of the conditional mean

( β̂c jkt ), which is a direct estimate of the amount of unexplained forecasting error that can be

predicted by counterfeiting supply and demand factors:


    βˆc jkt = Amount of counterfeiting            (3)


V. Data

        To test the validity of the proposed method, we obtained confidential data from an industry

partner whose specific technology has been the target of counterfeiting in various places across the

globe. The data come from a single firm that is the internationally leader in the sale of this specific

technology offered through a variety of products patented by the firm in numerous countries. Due to

the persistent threat of counterfeit producers, the firm independently engages in estimation of

counterfeiting activities using an industry gold-standard, which involves conducting shadow shopping

in selected markets on an infrequent basis.        Estimates from these selected markets are then

extrapolated to sales in all markets and other countries in which the firm operates.         Given the

tremendous cost of collecting data using the shadow shopping method and the uncertainty of how to

extrapolate properly to other markets, the firm was willing to share with us proprietary data on

forecasts and actual units sold in 30 different countries for over 50 different products sold during the

period 2006-2011 so we could test our model and compare it to their estimates. Further, for a subset

of the data, the firm provided to us information on market factors they use to understand deviations

from forecasts and in the construction of new forecasts, including sales by competitors.

        Not all of the products for which we were provided information on forecasts and actual units

sold contained the firm specific product and market information for the years of interest. Thus, the

final data set used for testing our model contained information on 45 related products sold in 16

countries over the period 2006-2011, resulting in a total sample size of 3,300 observations.

Descriptive statistics on the main variables used in our analysis, slightly camouflaged to protect the

identity of the firm, are provided in Table 1. As can be seen by the mean values and their very large

standard deviations for forecasts and actuals, there is considerable variability in the number of units
sold for each product across markets, with some markets selling relatively small amounts of the

product and other markets being quite substantial. In general and on average, forecasts are larger than

units sold, as is indicated by the positive mean value for the difference in forecasts and actuals

(median value is also greater than zero).                 The sales by competitors could affect their own market

sales, and if pure volume is a good indication, it appears that at least two of the competitor product

types are large enough to create some serious competition in select markets. The base technology

previously sold in a given market is used by the firm to help formulate future forecasts, which is why

we also include it in our first stage analysis.

            We added to these firm-specific data information from a variety of sources that help us

capture general correlates of market demand within each country. First, we include a measure of the

rate of growth of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to capture changes in income within the country.

As this is a variable that is frequently used to project forecasts by the firms, we include this measure

in our first stage regression, not the latter. To capture general market demand in the second stage, we

include a second measure correlated with demand, international tourism.                    Both measures were

obtained from the World Bank Development Indicators. 7

            Measures of the susceptibility of these products to IPR infringement, which are used in the

second stage, are obtained from World Bank Surveys, which collects national-level data on a series of

topics systematically from countries across the globe, including economic prosperity; trust in the legal

system; and so on. For our study, we draw on three indices constructed by the World Bank from data

collected within these surveys, namely indicators of the rule of law, control of corruption, and

government effectiveness. Ex-ante we expect that the rule of law and control of corruption variables

are more likely to related to counterfeiting than the government effectiveness variable, but in this pilot

exercise of the theory we experiment with all three variables.

            The World Bank’s rule of law index is constructed from a series of variables capturing

respondents’ perceptions about how well the rules of society are abided to. Variables used in the

construction of this index include beliefs regarding the effectiveness of the police, confidence in the


7
    http://databank.worldbank.org as of March 20, 2012.
policy system, whether intellectual property protection is weak, speediness of the judicial system,

enforceability of contracts and trust in the functioning of the criminal justice system. The control of

corruption variable, as defined by the World Bank, captures peoples’ perceptions regarding the extent

to which public power is used for private gain. Questions used in the creation of this index include the

frequency with which firms are required to make payments in a variety of settings (favourable judicial

decisions, public utilities, etc.), the frequency of corruption amongst public institutions such as the

state legislatures and customs and the existence of country anti-corruption policies. The government

effectiveness measure attempts to assess how respondents feel about the quality of their public

services, civil services, policy formation, and independence from political pressure.8

    We also consider as additional variables in our second stage analysis two indicators of the

complexity of customs procedures, namely the number of documents required to import goods

(documents) and stringency of a country’s customs procedures (custom’s burden). In the final results

presented here, we only use the measure of custom’s burden, as we found that the documents measure

is highly correlated with too many of the other variables included in the model.

VI. Results

Table 2 shows the results from our estimation of the first stage regression, where we attempt to

explain post-hoc why actual units sold deviate from firm forecasts (i.e. identify the amount of

“explained” forecasting error). While the actual sources of information used to predict deviations in

forecasting errors are relatively limited, the small set of controls predicts nearly a quarter (22%) of the

variation in the forecast errors.         We find that proportion of products sold with a particular

characteristic tend to lead to larger forecasting errors, which is consistent with findings from Qian

(2011) that the volume of authentic goods sold is positively correlated with the volume of counterfeits

sold given this characteristic of common of the products most frequently counterfeited.

         The results also show that the firm does a better job forecasting in markets where there is

more of the base technology making use of their products, as higher base technology units is


8
    The full set of questions related to        the   construction   of   each   of   these   indices   can   be   found   at
info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/pdf/rl.pdf.
associated with lower forecast error. We interpret this result as suggesting that there is greater

predictability in markets with a larger, more stable technology base, so there is less uncertainty about

market growth and the like. Unexpected increases in the sales of competitor goods, however, reduces

the number of units sold by this firm and leads to larger forecasting errors, which is consistent with

expectations. Interestingly, the model also suggests a positive monotonic increasing effect of year,

suggesting that the firm is getting worse at achieving forecasted sales units over the time period

examined. This is not too terribly surprising, however, in light of the global recession that occurred in

the latter part of the period being evaluated.

        Product fixed effects, which are also included in this first stage regression but suppressed

from the table, were highly statistically significant as a group and for particular products.        This

suggests to us that there is important variation across products in the firm’s ability to reliably predict

forecast sales, which may have something to do with the product (if it is a new product or quickly

growing one) or something to do with the markets in which the product is being sold. Not all the

products are sold uniformly in each of the 16 countries.

        Regression errors from this first stage regression, which represent the “unexplained

forecasting error” are retained and used then as a dependent variable in a second stage regression. In

this second stage, we now examine how important counterfeiting measures are in explaining the

remaining unexplained forecasting error. Results from four alternative specifications of this second

stage regression are shown in Table 3. These alternative specifications are run so that we can show

the relative importance of specific counterfeit measures independently, as the variables are highly

collinear which makes it difficult to interpret their results in the final specification when all of them

are included together.

        We see in looking across Columns I, II and III that the unexplained forecasting errors are

lower in countries with a stronger rule of law, stronger control of corruption, and higher levels of

government effectiveness.     Individually each of these measures come in strong and statistically

significant in the manner we would expect, suggesting that countries that are tough in enforcing

penalties and sanctions on violators of IPR agreements and/or who are tough on crime in general, with

a strong, effective government have lower levels of counterfeiting.           However, when all three
variables are included simultaneously into the model, the signs and significance on the rule of law and

government effectiveness variables change. Government effectiveness remains negative but becomes

statistically significant and the rule of law variable becomes positive and marginally significant (at the

10% level). In light of the other factors held constant in the regression, most specifically the direct

control for corruption, it appears that countries with a stronger rule of law might be associated with

greater counterfeiting. Control for corruption, however, remains strongly negatively associated with

unexpected forecast errors, getting even larger in magnitude with the other variables included

simultaneously.

        Unexplained forecasting error is larger in countries with a higher customs burden, and

statistically significantly so when measures for the control for corruption are included. To the extent

that a larger unexplained forecasting error represents higher levels of counterfeiting, this would

indicate that counterfeiting is a bigger problem in countries with a higher customs burden. Whether it

is the policy that drives this association or that countries with significant problems are more likely to

adopt more burdensome custom practices cannot be said. But the model clearly identifies a positive

association between the two.

        Our measure for international tourism, which proxies a higher level of general market

demand, is positively associated with unexplained forecasting errors in each of these models.

If international tourists were coming into the country and buying authentic products, then one

would expect the association to be negative. The fact that it is positive suggests that the

international tourists may be helping support counterfeit markets. This might be true for two

reasons: (1) tourists might be easier targets for counterfeiters to deceive (because they are less

familiar with the market, legal framework, etc. and also only one-time shoppers); and (2)

local authorities might be more lenient towards counterfeit markets in tourist locations as a

sort of “marketing lever”. We cannot assess if either of these are true in our model, but

simply offer them as a possible explanation for the finding.
       Also included in the second stage model are year, product and country fixed effects.

Interestingly, the year effects do a better job picking up the global recession effects when all

three of our strength of government variables are included, possibly because these three

indicators combined do a better job of separating out Europe and the US from India, China

and other developing countries.

       As the goal of this exercise is to use the second stage model to predict the level of

counterfeiting in each of our national markets, we use the regression coefficients from the

model presented in Column IV to derive estimates of the amount of counterfeiting in each

market because it is the model with the highest R-squared. Importantly, none of these models

have very large explanatory power in the second stage, but that is not too surprising given

that there remain a variety of other factors that influence errors in forecasts besides

counterfeiting. Thus the real test of the model will be assessing how well its predictions

correspond to estimates from the firm for each of the markets.

       Table 4 provides summary statistics of the predicted level of counterfeits (aggregated

to the country, product level) as generated by the model and those reported by the firm using

their shadow-shopping method with extrapolation.       It appears in looking at these numbers

that the RAND model estimate is generally lower than the firm’s estimate both in total units

and as a percent of actual units sold. This is true in total and across all years. As we do not

have available to us the error bands for the firm estimates, we can only assess the extent to

which the firm estimate falls within our 95% confidence intervals derived from our model.

We do this on a product-by-product and year-by-year basis and find, as reported at the bottom

of Table 4, that 40% of the time the model generates estimates that are not statistically

differentiable from the firm estimate. The degree of overlap between the model estimate and

the firm estimate will in fact be greater than this given the firm’s estimates are themselves

extrapolations (and hence have confidence intervals). Without a measure of their modelling
error, however, we cannot say how much overlap there would be, so the 40% should be

viewed as a lower bound.

       It is not terribly surprising that the RAND model predicts lower levels of counterfeits

than the firm’s gold standard, particularly in light of the very general information that is

being used to build the estimate. One would expect that the precision of the model will be

reduced as you move beyond information that is specific to the firm or industry; similarly, it

is likely that the model could be improved if more industry or sector-specific information

were included. The advantage of relying on broad information is that it allows the same

approach to be applied across a variety of goods and sectors, and demonstrates that even this

broad approach generates estimates that are indeed plausible and meaningful. But there is a

trade-off of using this broad approach; it comes at a cost of lower precision and, in the case of

this one particular product group, a downward bias.

       Another very important aspect to consider when evaluating the model is its ability to

replicate trends in the amount of counterfeiting over time. As can be seen in Table 4, the

share of counterfeit as a percent of actual units sold generated from the RAND model follows

the same general downward trend between 2006-2010 as the firm model does, and also

captures the uptick in 2011. This is shown visually in Figure 1. However, the RAND model

does not do a very good job capturing the firm’s estimated rise in counterfeiting in 2007.

Unfortunately, we did not collect data from the firm regarding when their estimates of

counterfeiting were data based versus projections from a model, so we cannot be certain at

this point if this deviation is due to our model or perhaps a forecasted error on the firm’s

behalf (due to the immediate return to a decline in 2008).          Additional investigation is

warranted to identify whether the firm had confidence in the unexpected increase their data

report for 2007.
        While the level of counterfeiting estimated by the two stage model is clearly biased

downward in terms of the level estimated, the model appears to do a very good job capturing

broad trends in counterfeiting over the time period examined. If the ability to mimic trends is

observed over a longer period of time and/or for other firms, then it is this trait of the model

that will likely be the most useful to policymakers. While understanding the total level of

counterfeiting may be valuable to particular firms, policymakers care more deeply as to

whether particular strategies or policies are improving the situation or making it worse. A

model that can accurately identify changes in the trend of counterfeiting would be very useful

for this purpose.

VI. Conclusions


The development of new methods for estimating the size of the counterfeit goods market is an

important activity in light of the significant limitations of existing methods (OECD, 2008) and the

desperate need of policy makers to identify and assess policies that are effective at reducing it

(OECD, 2008).       Firms and governments alike expend extensive resources in efforts to limit

counterfeiting because in some cases the imitations may be dangerous or a risk to public safety, but

little can be known with certainty regarding the effectiveness or cost-effectiveness of various

measures without a reliable method for measuring the extent of the problem in the first place.

        In this paper we propose and pilot a new methodology grounded in economic theory that

shows promise in terms of assessing trends in the size of the counterfeit market. Though encouraging,

the pilot study has important limitations that need to be considered when interpreting the results.

First, we are only able to test the model with data from a single firm operating in just one sector of the

economy. It will be important to identify through future work whether the basic model performs

reasonably well for other industries and sectors, and if not, identify what aspects of those

industries/sectors make it less useful. It may be that the specific macro-level measures of IPR

susceptibility vary significantly across different sectors (for example, broadband access and number
of internet users may be more relevant for pirated goods than physical goods). Future work should

consider the utility of considering sector-specific models that enable the incorporation of a broader set

of macro measures. Such a modification does not reduce the utility of the general approach here; in

fact, to the extent that more specific measures are required in different sectors, estimation by sector

could lead to improved precision of counterfeit estimates from the model, which can then be

aggregated post estimation to understand overall trends across multiple products groups and market

sectors.

           A second limitation of the model is that it cannot capture the presence or amount of

counterfeit goods that do not directly compete with authentic goods (i.e. where the substitution rate

between authentic good and counterfeit good is very low or equal to 0). To the extent that this

represents a relatively large share of the total counterfeit good market, this could be a big problem and

lead to an even larger underestimation of the market. The products being evaluated here, because of

their direct tie to a base technology purchased separately, are all goods where counterfeiters would

actually be substituting for the authentic good (though perhaps not as high as 100%).              Thus,

consideration of the model’s performance when considering a counterfeit market that does not directly

compete with the authentic good will be important in future efforts.

           Even with these limitations, this paper makes an important contribution by developing,

implementing and testing a promising new approach for estimating the size of the counterfeit market,

which can be used to assess the impact of counterfeiting within particular industries, sectors of the

economy, or for an economy as a whole.          When estimates from our model are tested against an

industry gold standard, estimates derived from shadow shopping, our model performs reasonably well

in that model estimates are consistent with those of the gold standard in 40% of the cases.

Interestingly, we find that the matching is better in some years than it is in others, raising an

interesting question regarding what might be driving this and whether it is a function of the model or

other market forces.

           Should future tests of the model prove similarly promising, a new relatively low-cost strategy

for understanding trends in the amount of counterfeiting in different markets may emerge, providing a
more methodologically rigorous approach then prior methods that rely on seizure information.

However, the model should be further tested in other industries and for a range of products before

such a conclusion can be drawn definitively.

        Importantly, the proposed new methodology generates results consistent with prior work

showing that the level of counterfeiting is inversely related to the strength of the governments’ efforts

to deter it as well as the degree of corruption within the system.         This was true even after

controlling for country fixed effects in a relatively short panel of data, suggesting that

applications of the model on more data (either in terms of years or countries) may generate

even more promising results than those presented here. A key implication of our model is

that broad national policies can be effective at influencing the level of counterfeiting within

the market as well as trends.
                                           References

Alcock, L., Chen, P. Ch’ng, H.M., & Hodson, S. (2003). “Counterfeiting: Tricks and trends.”
        Journal of Brand Management, 11(2), pp. 133–136.

The Allen Consulting Group. (2003). Counterfeiting of toys, business software and computer and
       video games, Report to the Australian Toy Association, the Business Software Association of
       Australia and the Interactive Entertainment Association of Australia, Sydney.
Bagwell, K. and M. Riordan. (1991). “High and Declining Prices Signal Product Quality,” American
       Economic Review, 81, pp. 224–239.
Balfour, F. 2005. Fakes! Business Week. February 7, 2005.
Bian, X. and L. Moutinho (2009). "An investigation of determinants of counterfeit purchase
       consideration." Journal of Business Research 62(3), pp. 368-378.
Boldrin, M. and D. Levine. “Perfectly Competitive Innovation,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
        55(3), pp 435-453, 2008.
Boldrin, M. and D. Levine. “The Case Against Intellectual Property,” American Economic Review,
        Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred Fourteenth Annual meeting go the American
        Economic Association, pp. 209-212, 2002.
Cheng, S. I., L.T. Cam Tu and H. H. Fu (2011). "Examining Customer Purchase Intentions for
       Counterfeit Products Based on a Modified Theory of Planned Behavior." International
       Journal of Humanities and Social Science 1(10), pp. 278-284.
Cook, P.J., Molliconi S., and T.B. Cole. (1995). “Regulating Gun Markets” Journal of Criminal Law
       and Criminology 86(1), pp. 59-92.
European Alliance for Access to Safe Medicines, (2008). “The Counterfeiting Superhighway,”
       http://www.pharmaceuticalanticounterfeiting.com/uploadedFiles/EventRedesign/UK/2011/Fe
       bruary/18399002/Assets/The-Counterfeiting-Superhighway-report(2).pdf
Furnham, A. and H. Valgeirsson (2007). "The Effect of Life Values and Materialism on Buying
       Counterfeit Products." Journal of Socio-Economics 36(5), pp. 677-685.
Goel, R. and M. Nelson (2009). "Determinants of software piracy: economics, institutions, and
       technology," The Journal of Technology Transfer, 34(6), pp. 637-658.
Grossman, G. and C. Shapiro (1988). "Foreign Counterfeiting of Status Goods," Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 103(1), pp. 79-100.
Harvey, P. J. and W. D. Walls (2003). "Laboratory Markets in Counterfeit Goods: Hong Kong versus
       Las Vegas." Applied Economics Letters 10(14), pp. 883-887.
Higgins, R. and P. Rubin. (1986). “Counterfeit Goods,” Journal of Law and Economics 29(2), pp.
        211-230.
Hui, KL and I. Png (2003). “Piracy and the Legitimate Demand for Recorded Music.” Contributions
       to Economic Analysis & Policy, 2(1), Article 11.
Khan, A.Y. and N.M.K. Ghilzai. (2007). “Counterfeit and substandard quality of drugs: The need for
       an effective and stringent regulatory control in India and other developing countries,” Indian
       Journal of Pharmacology, 39(4): 206-207.
Kilmer B and RL Pacula (2009). Estimating the size of the global drug market: A demand-side
       approach. RAND Technical Report TR-711-EC. Cambridge, UK: RAND Europe.
Koklic, M. K. (2011). "Non-deceptive Counterfeiting Purchase Behavior: Antecedents of Attitudes
        and Purchase Intentions." Journal of Applied Business Research 27(2), pp. 127-137.
Lazco F. and MA Gramegna. (2003). “Developing Better Indicators of Human Trafficking“ Journal
       of World Affairs X(I), pp. 179-198.
Levitt, S. and S. Venkatesh, (2000). "An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's Finances,"
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 755-789.

Liebowitz, SJ. (2008). “Testing File-Sharing’s Impact on Music Album Sales in Cities,” Management
       Science 54(4): 852-859.

Oberholzer-Gee, F., and K. Strumpf. (2007). “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An
       Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, (1): 1-42.
OECD (2008), The Economic Impact of Counterfeiting and Piracy, OECD, Paris.

Qian, Y. (2006). "Pricing and Marketing Impacts of Entry by Counterfeiters and Imitators," Harvard
       University Working Paper, http://www.nber.org/ —yiqiani.

Qian, (2011). “Counterfeiters: Foes or Friends”, NBER Working Paper No. 16785, National Bureau
        of Economic Research, Massachusetts.
Qian, Y. and H. Xie (2011). Investigating the Dynamic Effects of Counterfeits with a Random
       Changepoint Simultaneous Equation Model, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
       NBER Working Papers No.16692.
Saving, T. (1970). “Concentration Ratios and the Degree of Monopoly,” International Economic
        Review, 11(1), pp. 139-146.
Scandizzo, S. (2001). Counterfeit Goods and Income Inequality, International Monetary Fund, IMF
       Working Papers: 01/13: 22 pages.
Shaked, A. and J. Sutton, (1982). "Relaxing Price Competition Through Product Differentiation,”
       Review of Economic Studies, 49, pp. 3-13.

Shaked, A., and J. Sutton, (1983), "Natural Oligopolies," Econometrica, 51, 1469-1483.

Singh, N. and X. Vives (1984). “Price and Quantity Competition in a Differentiated Duopoly,” RAND
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 546-554.
Staake, T., F. Thiesse, and E. Fleisch (2009). "The emergence of counterfeit trade: a literature
        review." European Journal of Marketing 43(3/4): 320-349.
Swami, V., T. Chamorro-Premuzic, et al. (2009). "Faking it: Personality and individual difference
       predictors of willingness to buy counterfeit goods." Journal of Socio-Economics 38(5): 820-
       825.
Varian, H.R. (2005). “Copying and Copyright” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(2): 121-138.
Wilcox, K., H. M. Kim, et al. (2009). "Why Do Consumers Buy Counterfeit Luxury Brands?" Journal
       of Marketing Research 46(2), pp. 247-259.
Yang, W.C. and D.Y. Chou (2008) "An Economic Analysis of Anti-Counterfeiting," unpublished.
Yao, J.T. (2005). "How a Luxury Monopolist Might Benefit from a Stringent Counterfeit Monitoring
        Regime." International Journal of Business and Economics 4(3): 177-192.
Figure 1: Trends in the Level of Counterfeiting as Indicated by the Firm’s “Gold
Standard” and the RAND Model
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on Key Firm and Counterfeiting Measures
                               Dependent Variables
                                           Mean                    Std. Dev
Firm Forecasts (Units Sold)               708,957                 1,941,571
Firm Actuals (Units Sold)                 695,984                 1,977,649
Diff: Forecasts - Actuals                  11,798                  220,558

                         Independent Variables -First Stage
                                             Mean                  Std. Dev
GDP Annual Growth                             2.9                    3.89
Existing Base Technology Previously
Sold                                       953,416                1,875,790
Competitor Sales Product Type A            187,244                 421,244
Compeitor Sales Product Type B              96,629                 171,786
Competitor Sales Product Type C             24,356                 36,685

                       Independent Variables - 2nd Stage
                                           Mean                    Std. Dev
Rule of Law                                0.89                       0.8
Control of Corruption                      0.94                       0.9
Government Effectiveness                   0.97                      0.67
Custom's Burden                            4.46                      0.54
International Tourism                      7.46                      3.92

N                                                    3000
Notes: Product data is from countries within North America, Europe, Central,
South, and East Asia; spans the 2005-2011 time periods. Data captures 45
unique products across the 2005-2011 time period.
Table 2: Results from First Stage Regression of Product Specific Forecasting Error


                             1st Stage Dependent Variable
                                                                      Forecast
                                                                        Error
                                                                     (in 1,000
                                                                        units)
                         GDP Growth                                     1.241
                                                                       (1.801)
            % Sold with Product Characteristic X                         106      ***
                                                                      (28.219)
                 Install of Base Technology                          -4.08E-05    ***
                                                                        0.000
             Competitor Sales Product Type A                           0.0873
                                                                        (0.06)
              Competitor Sales Product Type B                           0.233     ***
                                                                       (0.075)
              Competitor Sales Product Type C                           0.468     *
                                                                       (0.253)
                             Year                                      21.657     ***
                                                                       (7.967)
                        R-Squared                                       0.220
                    Product Fixed Effects                                 Yes
                          Cluster                                     Product
                             N                                           3300
Notes: Forecast Error, the dependent variable in the first stage is
defined as the (Forecast-Actuals). Product data is from countries within
North America, Europe, Central, South, and East Asia regions; spans
 the 2006-2011 time periods. Ordinary Least Squares regressions include
product fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the level identified
at the bottom of the table. Statistical significance is indicated as
follows: *** Denotes significance a the .1% level; ** denoted significance
at the 1% level; * denotes significance at the 5% level.
Table 3: Results from Second Stage Regression of Unexplained Forecasting Error
                        Dependent Variable: Residuals From First Stage Regression
                                     I.                 II.                III.               IV.
Rule of Law                      -97.74      ***       ---                 ---             230.89
                                 (21.05)               ---                 ---            (159.55)
Control of Corruption               ---             -121.48      **        ---            -283.32       *
                                    ---             (36.71)                ---             (98.57)
Government Effectiveness            ---                ---              -130.93     *      -32.41
                                    ---                ---              (48.51)           (117.54)
Customs Burden                    97.08               96.14      **      92.44              53.07       **
                                 (47.59)            (44.56)             (51.50)            16.23
Intern'l Tourism                  12.49       *       15.97      **      13.27      *       13.86       **
                                  (5.48)             (6.31)              (6.55)             4.10
Year_2007                         50.84               41.17              54.59              25.18
                                 (58.99)            (51.77)             (59.18)            (39.51)
Year_2008                         60.32               46.17              59.88              15.11
                                 (58.41)            (46.96)             (58.02)            (27.17)
Year_2009                         47.36               26.62              38.79             -11.93
                                 (64.47)            (51.95)             (60.41)            26.03
Year_2010                         42.96               27.74              40.69              -7.63
                                 (66.14)             56.55              (64.33)            34.10
Year_2011                         11.21              -26.37              -8.36             -65.77      ***
                                 (48.81)            (33.18)              37.80             15.89
Country FE                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Product FE                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Observations                       3300               3300                3300              3300
R-Squared                          0.03               0.04                0.03               0.05
Notes: Forecast Error, the dependent varibable in the first stage is defined as the (Forecast-Actuals).
Product data is from countries within the North America, Europe, Central, South, and East Asia regions; spans
the 2006-2011 time periods. Ordinary Least Squares regressions include product and country fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the product level. Statistical significance is indicated as follows:
*** Denotes significance at the .1% level; ** denotes significance 1% level; * denotes significance
at the 5% level.
Table 4: Mean Value of Predictions of the Number of Counterfeited Goods and Comparison with Firm’s Estimates

                            Mean       Std Dev     Year 2006   Year 2007   Year 2008   Year 2009     Year 2010   Year 2011
Firm Estimate of
Counterfeit by Product
(In Units)                707,124.00   1,028,840   1,082,135   1,032,073   939,672      810,159       747,979    118,853
RAND Estimate of
Counterfeit by Product
(In Units)                383,539.00   357,855     311,877     711,685     515,178      505,091       186,527    279,937
Percent of Firm
Estimates inside RAND
95% CI                      39.6%                   50.6%       21.5%        1.9%        59.2%         54.1%      15.9%
Firm Estimate as a
Percent of Actual Units
Sold                        55.8%                   81.6%       47.7%       65.4%        52.7%         37.7%      49.5%
RAND Estimate as a
Percent of Actual Units
Sold                        38.6%                   70.4%       44.7%       31.6%        18.9%         20.0%      45.6%
