                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    COMPETITION AMONG UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENTS

                                        William N. Goetzmann
                                             Sharon Oster

                                         Working Paper 18173
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18173


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2012




We thank John Griswold, Minhua Wan and Larry Itavares for their help and advice. We thank Commonfund
and NACUBO for providing data for research. We thank the Yale, Harvard and Princeton endowment
offices for providing data. Support for this paper was provided by the International Center for Finance
at the Yale School of Management. All errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by William N. Goetzmann and Sharon Oster. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Competition Among University Endowments
William N. Goetzmann and Sharon Oster
NBER Working Paper No. 18173
June 2012
JEL No. D4,G2

                                              ABSTRACT

The asset allocation of university endowments has recently shifted dramatically towards alternative
investments. In this paper we examine the role played by strategic competition in motivating this shift.
Using a metric capturing competition for undergraduate applications, we test whether endowment
performance relative to a school’s nearest competitor is associated with the likelihood of changing
investment policy, and conditionally, whether the nature of that change is consistent with the goal
of “catching up” to its closest rival. Conditional on indicating a policy change, we find that endowments
appear to use marketable alternatives – i.e. hedge funds – to catch up to competitors. More generally,
we find evidence that endowments with below median holdings of alternative investments tend to
shift policies in that direction. Besides herding behavior we also find trend-chasing behavior. Endowments
with recent positive experience with various alternative asset classes tend to increase exposure to them.
We consider the long-run implications of this competitive and trending behavior for the ability of endowments
to deliver intergenerational equity.


William N. Goetzmann
School of Management
Yale University
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Sharon Oster
School of Management
Yale University
135 Prospect St.
New Haven, CT 06520
sharon.oster@yale.edu
Introduction

Why did so many American universities find themselves with such troubling liquidity issues in

2008 and 2009 when their endowments suffered large declines? With endowments in the

billions of dollars, and what had long been touted as conservative spending policies, many

observers outside the academy were surprised by how difficult the financial crisis was for

universities like Harvard, Yale and Stanford. Within the academy, many have talked about the

role played by the change in asset allocation policies that occurred in the last several decades,

particularly in the increased use of alternative investments. For example, Lerner, Schoar and

Wang (2007) show that this change in asset allocation increased the skewness in endowment

size, paradoxically leading the now-much-richer universities to rely more heavily on endowment

returns to fund operations. At the same time, the increased reliance on relatively illiquid,

alternative investments by many universities exacerbated difficulties in adjusting to the market

downturn, at least in the short-run.


Our paper focuses on the process by which universities decide to change their asset allocation

policies. We are particularly interested in the decisions leading to the adoption of alternative

investments. We will argue and provide some evidence in favor of the proposition that

competition in the product market of universities, particularly in the competition for quality

students, influenced patterns of diffusion of innovation in asset allocation.   We argue that the

dynamic patterns that we see in asset allocations in university endowments are consistent with

an arms race model of universities, in which the competitive pressures in the “real” part of the

university business (research and teaching) drive an imitative diffusion of endowment policies

across schools in similar submarkets.




                                                                                                    1
Using data on prospective applicant comparison behavior to identify clusters of competitive

universities, we find evidence that schools competing in the same markets for students follow

similar asset allocation policies over time, even when we hold endowment size and other school

characteristics constant. We further find that when a school’s endowment return lags relative

to its immediate rival, it systematically changes its asset allocation.


Section 2 of this paper provides some historical background on asset allocation by universities

in the United States, and sketches our theory of the link between product market competition

and asset allocation choices. Section 3 describes the data we use to provide evidence for our

theory, Section 4 describes our results and Section 5 discusses their implications.




Section 2: Some History and a Theory


University endowments have long been at the forefront of innovative investment. For example,

Goetzmann, Griswold and Tseng (2010) document a strategic shift in university endowments

towards equities in the 1920’s and 1930’s, despite the financial crisis at the time. This shift

proved beneficial in the long run, but caused observers to question its wisdom in the short run.


Prior to the 1980’s virtually all universities and colleges restricted themselves to domestic

equities, bonds and cash. Even at Harvard and Yale, the two innovators in asset allocation

policy, the share of endowment devoted to these traditional classes was dominant in 1985. Our

first three figures capture the central and dramatic changes in the portfolios of the Harvard, Yale

and Princeton endowments over the last twenty five years.1 Figure 1 shows the decrease in

allocation to U.S. publicly traded equities by the three endowments over the period from 1985 to

2011. The Yale and Princeton stock holdings decreased from over 60% to less than 10% in

the time period. Harvard’s stock holdings dropped from 40% to about 10% at the end of the

1
    We thank the endowment offices of Harvard, Yale and Princeton for the data for these figures.


                                                                                                    2
period. Yale and Princeton’s shift from public equities appears to be partially explained by

substitution into private equity. Figure 2 shows a dramatic rise in Yale and Princeton’s private

equity allocation from below 5% to over 30%. The speed with which interest in the new asset

classes grew, and the movement away from both domestic equities and more dramatically

bonds, is striking. Figure 3 shows a sequential adoption of new investment “technology” over

the 1990’s. From 1990 to 1998, first Yale then Princeton then Harvard began to invest in

hedge funds – i.e. marketable alternatives. These investments reached a peak in the mid 2000’s

and have since tapered to about a 20% allocation.        While some of the recent shifts from

marketable alternatives and publicly traded equities may have been driven by liquidity needs

around the financial crisis (and conversely the difficulty in liquidating private equity positions at

that time) the broad trends are clear. In 1985, all three institutions were heavily invested in

domestic equity and fixed income. Harvard had 69% of its endowment invested in domestic

equities and bonds, while Princeton had 85% and Yale 78%. None of the three institutions had

any investment in absolute returns and all were relatively light on private equity, with Harvard

leading at 7%, Yale at 3% and Princeton at 2%. These strategies virtually reversed themselves

over the 25 year period.


The similarities in the diffusion of the new asset allocation strategies of Harvard, Yale and

Princeton are even more striking when mapped against the strategies of the rest of the universe

of colleges. In the NACUBO2 data base, as late as 2000 the average university endowment was

still invested more than 50% in domestic equities, with under 2% in private equity and hedge

funds (Brown, Garlappi and Tiu, 2010). Figure 4 compares the time trend of domestic equity




2
  NACUBO, the National Association of College and University Business Officers, has maintained an
annual survey of its members for a number of years and this has been recently managed by the
Commonfund since 2009 and combined with the Commonfund’s own survey of college and university
endowment offices. The Commonfund is a non-profit investment management firm serving primarily
endowments and foundations.


                                                                                                        3
investments for Harvard, Yale and Princeton with the general NACUBO population of schools

from 1989 to 2005.


The similarities in the rate of adoption of the new financial models by Harvard, Yale and

Princeton could, of course, be attributed to a number of factors. In all industries, there are early

and late adopters of innovations, and we know that early adopters differ systematically from

later adopters. On the firm level, early adopters tend to be those firms with most to gain from

an innovation, and firms with the requisite complementary assets. Early adopters also tend to

cluster geographically or belong to the same trade organizations, which facilitate transmission of

new ideas (Griliches, 1956; Oster, 1995). Harvard, Yale and Princeton were all large

endowments, for example, all located in the East, and all part of the Ivy League. Surely, these

commonalities facilitated the diffusion of innovation across the three.


But there is another feature of Harvard, Yale and Princeton that we believe plays a fundamental

role in their common adoption of endowment strategies: the strong competition among the three

in their product market. References to H-Y-P as the goal of many elite high school scholars are

common; close rankings of the three are also evidenced in more sophisticated revealed

preference rankings (Avery et al. 2004). We argue that this product line competition also

affects investment decisions.


To understand why product market competition might influence the diffusion of investment

strategies we need to think about the role of endowments for universities more broadly. The

classic argument in favor of an endowment beyond that required to accommodate cash flow

swings is to create intergenerational equity across students, by creating a perpetual flow of real

income to support university activities (c.f. Litvak, Malkiel and Quant, 1974; Tobin 1974; Eisner,

1974). Sometimes this goal is referred to as “preserving purchasing power” from a gift

(Swensen, p. 35).




                                                                                                     4
Some have interpreted this mandate as requiring that spending rules and investment returns be

managed to maintain the real value of the endowment spending, using, for example, the Higher

Education Price Index [HEPI] to measure changes in the costs of inputs used by universities.


We would argue that the objective of intergenerational equity is more complicated than simply

maintaining a level real value of resources. In producing a superb education, two key

ingredients are faculty and students. Student quality is especially important: better students

attract better faculty; peer effects are important in improving educational outcomes and quality

of student on the incoming side is clearly highly correlated with student outcomes. (For evidence

on the importance of peer effects see Epple, Newlon and Romano,2002; and Burke and Sass,

2009).   It is for this reason that various measures of student quality and student admissions

choices play such a large role in the many college rating systems. US News and World

Report , for example, weights SAT scores 15% in devising their college ranking and adds

another 25% weight for another, more subjective measure of student quality. Notice, however,

that while changes in competition for faculty will arguably show up (at least on average) in the

Higher Education Price Index, competition for students will typically not be reflected in the price

index. Schools compete for students via increasing resources available to them such as

scholarships, housing and athletic facilities (Hoxby, 2009 describes this process). They thus bid

up the number of inputs needed to produce good students rather than the price of those

inputs. Perhaps more importantly, the competition for students occurs in very narrow markets.

Colleges ranked among the top ten schools rarely compete         for students with schools ranked

100 rungs below them. As we describe later in this paper, there is reason to think that the

narrow competition for students within quality bands of schools may have increased over time.

With local competition for a key input like students, preserving intergenerational equity requires

that universities keep up with their proximate rivals and not just maintain the real value of their

assets, as they might do in a case in which their inputs were widely traded. If Yale wants to



                                                                                                      5
produce as good an education in 2020 as it did in 2010 it needs to preserve its competitive

position vis a vis the other narrow set of colleges with which it competes for students. If the

real value of Harvard’s endowment doubles in the next ten years, and Yale’s remains flat, Yale

will no longer be able to compete for the same quality of students that it attracted earlier.


A goal of producing the same level of service over time, in a market in which groups of

universities compete for scarce resources creates a linkage across those universities in both

asset allocation decisions and spending rules. We will observe a form of arm’s race in which

universities focus on ensuring adequate resources for tomorrow’s battlefield. There are, as a

result, strong competitive pressures that may encourage adoption of similar policies within

competitive submarkets. This is the hypothesis we will explore in this paper.




Related Research: Keeping Up With the Jones


Economic research has not addressed competitive endowment behavior to any large extent, but

it has intensely examined competitive household investment behavior. Much of this work has

focused on the effects of the utility for relative wealth on asset price dynamics in an equilibrium

setting (c.f. Abel, 1990, Gali, 1994; Chan and Kogan, 2002). Generally called “Keeping up with

the Jones” [KUJ] or “Catching up with the Joneses,” this research has been used to explain the

equity risk premium, as well as labor and consumption dynamics. Gali (1994), for example

shows that when consumption demand is positively related to average consumption, the equity

premium falls. Bakshi and Chen (1996) examine a model in which relative wealth determines

status and show it leads to excess market volatility. Ravina (2005) empirically identifies KUJ

behavior in consumption through credit cards. These asset pricing results may be tangentially

relevant to the endowment universe in asset markets with limited capacity, but this question is

not the focus of the current paper.



                                                                                                      6
Most relevant for our study, however, are papers by Demarzo, Kaniel and Kremer (2005 &

2011). They analyze how investors respond to local economic factors. In a KUJ setting, when

a subset of investors (the Joneses) within a community takes a large position in a particular

security for hedging reasons – or even irrational reasons – this can induce herding by others

concerned with keeping up with them. This setting leads to under-diversification, increased

investment in risky assets and may lead to asset market bubbles. They argue that diversified

portfolio becomes a community asset – inducing positive externalities for competitors. In this

case, the innovators in the endowment universe characterized by KUJ preferences can have

positive or negative externalities. If they become more diversified – or choose a strategy that is

superior in meeting the long-term goals of a university, then this has a positive spill-over to their

competitors. On the other hand, if the innovator picks a strategy that is optimal for itself, but is

not replicable or not optimal for imitators, this can have negative external consequences. For

example, if the leader invests in an asset class – such as venture capital -- with limited

capacity, this may generate increased demand for this specific asset, and drive up the price, or

lead imitators to investor in lesser quality venture funds.


Also related to our work is the investment funds tournament literature (c.f. Chevalier and Ellison,

1997, Sirri and Tufano, 1998, Brown, Goetzmann and Park, 2001, Brown, Harlow and Starks,

1996). These papers study the behavior of investment managers in a competitive setting in

which capital flows reward positive performance.       Chevalier and Ellison (1997) and Sirri and

Tufano (1998) document asymmetric rewards to performance which implies option-like

compensation that can induce risk-taking to stretch for high returns. Brown, Harlow and Starks

(1996) and Brown, Goetzmann and Park (2001) focus on risk-taking by mutual fund managers

and hedge fund managers. The former show increased risk-taking by funds that lag their peers

after the first half of the year. The latter show that positive performance relative to peers in the




                                                                                                       7
hedge fund industry is associated with reduced risk-taking in subsequent periods; consistent

with preserving relative performance.


University endowments differ considerably from households and managed funds, but the

studies cited above offer useful frames for understanding the effects of competition in the

endowment market. Endowments are a bit like mutual funds and hedge funds because their

managers operate within a labor market in which track record (and survival) are important

determinants of employment and compensation. Endowments are also a bit like households in

that they are confronted with a savings and investment problem conditional on a set of mission

objectives. These mission objectives may include a dimension of relative consumption – or

even relative wealth.


Strategic Competition Among Universities


There is considerable research on the competition among universities. Epple et. al. (2003 &

2006) for example find that competition among universities generates a rigorous quality

hierarchy in which a few select schools have market power. These researchers abstract away

from the role of the university endowment as either a metric for market power or a determinant

of it. Other research examines trends in student preferences for universities consistent with

increasing mobility. Hoxby (2009) finds “… the elasticity of a student’s preference for a college

with respect to its proximity to that student’s home has fallen substantially over time and there

has been a corresponding increase in the elasticity of each student’s preference for a college

with respect to its resources and peers.” (p. 96). This, in turn, may have intensified the

competition among “national” universities. In the mid 1950’s, 20% of the Yale undergraduate

population came from Connecticut (See Yale OIR website). By 2011, much of that

specialization had gone by the wayside: in 2011, only 6% of the Yale student body was from

Connecticut, fewer than came from outside U.S. borders. At the elite colleges, the diminishing




                                                                                                    8
role of family connections also serves to increase competition across schools. In the mid-

1950’s, 25% of the enrollees at Yale were the sons of Yale fathers (OIR website). By 2011, this

number had fallen to 10 % (and of course included daughters of Yale mothers and fathers). This

increased competition naturally increased the importance of maintaining financial parity to

enable selective colleges to maintain their ability to attract high quality students in what has

become an international marketplace.


Scholars have also recognized the effects of competition in the market for professors. In the

humanities, Shumway (1997) has derided the “star” system as a threat to merit-based

evaluation of research in literary studies. Volkwein and Sweitzer (2006) report that full-time

professor salaries are positively correlated to prestige rankings of universities and colleges.

Bastedo and Bowman (2010) find that published rankings of colleges influence future revenues.

The clear implication is that a larger endowment makes possible higher faculty salaries,

enhanced prestige and in turn this may generate future economic benefits as well.


If there is an arms race in university endowment management, born of increased competition for

key inputs, we should expect to see a higher degree of similarity of investment strategies for

schools that most directly compete. The data we looked at for Harvard, Yale and Princeton is

suggestive but we turn now to describe the broader data we will use to explore this hypothesis.




Section 3: The Data


We are interested in exploring the similarities in asset allocation patterns among colleges that

compete most directly with one another in the product market, here defined as the market for

students. We thus need data on asset allocations by schools and by narrow categories as well

as data on the levels of competition among schools.




                                                                                                   9
Asset Allocation


In describing the endowment assets and investment policies of universities and colleges we

relied on the annual NACUBO-Commonfund Study of Endowments. The survey covers 1,033

funds associated with 1,261 universities or colleges for the July-June fiscal years 2006-2011. It

collects comparative data on endowment investment policies and practices across the

participating universe of U.S. colleges and university endowments. The data are self-reported

by university endowment offices and not always complete for each year, although the annual

rate of compliance is very high. As necessary, we adjust our empirical analysis for competing

universities (for example some state institutions) that have a common endowment. With these

and other data-driven exclusions, 947 universities remain in our sample.


Much of our analysis focuses on the types of assets held by university funds. The NACUBO-

Commonfund sample classifies assets into domestic equities, fixed income, international

equities, alternative strategies and cash/other. Each category is broken down further. For our

analysis, we are especially interested in the subgroups within the alternative asset category:

private equity, real estate, venture capital, energy and natural resources, marketable

alternatives (i.e. hedge funds) and distressed debt. As we have already seen in the data on

Harvard, Yale and Princeton, the major change in endowments since 1985 was the movement

into alternatives.   These alternative assets have three features of interest. First, most of

these alternative asset categories are actively managed, so that a necessary component of the

value proposition of the investment involves access to skillful managers. When top managers

have limited capacity, they may not be able to accommodate both innovators and followers.

Second, alternative assets are generally less liquid than other asset categories. Indeed, One of

David Swensen’s key insights is that part of the returns to alternative assets comes from the

“liquidity premium”, that is compensation for holding illiquid, non-marketable assets. The

common notion, at least until 2008, was that endowments were patient investors who could



                                                                                                 10
“harvest” the liquidity premium that shorter term investors must avoid. Finally, alternative

assets were thought to be attractive because they were uncorrelated with the stock and bond

markets, and thus played a role in reducing portfolio volatility.


The NACUBO data provides, for each responding college, both the percent investments in each

asset class and the return achieved for that class, if available. These data allow us to

benchmark the endowments’ self-reported performance by asset class. In addition, for some

years, funds are asked whether their marketable alternative investments underperformed, met

expectations or exceeded expectations.


We are particularly interested in tracing the diffusion of allocation strategies across schools that

compete. Part of this analysis will involve looking at how closely allocations match at various

points in time. But we also have more direct data on planned changes by endowment

managers that we will exploit in our empirical work. A key survey question we rely on for our

analysis is whether the fund is considering changing “its approach to constructing the asset

allocation” of the portfolio and, if so, the nature of the contemplated change. Thus we are

potentially able to connect the decisions to change investment strategy to the behavior of

competitive rivals.


The key dataset we use from the survey is a time-series, cross-section panel of individual

endowment asset allocations. Figure 5 shows the aggregate allocation of university assets in

the sample to major asset classes: domestic equities, fixed income, international equities and

alternatives. The shift from domestic equities to alternative assets is clearly evident, though as

we see, it happened later in the general population than it did in the HYP sample. This shift

away from domestic equities by colleges is well documented. Lerner, Schoar and Wang (2007)

using data beginning in 1992, find a dramatic doubling of the share of the average endowment

invested in alternatives from 9% in 1993 to 18% in 2005.




                                                                                                  11
As we suggested earlier, there are a number of features of colleges that are correlated with

asset allocations. Size of endowment clearly affects asset allocations; the substitution towards

alternative investments is even more dramatic for larger endowments, which moves from 30%

allocation in 2006 to 43% in 2011. Clearly larger funds have capabilities different from smaller

ones. Differences in the investment strategies of the small and large funds are evident in Figure

6. There is also some regional variation in portfolios. Figure 7 separates endowments by the

first digit zip code regions and shows the greater exposure of the New England and Mid Atlantic

areas to alternative assets. The regional pattern we see is consistent with other regional

diffusion models, given the fact that the move to alternatives began, as we saw earlier, at

Harvard, Yale and Princeton, all located in the mid Atlantic and New England areas.


Data on School Competition


Universities compete in many markets from the labor market to the market for government

grants. For our work, a key market is the market for students. We are interested in finding a

measure of the degree of head-to-head competition among colleges for students.


The search process for information about colleges for students and their families has, like much

else, transitioned to the web. There are a few major websites that aggregate useful information

about universities and also provide software tools for building portfolios of schools for potential

consideration. For our measure of competition, we rely on one of these sites: Cappex.com.


Cappex claims to have nearly 3 million student users, and it covers roughly 3,000 colleges and

aggregates basic information about the school and the application process. On the cappex

web page for each college, there is a section entitled “students also considered” which includes

the names of 10 other schools visited by other users who visited that particular college page.

These other schools appear to be ranked in order of frequency of visit from one school to the

next. In other words, students who considered school X and considered these ten other



                                                                                                   12
schools. In effect, we are able to observe comparison shopping by college students browsing

schools.3


Table 1 provides a sampling of the pairings we found in this exercise along with data on the

relative ranking of the colleges using the revealed preference rankings found by Avery et al

(2004).     In the table we have provided information on the top ten browsing pairs for five

schools in the sample; in the empirical work we aggregate these ten competitors as our

measure of school competition. The pairings seem broadly sensible.             Thus for Yale, we see

Harvard and Princeton appear, while for the San Francisco Conservatory of Music we find the

Manhattan School of Music and the New England Conservatory of Music.


Section 4: Results


Table 2 provides some descriptive data on the sample of college funds we used in our analysis.

Two thirds of the institutions in the sample are private schools and the mean endowment size is

almost $500 million with a substantial range.


Tables 3a and 3b report the results of regressions explaining allocation to alternative assets. In

Table 3a, the dependent variable is the percent of a university’s endowment invested in

alternatives at the end of the fiscal year. In column 1 we report results from a pooled sample,

using year dummies. In the remaining columns, we break the data out year by year, allowing

coefficients to vary over the years. The results are qualitatively similar, so we will focus on the

pooled regression. Table 3b presents the same analysis for the percent of endowment

invested in marketable alternatives (i.e. hedge funds).4


Not surprisingly, the results indicate that larger schools, both in terms of number of students and

size of the endowment, have, on average, higher shares of their endowments in alternatives.

3
  Our data was downloaded in mid-December, 2011.
4
  For comparison, we also use the single closest school on the list as the nearest competitor. The
results are slightly stronger in that specification.


                                                                                                     13
For marketable alternatives, every one hundred million dollar increase in endowment size

increases the percent of assets invested in marketable alternatives by 2.2%. A comparable

increase in asset size increases the percent in all alternatives by 12% . Every thousand

students, another measure of school size, increases the share in marketable alternatives by

1.3% and all alternatives by 1.9%. Smaller endowments, those below $25 million, have a

natural disadvantage in investing in marketable alternative funds since they may not meet the

definition of a qualified institutional investor. In addition, hedge funds face a limit on the number

of investors they can serve and this rationing process favors large investors. Larger schools

have both the financial resources and the staff to consider alternative investments, although the

scale of their investment offices may reflect the complexities of investing in alternative assets.

Schools located in the New England or Mid Atlantic regions have, on average 3.5% more of

their endowments invested in marketable alternatives, all else equal and 3.8% in all alternatives.

The regression also suggests that richer schools, measured by endowment per student, a invest

more in alternative assets, perhaps reflecting a higher taste for risk, or a belief in their ability to

carry illiquid assets.


The key variable in the regression from our point of view is the Nearest Competitor. Again, this

variable measures the percent of alternative investments or marketable alternatives held by a

school’s ten nearest competitors. As we see, the variable is positive and highly significant both

in explaining marketable alternatives and all alternative investments.       In the pooled sample in

column 1, a 1% increase in a rival’s allocation to marketable alternatives increases own

allocation to this asset class by .43% and all alternatives by .64% Coefficients are roughly

equivalent and all significant across the six years in our sample.


We take these results to be consistent with our model of strategic asset allocation. Within school

pairings, constructed to reflect competition among schools in the product market, we observe—




                                                                                                      14
holding constant size, richness and location—very similar patterns of investments in

alternatives.


In 2009, the Nacubo-Commonfund survey began asking endowment managers whether they

were considering a change in their asset allocations and, if so, what change was being

contemplated. Almost twenty five percent of the sample reported in any given year were

considering an allocation change. This in itself is interesting and is consistent with the

transition of the endowment population observed over our longer period of study. In Table 4,

we estimate a log-linear regression, asking whether a manager’s interest in changing plans is

related to an endowment’s own lagged performance and that of its nearest competitors. The

results suggest that high lagged own returns decrease the likelihood of wanted to change asset

allocations, while good performance by an index of nearest competitors are associated with an

increased likelihood of change.


Table 5 further explores the type of change contemplated by endowments. Ideally, we are

interested in whether superior performance by a rival drives an endowment more into

alternatives. The survey data provides some interesting evidence in this regard. Table 5

examines comparative performance to the set of nearest competitors at three-year and five-year

horizons. Winners are defined as those funds that beat their competitors over that time

interval. Counts and proportions are reported, and test of the independence of rows and

columns are also reported.


Consistent with the evidence in table 4, we find that, over the three-year horizon, the propensity

to change is related to whether or not the fund is a winner or loser relative to competitors. This

is positive, although the p-value is 7%, and over the five year horizon, we do not reject the null.

The focus of this table, however is the further detail provided by endowments about the TYPE of

change being contemplated. At both three and five year return horizons, losers contemplating




                                                                                                  15
a change were significantly more likely to seek assets in the risk/hedge category as opposed to

the growth category. Unfortunately, the NACUBO classifications are not a perfect match for our

interests. Choices for contemplated changes are: Growth Assets, defined as domestic and

international equities, private equities, etc; Risk Reduction: defined as long/short, hedged

equities, fixed income; Inflation Protection, defined as real assets( e.g. real estate ,oil and gas,

timberland and TlPS; Opportunistic Investment (undefined); Liquidity(undefined); and Other.

We use only the Growth Assets and Risk Reduction categories. Hedge funds are included in the

Risk Reduction category, along with fixed income; while it is generally true that hedge fund

returns have lower standard deviations than equities, the common reasons to invest in them is

to capture risk-adjusted returns (alpha) based on proprietary trading techniques. This makes

hedge funds quite different from fixed income, with which they are lumped. With this caveat we

can interpret the significant preference by losers for the Risk Reduction category provisionally

as a tendency to move towards marketable alternatives as opposed to private equity, although it

is also possible that it reflects a tendency to increase bonds. Note, however that it is not the

result of a movement towards more liquidity engendered by the 2008-2009 crisis – this would

presumably fall into the Liquidity category.


Table 6 follows up on the reported desire to change asset allocation. We take response to the

question about intent to change allocation and see whether the endowments in fact change their

percentage allocation in the following year. The table treats the increase in percentage

allocation each asset class in a separate regression, using the indicator variables for intent to

change or uncertain about a change as explanatory variables. We also include a dummy for

year 2011, to address secular changes in endowment preferences for certain asset classes.

Since this question has only been asked for two years and we are using a one year forward lag

as the dependent variable, we only have two years of annual panel data.




                                                                                                    16
The time dummy in the regression is significant in each case and indicates two things. First, it

likely partly reflects change in the market value of each asset class – in years when the stock

market goes up, it will be positive. Second, it also likely reflects industry-wide rebalancing

towards certain asset classes. For example, although domestic equities increased in market

value in fiscal year 2011, the coefficient on intent to change is negative, indicating that,

controlling for market growth, endowments intending to change withdrew funds from domestic

equities in the following year.


The coefficient on Marketable Alternatives is strongly positive, while the 2011 dummy is

negative – the overall industry trend and/or the performance of hedge funds in 2011 may have

been down, but for those endowments reporting an intent to change policy, they followed

through by increasing their exposure to hedge funds. The same is true for international

equities (which would include emerging market stocks), but interestingly it is not true for private

equity and venture capital. This is consistent with the evidence we saw in the previous table –

that, conditional on intent to change, the Risk Reduction category was significant for losers but

not the Growth Assets category.


Finally, we use the data to explore whether the documented pattern of competitive response

that has led endowments towards greater allocation to marketable alternatives has differential

effects for large vs. small institutions. Table 7 reports the results of regressions explaining the

reported returns within each asset class. The explanatory variables include a benchmark index

for that asset category in the observation year ( for example the domestic equities benchmark is

the S&P 500), the size and richness of the endowment at the beginning of the year and a

dummy for the Northeast region. Focusing in the marketable alternatives, we see that the

benchmark explains performance well but that certain factors add or detract. Taking the average

values for endowment size ($463 mm) and richness (.095) the estimated model indicates that

these add about .30, or 30 basis points per year to the return to marketable alternatives. The



                                                                                                  17
Northeast dummy adds 57 basis points. Thus a school of average size and average richness

situated in the Northeast would likely have a return that exceeds the benchmark (0.868 – 0.696

= .182). which suggests that the hedge fund allocation has matched or exceeded industry

performance. For less-rich, smaller schools outside the Northeast this is likely not the case.

Given the standard errors about the coefficient in the marketable alternative regression,

however, this calculation is only a gross estimate: while the intercept is significantly negative,

the other coefficients (besides the intercept) are not. Among the other regressions, the overall

Alternatives portfolio (constructed with reported asset weights) gives similar results, although

the richness factor approaches standard significance levels. Performance from domestic

equities, by contrast, does not vary at all by asset size, school richness or region. Interestingly,

though somewhat outside the scope of this paper, we find that international equity performance

also varies with endowment size, school richness and region, suggesting that this asset class,

like alternatives, requires more endowment management skill to pay off. This may give one

some pause when we remember the small uptick in the general trend towards international

equities in Figure 5, and a significant loading on intent to change for the international equities

regression in Table 6.


5. Discussion


Our empirical results demonstrate a few things. First, we show that the college endowment

allocations to alternative assets – and more specifically to marketable alternatives, is associated

with the allocation policies of their near competitors and single closest competitor. This is true

even controlling for regional effects, size and richness. Second, we show that that the decision

by college endowments to change their asset allocations is not independent of the relative

performance compared to rivals. In particular, prior one and two year past returns of rivals are

positively associated with an intent to change allocation. We find that, conditional upon an

intent to change, losing funds (i.e. those that underperformed rivals) more frequently indicated a



                                                                                                     18
choice for a category that includes hedge funds, compared to winners who intended to change.

This difference is not true for the asset category that includes private equity and venture capital.

We find that the announced intent to change allocation is significantly related to a subsequent

reduction in domestic equities and an increase in international equities and marketable

alternatives.


These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the relative performance of a university’s

competitors’ endowments influences its asset allocation policy and the decision to change it.

The general direction of the change is also consistent with the trends set by HYP – towards

marketable alternatives – i.e. hedge funds.


A key question is whether this allocation shift is a good thing. The implication of Demarzo et.

(2005 & 2011) is that keeping up with the Jones can create positive externalities if the action

indeed in welfare-improving. After all, that is what new technology is all about. Is the shift to

alternative investments a benefit to the universities who respond to competitive pressure by

reallocating? The answer is not straightforward. There is considerable literature on the

returns to hedge funds. Brown, Goetzmann & Ibbotson (1999) find that hedge funds delivered

positive risk adjusted returns over the period to 1995. Ibbotson and Chen (2005) and Stulz

(2007), in a review article, finds that this basic result holds true over a longer sample period.

Perhaps the competition among university endowments has led to greater diversification, less

exposure to market risk and the utilization of manager skill. Unfortunately, time is needed to fully

assess the benefits of a new technology. Our analysis of the relative benefits of small and less

rich funds moving to marketable alternatives is constrained to recent years. With this

qualification, we find some evidence that the benefits to the allocation shift are differential.


 If the returns to marketable alternatives continue as they have historically, then the competition

will have been a good thing. If, on the other hand, markets are efficient – or at least access to




                                                                                                    19
managers who can take advantage of inefficiencies for the benefit of clients is limited, then this

shift may have long-term costs.




                                                                                                 20
References


Abel, Andrew B., 1990, Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the Joneses,
The American Economic Review , Vol. 80, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and
Second Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May, 1990), pp. 38-42.

Brown,Keith, Lorenzo Garlappi and Cristian Tiu,2010.”Asset allocation and portfolio
performance: Evidence from university endowment funds,” Journal of Financial Markets, vol 1,
2010, pp 268-94.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, 1995, Performance Persistence, The Journal of
Finance , Vol. 50, No. 2 (Jun., 1995), pp. 679-698.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann and Roger G. Ibbotson, 1999, Offshore Hedge
Funds: Survival and Performance, 1989–95, The Journal of Business , Vol. 72, No. 1 (January
1999), pp. 91-117.

Avery, Christopher, Mark Glickman,Caroline Hoxby,Andrew Metrick, 2004, A Revealed
Preference Ranking of U.S. Colleges and Universities, NBER working paper 10803.

Bakshi, Gurdip S. and Zhiwu Chen, 1996, The Spirit of Capitalism and Stock-Market Prices, The
American Economic Review , Vol. 86, No. 1 (Mar., 1996), pp. 133-157.

Bastedo, Michael N. and Nicholas A. Bowman, 2011, College Rankings as an
Interorganizational Dependency: Establishing the Foundation for Strategic and Institutional
Accounts, Research in Higher Education, Volume 52, Number 1 (2011), 3-23.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann and James Park, 2001,Careers and Survival:
Competition and Risk in the Hedge Fund and CTA Industry, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 56,
No. 5 (Oct., 2001), pp. 1869-188.

Burke,Mary and Tim Sass, 2008. “Classroom peer effects and student achievement,” FRB of
Boston Working Paper, 2008

Yeung, Chan, Lewis and Leonid Kogan. "Catching Up With The Joneses: Heterogeneous
Preferences And The Dynamics Of Asset Prices," Journal of Political Economy, 2002,
v110(6,Dec), 1255-1285.

Ibbotson, Roger G., and Peng Chen, 2005, Sources of hedge fund returns: alphas, betas, and
costs. Yale ICF Working Paper , 5 (17).

Chevalier, Judith A., Glenn D. Ellison, 1997, Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, no.6 (1997): 1167-1200.

DeMarzo, Peter M., Ron Kaniel and Ilan Kremer, 2005, Diversification as a Public Good:
Community Effects in Portfolio Choice, The Journal of Finance, Volume 59, Issue 4, pages
1677–1716.




                                                                                              21
DeMarzo, Peter M., Ron Kaniel and Ilan Kremer, 2011, Relative Wealth Concerns and
Complementarities in Information Acquisition REV FINANC STUD 24(1): 169-207.

Epple,Dennis, Elizabeth Newlon and Richard Romano, 2002. “Ability tracking, school
competition and Distribution of Educational Benefits,” Journal of Public Economics,2002 vol 83,
pp 1-48

Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano and Holger Sieg, 2003, Peer Effects, Financial Aid and
Selection of Students into Colleges and Universities: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Applied
Econometrics , Vol. 18, No. 5, Empirical Analysis of Social Interactions, pp. 501-525.

Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano and Holger Sieg, 2006, Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid
Policies in the Market for Higher Education, Econometrica , Vol. 74, No. 4, pp. 885-928

Galí, Jordi, 1994, Keeping up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice,
and Asset Prices, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 26, No. 1 (Feb., 1994), pp. 1-8.

Goetzmann, William N. John Griswold, and, and Yung-Fang (Ayung) Tseng, 2010, Educational
Endowments in Crises, The Journal of Portfolio Management. Vol. 36, No. 4: pp. 112-123.

Griliches,Zvi, 1985. “ Hybrid corn: An exploration of the economics of technological change,”
Econometrica, 1985.

Hansmann, Henry, 1990, Why Do Universities Have Endowments? The Journal of Legal
Studies, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Jan., 1990), pp. 3-42.

Hoxby,Caroline. 2009.”The Cahnging Selectivity of American Colleges,” Journal of Economic
Persepctives. Vol 23, 2009, pp. 95-118.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang.2007.”Secrets of the Academy:The Drivers of
University Endowment Performance,” HBS Working Paper, 2007.

Litvak,J ,Burton MAlkiel and Richard Quandt. 1974.”A plan for the definition of endowment
income,” American Economics Review,1974, vol 64, pp 433-37.

Oster,Sharon. 1982. “The Diffusion of Innovation among Steel Firms,” Bell Journal (Rand), vol
13, 1982 pp. 45-56

Ravina, Enrichetta, Habit Persistence and Keeping Up with the Joneses:Evidence from Micro
Data (November 2005). SSRN.

Sirri, Erik R. and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, The Journal of
Finance , Vol. 53, No. 5 (Oct., 1998), pp. 1589-1622.

Shumway, David R., 1997, The Star System in Literary Studies, PMLA , Vol. 112, No. 1, Special
Topic: The Teaching of Literature (Jan., 1997), pp. 85-100.

Rene Stulz, 2007, Hedge Funds: Past, Present, and Future. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives , 21 (2), 175‐194.



                                                                                                22
Swensen,David. Pioneering Portfolio Management, Free Press, 2000.

Tobin, James. 1974. “What is permanent endowment income,” American Economic
Review.1974, vol 64, pp 427-432

Volkwein, J. Fredericks and Kyle V. Sweitzer, 2006, Institutional Prestige and Reputation among
Research Universities and Liberal Arts Colleges”, Research in Higher Education, Volume 47,
Number 2 (2006), 129-148.




                                                                                            23
                                  Allocation to U.S. Publicly Listed Equities by
                                 Yale, Harvard & Princeton Endowments: 1990‐
                                                      2011
                           90
                           80                                                                                Harvard
                           70
   Percentage Allocation




                           60                                                                                Princeton

                           50                                                                                Yale
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                           0
                                1984

                                       1986

                                              1988

                                                     1990

                                                            1992

                                                                   1994

                                                                          1996

                                                                                 1998

                                                                                        2000

                                                                                               2002

                                                                                                      2004

                                                                                                              2006

                                                                                                                     2008

                                                                                                                            2010
                                                                          Fiscal Year


Figure 1




                                                                                                                                   24
                                           Allocation to Private Equity by
                                   Yale, Harvard & Princeton Endowments: 1990‐
                                                        2011
                           40

                           35                 Harvard
   Percentage Allocation




                           30
                                              Princeton
                           25

                           20                 Yale
                           15

                           10

                           5

                           0
                                1984

                                       1986

                                                1988

                                                        1990

                                                               1992

                                                                      1994

                                                                             1996

                                                                                    1998

                                                                                           2000

                                                                                                  2002

                                                                                                         2004

                                                                                                                2006

                                                                                                                       2008

                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                             Fiscal Year

Figure 2




                                                                                                                                     25
                                       Allocation to Marketable Alternatives by
                                 Yale, Harvard & Princeton Endowments: 1990‐2011
                          35

                          30   Harvard

                          25   Princeton
  Percentage allocation




                          20   Yale

                          15

                          10

                           5

                           0
                               1984
                               1985
                               1986
                               1987
                               1988
                               1989
                               1990
                               1991
                               1992
                               1993
                               1994
                               1995
                               1996
                               1997
                               1998
                               1999
                               2000
                               2001
                               2002
                               2003
                               2004
                               2005
                               2006
                               2007
                               2008
                               2009
                               2010
                               2011
                                                       Fiscal Year


Figure 3




                                                                                   26
                                                Allocation to U.S. Publicly Listed Equities by
                                             Yale, Harvard, Princeton and NACUBO: 1989‐2005
                          60


                          50
  Percentage Allocation




                          40


                          30

                                         Harvard
                          20
                                         Princeton

                                         Yale
                          10
                                         NACUBO

                          0
                               1989

                                      1990

                                              1991

                                                     1992

                                                            1993

                                                                   1994

                                                                          1995

                                                                                 1996

                                                                                        1997

                                                                                               1998

                                                                                                      1999

                                                                                                             2000

                                                                                                                    2001

                                                                                                                           2002

                                                                                                                                  2003

                                                                                                                                         2004

                                                                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                  Fiscal Year

Figure 4




                                                                                                                                                27
                            Change in Asset Allocation over Time

             Domestic Equities          Fixed Income          International Equities          Alternatives
  2006            45.534                  19.9669                   13.5706                     17.703
  2007            42.3251                 17.7306                   15.8226                     18.941
  2008            37.9991                 18.8349                   15.1108                     23.848
  2009            33.5849                 21.6286                    14.269                     23.024
  2010            32.3573                 21.7605                   14.7836                     24.976
  2011            32.4115                 18.975                     16.463                     26.368




                    Change in Asset Allocation Over Time
 50

 45

 40

 35

 30                                                                                    Domestic Equities

 25                                                                                    Fixed Income
                                                                                       International Equities
 20
                                                                                       Alternatives
 15

 10

  5

  0
           2006     2007         2008      2009        2010         2011




Figure 5




                                                                                                                28
                                Change in Alternatives over Time

                  large funds                 medium funds          small funds
  2006              30.347                        16.532              6.361
  2007              31.296                        17.206              5.644
  2008              37.877                        21.024              7.094
  2009              40.98                         22.406              10.35
  2010              43.235                        23.587              10.559
  2011              43.186                        23.655              10.328




                      Change in Alternatives Over Time
 50

 45

 40

 35

 30
                                                                       large funds
 25
                                                                       medium funds
 20                                                                    small funds
 15

 10

  5

  0
           2006     2007          2008     2009       2010   2011



Figure 6




                                                                                      29
                          Regional Distribution of the use of Alternative Assets (% of Total Assets)

                      First Zip          avg_MktAlt (%)         avg_VC (%)            avg_PE (%)            avg_TotalAlt (%)

 0 New England                               14.437               1.335                    6.872                   27.747

 1 NY‐PA                                     12.631               1.176                    5.333                   23.610

 2 Mid‐Atlantic                              15.365               1.680                    5.561                   30.267

 3 South East                                9.808                0.694                    4.451                   19.706

 4 Michigan ‐ KY                             10.380               1.301                    5.504                   21.143

 5 MT to WI                                  8.396                0.813                    4.961                   17.853

 6 Mid West                                  7.667                1.008                    5.431                   18.084

 7 TX & Oil                                  10.537               0.781                    5.797                   22.754

 8 Rockies                                   10.501               0.440                    4.948                   20.276

 9 West Coast                                9.657                1.404                    5.571                   22.196



                                          Regional Distribution of the use of
                                                 Alternative Assets
                     35

                     30

                     25
 % of Total Assets




                     20

                     15

                     10

                     5

                     0




                                  Mkt Alternatives    Venture Capital     Private Equity      Total Alternatives



Figure 7



                                                                                                                            30
                                   Table 1   A Sample of Pairings from Cappex

                Yale University       University of     Arizona State       San Francisco          Boston
                (2) *                 Michigan‐Ann      University (80) *   Conservatory of        Architectural
                                      Arbor (42) *                          Music                  College
Competitor 1    Harvard University    Michigan State    University of       Manhattan School       Southern
                                      University        Arizona             of Music               California Institute
                                                                                                   of Architecture
Competitor 2    Princeton             Northwestern      Northern Arizona    The New England        Wentworth
                University            University        University          Conservatory of        Institute of
                                                                            Music                  Technology
Competitor 3    Stanford              University of     San Diego State     The Curtis Institute   Pratt Institute
                University            Chicago           University          of Music

Competitor 4    Brown University      UIUC              University of       Berklee College of     Rhode Island
                                                        Southern            Music                  School of Design
                                                        California
Competitor 5    Columbia              University of     UCLA                Cleveland Institute    Syracuse
                University            Pennsylvania                          of Music               University

Competitor 6    Cornell University    Cornell           University of       Longy School of        Lawrence
                                      University        Oregon              Music                  Technological
                                                                                                   University
Competitor 7    Duke University       New York          Stanford            The Boston             Massachusetts
                                      University        University          Conservatory           College of Art and
                                                                                                   Design
Competitor 8    University of         Stanford          University of       The Juilliard School   California College
                Pennsylvania          University        Colorado                                   of the Arts‐CCA
                                                        Boulder
Competitor 9    Dartmouth College     Purdue            University of       VanderCook             Northeastern
                                      University        Nevada‐Las          College of Music       University
                                                        Vegas
Competitor 10   New York              Duke University   University of       Puerto Rico            Drexel University
                University                              California‐         Conservatory of
                                                        Berkeley            Music



     * Ranking source: “A revealed preference ranking of U.S. colleges and universities”, Christopher Avery,
     Mark Glickman, Caroline Hoxby, Andrew Metrick (NBER Working Paper 10803, 2004)




                                                                                                                   31
                            Table 2 Summary Statistics of College Funds


                   2006‐
                                2006         2007         2008        2009         2010         2011
                   2011


Number of
                   4070          557         549          461          838          845         820
observations

Percentage of
Private            64.50        64.99       66.30        65.29        63.60        63.79       64.15
Schools
College
Endowments
                  463.60       480.38       581.72       526.56      364.44       408.13       496.22
(Mean,
Million)
Number of
Students          10254           ‐            ‐            ‐        9,996.99   10,058.99 10,732.18
(Mean)

Percentage in
Northeast          40.02        38.60       39.53        40.78        39.62        40.36       40.98
area


Richness           0.095        0.106       0.130        0.127        0.073        0.078       0.092


  1. Richness = College Endowments/ Number of Students, as “Number of Students” is not available in
     2006‐2009 and it does not vary much over time, average Number of Students of each college is used
     to calculate Richness.

  2. Northeast area include New England, NY, PA, and mid Atlantic.




                                                                                                   32
                                              Table 3

                      Factors associated with allocation to alternative assets


                                             Table 3a

                Dependent variable: Percent of Endowment Invested in Alternatives

                    Pooled
Variable                        2006        2007        2008        2009          2010      2011
                    Sample
Intercept            0.167      3.097      2.359        4.546      0.241         ‐1.203    ‐3.391
                     (0.17)     (1.85)     (1.30)       (2.00)     (0.15)        (‐0.66)   (‐1.82)
Nearest
Competitors          0.645      0.540      0.578        0.482       0.653         0.670     0.748
_Alternatives       (27.41)     (8.60)     (8.97)       (7.29)     (12.81)       (12.43)   (14.02)
Total Assets         0.120      0.083       0.066       0.224       0.191        0.151      0.110
(hundred
                     (7.01)     (2.35)     (2.18)       (3.93)     (3.89)        (3.17)     (2.83)
million)
avg_students         0.194      0.147      0.164        0.218      0.135         0.220      0.246
(thousand)           (6.00)     (1.86)     (1.99)       (2.26)     (1.89)        (2.95)     (3.38)
School
Richness             5.188      5.579      4.659        4.311      5.919         6.626      5.253
                     (6.93)     (3.40)     (3.37)       (2.58)     (2.68)        (2.94)     (2.76)
Region Dummy         3.835      4.145      4.068        5.398      2.794         4.073      3.221
                     (6.71)     (2.91)     (2.81)       (3.17)     (2.20)        (3.09)     (2.55)
Year Dummy            Yes         ‐           ‐           ‐           ‐             ‐            ‐
Number of Obs        3452        410        413          373        754           764        738
R‐Square            0.3269     0.3054      0.3192       0.3193     0.3220        0.3128    0.3530

      1. If fund in Northeast (New England, NY, PA, or mid Atlantic), then region=1; otherwise
         region=0.
      2. T‐statistics in parentheses




                                                                                                 33
                                              Table 3b

            Dependent variable: Percent of Endowment Invested in Marketable Alternatives

                     Pooled
Variable                        2006        2007         2008       2009         2010         2011
                     Sample
Intercept            2.511      2.922       1.555        3.122      0.997       2.751         3.690
                     (3.93)     (2.70)      (1.21)       (2.26)     (0.92)      (2.29)        (2.80)
Nearest
Competitors          0.433      0.344       0.485        0.421      0.557       0.402         0.351
_Mkt
                     (13.21)    (4.42)      (5.39)       (4.88)     (7.69)      (5.34)        (4.20)
alternatives
Total Assets         0.022      0.020      ‐0.018        0.062      0.018       0.048         0.034
(hundred
                     (1.90)     (0.77)     (‐0.82)       (1.61)     (0.55)      (1.57)        (1.30)
million)
avg_students         0.133      0.086       0.164        0.104      0.117       0.148         0.156
(thousand)           (5.96)     (1.46)      (2.71)       (1.56)     (2.41)      (2.96)        (3.10)
School Richness      3.616      3.891       3.663        2.842      4.094       3.905         3.255
                     (7.11)     (3.23)      (3.66)       (2.49)     (2.78)      (2.63)        (2.53)
Region Dummy         3.464      3.840       4.142        4.566      2.432       3.615         3.183
                     (8.63)     (3.51)      (3.86)       (3.76)     (2.76)      (4.09)        (3.59)
Year Dummy            Yes         ‐           ‐            ‐           ‐           ‐            ‐
Number of Obs         3452       410         413          373        754         764           738
R‐Square             0.1371     0.1601     0.1811        0.1885     0.1445      0.1179        0.0897

   1. If fund in Northeast (New England, NY, PA, or mid Atlantic), then region=1; otherwise
      region=0.
   2. T‐statistics in parentheses




                                                                                                 34
                                                   Table 4

     Is an expressed consideration to change allocation policy related to endowment
                performance and the performance of nearest competitors?




Where c takes on the value 1 if a desire to change is expressed in a given year.


                                     One‐year return                          Three‐year return


                         ‐1.200***     ‐1.207***       ‐1.157***   ‐1.108***     ‐1.152***     ‐1.602***
Intercept
                           (0.054)       (0.057)         (0.064)     (0.056)       (0.061)       (0.100)

                          ‐0.016         ‐0.016                    0.032***       ‐0.032*
Own return (t‐1)                                             ‐                                       ‐
                          (0.004)        (0.013)                    (0.008)       (0.017)

Nearest competitors:                     0.0006                                   0.085***
                              ‐                              ‐          ‐                            ‐
return (t‐1)                             (0.013)                                   (0.019)

                                                        ‐0.010                                    ‐0.027
Own return (t‐2)              ‐             ‐                           ‐             ‐
                                                        (0.015)                                   (0.023)

Nearest competitors:                                   0.040**                                    0.087***
                              ‐             ‐                           ‐             ‐
return (t‐2)                                           (0.015)                                     (0.024)


Number of Obs              2032           1812           1454         1754          1548           1208


Likelihood Ratio           19.09         16.24          61.19        14.80         36.98           45.08


    1. Ct =1 if fund considers to change asset allocation; otherwise (No & Uncertain) Ct =0.
    2. Standard errors in parentheses




                                                                                                         35
                                            Table 5

                                  Conditional policy change


Three-Year Return

Frequency
                   Yes              No            Uncertain           Growth                Risk
Percent
Loser              210              475               75               0.673               0.817
                   27.63           62.50              9.87

Winner             213              592               66               0.623               0.722
                   24.45           67.97              7.58

Total              423             1067               141            Pr = 0.3701         Pr = 0.0415

                   25.94           65.42              8.65

Test of the independence of decision to consider an asset allocation change: Yes/No: Pr > t =
0.0734; Test of the difference in proportion for conditional response to considering a change
towards growth-oriented assets: Growth: Pr>t = 0.3701; Test of the difference in proportion for
conditional response to considering a change towards risk/hedge oriented assets Risk: Pr>t =
0.0415.



Five-Year Return

Frequency
                   Yes              No            Uncertain           Growth                Risk
Percent
Loser               214             522                74              0.658               0.812
                   26.42           64.44              9.14
Winner              169             439                57              0.632               0.713
                   25.19           65.97              8.85
Total               383             961               131            Pr = 0.6583         Pr = 0.0453
                   25.97           65.15              8.88

Test of the independence of decision to consider an asset allocation change: Yes/No: Pr > t =
0.6052; Test of the difference in proportion for conditional response to considering a change
towards growth-oriented assets: Growth: Pr>t = 0.6583; Test of the difference in proportion for
conditional response to considering a change towards risk/hedge oriented assets Risk: Pr>t =
0.0453.




                                                                                                  36
                                              Table 6

               Do funds contemplating a change in asset allocation actually
                             follow through the next year?

                         ∆



             Domestic         Fixed_      International   marketable_
                                                                               PE              VC
             _equities       income         _equities     alternatives

              ‐0.257          0.127           0.414           0.439         ‐0.0154          ‐0.017
Intercept
              (‐0.80)         (0.46)          (2.21)          (1.39)         (‐0.10)         (‐0.29)
              1.595           ‐2.835          0.923          ‐1.029          0.458           0.194
FY2011
              (4.18)          (‐8.69)         (4.15)         (‐2.75)         (2.54)          (2.86)
              ‐2.731          0.499           0.508           1.565          0.175           ‐0.014
C= intent
              (‐6.41)         (1.37)          (2.04)          (3.74)         (0.87)          (‐0.18)
U=uncert      ‐1.149          ‐0.295          0.266           0.567          ‐0.589          ‐0.044
ain           (‐1.72)         (‐0.52)         (0.68)          (0.87)         (‐1.87)         (‐0.37)

No. obs        1580           1580            1580            1580            1580            1580

R‐Square      0.0391         0.0484          0.0126          0.0147          0.0076          0.0054

   1. T‐statistics in parentheses
   2. C= intent to change: “are you changing or considering changing your approach to constructing
      the asset allocation of your portfolio? (Yes, No, Uncertain)” intent=1 if yes; Q4E1=0 otherwise;
      U= uncertain=1 if uncertain; Q4E9=0 otherwise.
   3. Intent data is available only in years 2009, 2010, and 2011, so only one year dummy is included
      in the regression.




                                                                                                      37
                               Table 7: Explaining asset class returns


                                                  Dependent: Return (%)


                 Marketable                           Domestic      Fixed           International
                                     Alternatives
                 Alternatives                         Equities      Income          Equities

                     -0.696             -2.047           0.678            0.703         3.486
Intercept
                     (-2.67)            (-4.77)          (3.64)           (2.64)       (14.57)

Benchmark            0.863               0.792            0.970            0.961        0.984
Index               (54.94)             (45.23)         (146.11)          (25.85)     (129.17)

Total Assets
                     0.319              0.162            0.027            0.157        0.806
(thousand
                     (1.65)             (0.34)           (0.22)           (1.07)       (3.22)
million)

                     1.599              4.296            -0.208           0.625        2.913
Richness
                     (1.62)             (1.95)           (-0.34)          (0.88)       (2.72)

Northeast            0.569              0.887            -0.004           -0.074       0.516
Region               (1.61)             (1.43)           (-0.02)          (-0.33)      (1.49)

Number of
                      1651               1313             2675             2481         2234
obs

R-Square              0.65               0.61             0.89             0.21         0.88


    1. T‐statistics in parentheses




                                                                                                 38
