                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INNOVATING STANDARDS THROUGH INFORMAL CONSORTIA:
                 THE CASE OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS

                                         Henry R. Delcamp
                                          Aija Leiponen

                                        Working Paper 18179
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18179


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




This paper has benefitted from comments by the participants and organizers of the NBER conferenceon
Standards, Patents, and Innovation (2012), particularly by Tim Simcoe, Ajay Agrawal, Shane Greenstein,
and Neil Gandal, and from seminar participants at Cornell University and Stanford University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Henry R. Delcamp and Aija Leiponen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Innovating Standards Through Informal Consortia: The Case of Wireless Telecommunications
Henry R. Delcamp and Aija Leiponen
NBER Working Paper No. 18179
June 2012
JEL No. D23,L15,L23,L24

                                              ABSTRACT

We empirically examine the effects of industry consortia on the coordination of innovation strategies
of the members. Our analyses utilize membership data from 32 consortia in wireless telecommunication
technology subfields from 2000 to 2005 and prior art citations in standards-essential patents. We find
that connections among firms in informal technically-oriented consortia significantly increase the likelihood
that firms cite each other’s patents in subsequent patents essential for the UMTS wireless telecommunication
standard. Inventions that are likely to become part of the UMTS telecommunication system tend to
build on inventions by firm peers who were members in the same consortia, controlling for patent
or firm fixed effects, technology class, and other characteristics. Consortia may enhance productivity
of invention and increase the incentives to invest in R&D by internalizing potential externalities. They
may also enhance efficiency of standardization by facilitating the interaction of committee and market
processes. Consortia thus structure and constrain the process of innovating standardized technologies.
This is problematic if consortia are not truly accessible for all the relevant parties. Policymakers thus
need to balance these effects. For managers, the results show that participation in a variety of technical
consortia enables influencing peers’ innovation strategies related to compatibility standards.


Henry R. Delcamp
CERNA
Ecole des Mines ParisTech
60 Boulevard Saint Michel
75006 Paris
France
henry.delcamp@ensmp.fr

Aija Leiponen
Cornell University
Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management
and Imperial College London Business School
Warren Hall
Ithaca NY 14853-7801
USA
aija.leiponen@cornell.edu
    1. Introduction


This paper examines the effects of firms’ participation in wireless telecommunications
industry consortia on their subsequent innovations that become declared essential patents in
the global UMTS standard for mobile communication. We highlight the increasingly central
role that these types of technical consortia play in coordinating technology development in
many different technology fields and industries. Consortia are particularly prevalent in, but
not limited to, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) industries where individual
products may be associated with thousands of patents and hundreds of compatibility standards
(WSJ, 2011; Biddle, 2012).

Compatibility standards are common technology norms that ensure interoperability between
communication products and services3. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
standards, in particular, embody an increasing number of patented elements. In many ICT
fields, particularly in telecommunications, standards have traditionally been defined
cooperatively by governments or industry actors within formal Standard Setting
Organizations4 (SSOs). However, these formal SSOs are often perceived to be slow and
bureaucratic, particularly when intellectual property rights have become part of the
negotiation (Simcoe, 2012; Bekkers et al. 2002). For instance, the 3G wireless telecom
standard studied here is associated with around 16 000 essential patent disclosures, and its
development took most of a decade.

To accelerate the process, sub-groups of firms may create less formal upstream alliances or
consortia. These types of collaborative organizations offer opportunities to discuss, test, or
promote certain technologies, or they can be used to actually develop new technical
specifications that will subsequently be submitted to formal SSOs for official approval. The
effects of these consortia have been debated in policy circles (e.g., Cargill, 2001) but there is
little quantitative empirical research evidence. DeLacey et al. (2006) discuss the division of
labor between formal standardization and informal consortia in the development of WiFi and
DSL standards, noting that firms may use consortia to influence and accelerate formal
standardization. Leiponen (2008) suggests that ICT firms’ participation in such consortia
enhances their ability to influence formal standard-setting outcomes. However, there is no

3
    E.g., mobile phones, DVD content and players, and internet protocols.
4
    E.g., International Standard Organization, International Telecommunication Union
                                                                                               2
evidence to date about the broader implications of informal consortia for coordination of
innovation in network-technological industries. The purpose of this paper is to address this
research gap and conduct an empirical analysis of the effects of ICT consortia on the
coordination of R&D strategies of the participants.

Whether consortia facilitate coordination of innovation related to communication standards is
interesting from both policy and managerial perspectives. From a policy standpoint, our
results may inform competition policy. The economic literature (Katz and Ordover, 1990;
Jorde and Teece, 1990; Choi, 1993) often considers collaborative industry organizations as a
potential threat to competition because of excessive market coordination. However, consortia
can be socially desirable if they reduce coordination problems around innovation. In this case,
consortia might mitigate wasteful duplication of effort and increase incentives to invest in
R&D by internalizing potential externalities (d’Aspremont and Jacquemin, 1988). These
arguments could lead competition authorities to adopt a lenient policy with respect to
standardization consortia, because they might, overall, increase R&D efforts and productivity.

Our analyses of industry consortia in wireless telecommunications shed new light on the
process through which communication standards are being created. Development of “open
standards” through a process that is not truly accessible for all the interested parties may be
viewed as problematic. To the degree that essential inventions that become incorporated in the
formal standard are coordinated and agreed in informal and semi-private consortia,
policymakers may find it worthwhile to better understand and provide rules of the game
regarding meeting procedures, membership fees particularly for small firms, terms of access,
and public release of relevant information. Indeed, if consortia are used to coordinate
innovation in advance of formal standard setting, there is a trade-off between the speed of
development and representation of the different stakeholders. Monopolization of key
technologies underpinning a widely used standard is likely to lead to excessive royalties and
potential holdup that can slow down technology adoption and reduce social welfare. This
would be equivalent to monopolization of an upstream market in a long and complex value
chain.

From a strategic viewpoint, participation in standardization consortia may offer a venue for
firms to promote their technologies and become central and powerful players in an innovation
network (Ballester et al. 2006; Fershtman and Gandal, 2011). For instance, from a

                                                                                             3
sociological perspective, Pfeffer (1981) suggests that consortium participation helps firms to
access and control strategic knowledge. Nevertheless, there is little empirical evidence for this
assertion. Our research aims to highlight strategies that firms may deploy to influence
innovation by others – particularly innovation related to compatibility standards.

This paper utilizes a network-analytical approach that examines the effects of one-mode and
two-mode network connections on subsequent patent citations. A study of two-mode
networks in open-source software development by Fershtman and Gandal (2011) is closely
related to ours. We combine membership data from 32 ICT consortia to identify consortium
network ties between firms involved in formal standardization of wireless telecommunication
technologies through Third Generation Partnership Project, or 3GPP. 3GPP is the
international standard-setting organization driving the specification development for the
Universal Mobile Telecommunication System, UMTS, which is one of the third-generation
mobile communication systems. Additionally, we compile and analyze citations of 16 000
essential patents filed by member firms in the 3GPP standardization process for UMTS. These
data will be used to econometrically assess the effects of firms’ participation in consortia on
cross-citations of subsequent inventions. To empirically identify the causal relationship, we
use a merger in the network of consortia as an exogenous event that changed the consortium
connections of dozens of member firms.

According to our empirical analysis, patent holders’ involvement in consortia increases the
likelihood that their patents are cited by other consortium members in subsequent patents that
are declared essential for the UMTS standard. This result is particularly strong for consortia
that are technically oriented (as opposed to marketing oriented) or formally allied with and
thus directly related to 3GPP. The result is significant only for informal consortia and does
not hold for more formal organizations such as other formal standard-setting organizations
(e.g., regional SSOs). It also does not hold for other patents than those subsequently declared
essential for the UMTS standard. The significant relationship we find thus appears to involve
informal technical consortia and patents closely related to a standard. Finally, a change in the
network caused by a merger of several consortia had a significant impact on the strength of
this coordination effect. Our main results are supported by a difference-in-differences analysis
utilizing this source of exogenous variation.




                                                                                               4
Our results highlight informal technical consortia as an organization form that enables sharing
of knowledge and coordination of R&D efforts related to compatibility standards in network
industries. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the
literature on consortia and discusses the conceptual foundations of our research. Section 3
explains the data collection process and the empirical methodology. Section 4 presents our
empirical results and section 5 concludes.


2. Earlier literature on technical consortia and the intended empirical
   contribution


Research and development consortia have been studied extensively in various strands of
literature. The advantages and drawbacks of these organizations as well as their formation
process and possible impact on future alliances are now relatively well understood. Here, we
will review the benefits and costs of participation as discussed in earlier studies, and finish by
discussing the distinct features and implications of consortia focused on standardization rather
than just R&D.

Scholars have found substantial positive effects of consortium participation on innovation by
firms. For instance, an early stream of research analyzes R&D consortia from a theoretical
standpoint and underlines financial incentives to participate therein. Katz (1986), Katz and
Ordover (1990), and d'Aspremont and Jacquemin (1988) view consortia primarily as a means
to share and reduce R&D expenses. Consortia may enable scale economies and reduce effort
duplication among participants. Subsequent studies examine the incentives to participate
when firms have asymmetric contributions (e.g., Kamien, Muller and Zang, 1992). Here,
R&D investments create knowledge spillovers. Spillovers are positive externalities that
enhance the social benefits of R&D investments, but they lead to socially suboptimal
investments because private incentives do not take spillovers into account. Consortia may
enable the internalization of these spillovers. This positive effect has led some scholars to
propose public funding of R&D consortia (Romer and Griliches, 1993).

Two empirical papers confirm that R&D consortia lead to increased R&D investments and
productivity. First, Branstetter and Sakakibara (1998) analyze a sample of Japanese consortia
and find that the marginal effect of consortium participation is about two percent increase in
total R&D spending and between four and eight percent increase in patenting per R&D dollar
                                                                                                5
(research productivity). In a subsequent paper, Sakakibara (2001) finds an even more
substantial effect of consortium participation on R&D expenses (around 9%) and also finds
support for the hypothesis that diverse competencies of members enhance the efficiency of the
consortium, thus leading to greater R&D expenditures by participants (see also Chung, Singh
and Lee, 1999).

An organization-theoretic literature suggests that participation in R&D consortia facilitates
obtaining a strategic advantage over competitors. Pfeffer (1981) proposes that consortium
participation helps firms to access and control strategic knowledge. Aldrich et al. (1998) also
argue that R&D consortia could help to orient research in the industry in a way that supports
the firm’s strategy. This hypothesis is supported empirically by Leiponen (2008) who
examines consortia around the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), a formal
standards-development organization. That study finds that participation in technical consortia
significantly enhances firms’ contributions to new standard specifications in 3GPP
committees. Firms that are central in the consortium network are ultimately better able to
influence the standard-setting outcome. From a societal point of view, industry consortia may
also have adverse effects and are potentially a way to foreclose competition. This potential
negative effect of consortia on competition has also been discussed in a series of earlier
papers (e.g. Brodley (1990), Katz and Ordover (1990), Jorde and Teece (1990) and Choi
(1993).

Finally, a set of studies identifies consortia as a channel for signaling strategies within the
industry. In a longitudinal study of 87 cellular service providers and equipment
manufacturers, Rosenkopf, Metiu and Georges (2001) show that participation in technical
committees helps to identify potential alliance partners and opportunities for collaboration.
These authors also find that the marginal effect of consortium participation on alliance
formation is decreasing with the number of alliances already formed and varies according to
interpersonal connections. This importance of interpersonal bonds is also underlined by
Dokko and Rosenkopf (2010), who examine how job mobility of individuals affects firms’
abilities to influence others in a technical standard-setting committee for U.S. wireless
telecommunications. The authors suggest that recruitment of employees with abundant social
capital in consortium committees increases a firm’s power to influence standard setting
through such committees.


                                                                                             6
As described above, cooperative research arrangements can be very beneficial, but consortium
participation may also be associated with risks and costs. First, firms have to support expenses
such as membership fees, and travel, meeting, and human resource costs. Sakakibara’s (2001)
analysis of Japanese consortia and Hawkins’ study of ICT consortia (1999) present evidence
that consortium participation engenders substantial costs. Hawkins’ estimate of membership
fees for a typical technology firm in the mid-1990s was in the order of 1.5 million US dollars.
This number does not include the travel and human resource costs of participation. Moreover,
in the years since this study, membership fees and the number of consortia have considerably
increased. According to the data cited in DeLacey et al. (2006: 2), it was estimated in 2005
that IBM’s total standard-setting investments amounted to half a billion US dollars.5

Consortia can also present risks of technology leakage. Sharing R&D knowledge in technical
meetings with other participants that have sufficient skills to understand and absorb these
competencies strongly increases the risks of imitation. Kodama (1986) suggests that firms
participating in consortia may create internal research groups just to absorb knowledge from
consortium work. For consortium members, secrecy is thus no longer an effective protection
method and member firms may need to follow alternative appropriation strategies (e.g.,
Leiponen and Byma (2009).

To summarize, extant literature on R&D consortia has identified many potential strategic
benefits and drawbacks of participation and discussed implications for competition policies.
However, most of the work on consortia has examined R&D consortia, whereas here the
focus is on standardization-related consortia. These types of collaborative structures are
increasingly common. We found dozens within wireless communications alone; computing is
another field where pre-standardization is often organized through informal consortia. The
well-known battle for dominance in high-definition DVD formats also featured competing
consortia. The European Committee for Standardization (CEN) maintains a list of over 200
important international multi-vendor ICT consortia and admits that “Much of the key
standardization activity in ICT is carried out by industry consortia rather than in formal
standards organizations such as CEN and ISO.” (CEN, 2012).

As discussed by Farrell and Saloner (1988: 237), formal standardization committees do many
things. They share information, design product features, negotiate technical solutions, and


5
    http://www.forbes.com/2005/09/26/ibm-software-investments-cz_qh_0926ibm.html, retrieved on 4/6/2012.
                                                                                                           7
carry out performance and compliance tests of the proposed standards and associated
products. Informal consortia do many of the same things, to varying degrees. Some consortia
only share information and promote a specific set of technologies, whereas others may
additionally be actively engaged in joint R&D – designing features and technical
specifications – the results of which may subsequently be submitted for approval in formal
standardization organizations such as 3GPP.

Rules, decision-making processes and antitrust implications of (more) formal standard-setting
organizations have been discussed in academic literature (e.g., Lemley, 2002; Anton and Yao,
1995; Chiao, Lerner, and Tirole, 2007) and also scrutinized in antitrust enforcement (e.g., see
legal references in Lemley, 2002). In contrast, informal industry consortia have rarely been
examined in detail either by academics or policymakers (but note Cargill’s testimony in
United States Congress, 2001). In fact, it is often difficult to get information about their inner
functioning. Because informal consortia are private organizations, little is known about the
nature and topics of discussion, decision-making procedures, or forms of information
exchange.

Strategic knowledge sharing, co-development, and alignment may have long-term
implications for an industry. In contrast to R&D consortia that also develop technologies for
the participant firms to offer in their new products or processes, pre-standardization consortia
may develop technologies and make decisions that not only the participants but also the rest
of the industry will have to abide by if they build products for the same compatibility
standard. Early-stage standardization consortia may thus provide a somewhat opaque route to
domination of a standard for a small subset of firms in the industry.

Indeed, informal consortia may be aware of the potential competitive implications of their
activities. The Antitrust Guidelines of one such consortium in our dataset state: “The Forum is
not a standard-setting organization and neither it nor any committee or member thereof shall
make any effort to bring about the standardization of any product or service for the purpose or
with the effect of preventing the manufacture, sale or supply of any product or services not
conforming to a specified standard(…)” and “To the extent that The Forum through its
committees and membership, develops or approves specifications which, if followed, will
permit specific equipment and service to interoperate with any other equipment, service or
network, adherence to such specifications shall be voluntary on the part of the members of

                                                                                                8
The Forum(…)” (MWIF, 2000). This forum thus explicitly acknowledges that the
development of formal standards through informal consortia might be detrimental to
competition. Nevertheless, such voluntarily adopted consortium specifications may be
successfully fast-tracked in a formal standardization body such as 3GPP, with the described
effect of foreclosing competition.

The focus of our empirical work is on the hypothesis that pre-standardization consortia
facilitate coordination of R&D that results in essential inventions related to a compatibility
standard. If this is true, then these types of consortia may support and structure the
identification of early-stage investments that enable controlling the standard later on. In the
language of Farrell and Saloner (1988), consortia may be viewed as a “hybrid” coordination
structure that combines market-based and committee-based processes of standardization.
Consortia facilitate firms’ attempts to both mobilize a market bandwagon and to negotiate and
coordinate technical features with rivals. Technical meeting discussions in consortia enable
negotiation and coordination, whereas competition among consortia and broader adoption of
their proposals may help set off a bandwagon effect. Farrell and Saloner’s theoretical work
suggests that consortia can be welfare improving because they are likely to speed up
coordination. However, their analysis does not examine the implications of restricted access
to the early-stage processes or monopolization of the IP market (but see Simcoe and Farrell,
2011).

Policy makers such as those in the European Commission have expressed concerns that
private consortia tend to be closed and undemocratic (Egyedi, 2001). Industry practitioners
have also suggested that informal consortia tend to be founded by a core group of members
who fix the agenda and the bylaws before others are allowed to join, often preserving
membership tiers that separate founders from general members. Many consortia such as the
Open Mobile Alliance included in the sample here also have multiple levels of membership
differentiated by a steep fee structure, whereby it can be prohibitively expensive for smaller
firms to participate in the “sponsor” levels, whereas members on lower levels are likely to be
excluded from committee chairpersonships, formal votes, or rights to submit technical
appeals.

As discussed by Anton and Yao (1995), agenda control alone can be a significant source of
power. Moreover, dispute resolution mechanisms analyzed by Chiao, Lerner and Tirole

                                                                                             9
(2006) are usually missing from informal consortia (such as WAP Forum that is included in
their analyses and in the sample here). Then, if the basic technological approaches have
already been selected at founding to support the competitive advantages of the founders, it can
be difficult for newcomers to change the technical specifications already under way.

Echoing the statement by CEN cited              earlier, Hawkins (1999) notes that,           in
telecommunications, “an international system has evolved in which communication and co-
ordination is achieved primarily through inter-organisational alliances[…]” (also see Aldrich
et al., 1998). However, systematic empirical evidence regarding firms’ innovation and
standardization strategies therein and their economic implications remains scarce. Our paper
targets this research gap by examining the role played by consortia as vehicles for
coordination of innovation in the context of ICT standardization. Specifically, we are
interested in the degree to which communication in early-stage technical consortia drives
innovation that becomes incorporated in formal standard specifications in a later stage.


3. Data and Methods


Our main empirical model tests whether consortium participation by a firm increases the
likelihood that its patent is cited by other members of the same consortia in their patents that
are declared as essential for the wireless telecommunication system UMTS. We thus analyze
whether the likelihood that a patent is cited depends on the position and centrality of the
patent holder in the network of consortia in the year in which the citing patent was applied.
We test for the effect of consortium connections on the likelihood of citation at the level of
cited patents and at the level of firm pairs.

We assume that patent citations primarily represent spillovers of technical knowledge, but we
also consider the possibility that citations may be strategic and reflect strategic alignment
among firms. According to Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001:15), a prior art citation is
essentially an acknowledgement that the invention builds on an aspect of a prior invention
over which the new invention cannot have a claim. A prior art citation thus delimits and
defines the breadth of an invention. At the same time, a citation also increases the probability
that a patent is found to be valid (Allison and Lemley, 1998). Lampe (2012) suggests that
strategic citation is widespread; ICT firms strategically leave out up to 41% of relevant and
known citations to patents that they decide to ignore in an attempt to maximize the returns on
                                                                                             10
their own R&D investments. For the purposes of our study, we assume that the reason why
co-memberships in consortia may induce cross-citations of patents is that firms learn technical
information from each other in the consortium working groups and become more likely to
build on each other’s inventions. However, by comparing different types of consortia
(technically vs. marketing oriented) and different types of firms (operating companies and
non-practicing entities) we also assess the possibility that citations are primarily strategic.

We focus on citations by patents that subsequently become declared as essential for the
UMTS standard, because we are interested in the ability of consortium activities to influence
the set of technologies that become incorporated in the standard, but we also test the effects
on citations from a broader set of patents by the same firms, and on total numbers of essential
patents.

This paper relies on a combination of data on consortium co-membership links between firms
involved in the third-generation mobile standards and cross-citations of patents filed by these
participants. First of all, we gathered data on 16 000 patents declared essential for the UMTS
standard6. We retrieved these data in October 2010 using the ETSI online patent database7.
We then merged these data with information on citations using the 1976/2006 National
Bureau of Economic Research database8 and used the EPIP database to identify the patent
holders of the cited patents9. Appendices 1 and 2 present some information about the timing
of application and technological class of patents in our sample. The citing patents are very
concentrated in terms of technological class, whereas the cited patents are quite diverse. The
cited patents were granted between 1976 and 2004 but the majority of them were granted in
the late 1990s or early 2000s.

Next, we created a database on consortium membership links between firms involved in third-
generation mobile standards. This database is partly based on Leiponen (2008). Consortia
were initially identified from press releases by wireless technology companies and from
existing consortium lists compiled by Updegrove (2010), Chiao et al. (2007) and CEN (2012),
and by examining whether the technology is relevant for wireless communications and
whether some members of 3GPP were also members of the consortia. Using the Internet

6
  The projects included are : 3GPP, 3GPP release 7, 3GPP/AMR-WB+, UMTS, UMTS Release 5, UMTS
Release 6, UMTS Release 7, UMTS Release 8, UMTS/CDMA
7
  Available at: http://ipr.etsi.org/
8
  Available at: http://www.nber.org/patents/
9
  Available at: http://www.epip.eu/datacentre.php
                                                                                                  11
Archive, we obtained data on the memberships of the patent holders (owners of the citing and
the cited patents) in ICT consortia from 2000 to 2005. Some of these consortia are formally
allied with 3GPP as organizational or marketing partners, and others are unrelated or even
directly competing with 3GPP. A list of these consortia is presented in Appendix 3. A handful
of relevant consortia had blocked their historical websites from the Archive and we were
unable to retrieve their membership rosters.

As we have information on participation in consortia from 2000 to 2005, we will restrict our
analysis of citing patents applied in this period. We organize our database around the cited
patents over six years. This database consists of 1046 patents that were cited at least once by a
UMTS essential patent between 1998 and 2005. These patents were held by 43 different
firms10. The database connects the cited patents with 1962 citing patents, held by 17 firms.

We first examine the research question using cited patents as our unit of analysis. Our
dependent variable here is a binary indicator for whether a patent was cited by a patent
application that was subsequently declared as essential for the UMTS wireless
telecommunication system developed in 3GPP. We use two different explanatory variables to
capture firms’ participation in pre-standardization consortia. These two variables measure the
patent holder’s general level of participation in consortia of the ICT field: the number of
consortium memberships, (total memberships) and the number of unique connections to peers
from consortia (consortium connections). A consortium connection is formed if two firms
meet in at least one of the consortia during the year. In network-analytical terms these are
two-mode and one-mode degree centrality measures, respectively (cf. Fershtman and Gandal,
2011). We include a control variable to proxy for firms’ formal standardization strategies. We
trace patent holders’ activities in the standards-development committees of 3GPP11 and create
the 3GPP connections variable that equals the number of unique connections (one-mode
degree centrality) to other firms through work-item committees. This variable allows us to
take into account the centrality of the firm in formal standard setting and thus to distinguish
the effects of informal and formal standardization strategies on cross-citations. We also
include patent age dummies to control for the evolution of citation patterns over time. We
estimate the following model:



10
     A list of the patent holders of the cited patents is presented in appendix 4.
11
     Using the website http://www.3gpp.org/
                                                                                               12
Pr(Citationpit ) = α0 + α1Consortium_ participationit + α 2 3GPP_ connection
                                                                           sit + α 3 Patent_ agept + ε pt
[1]

Pr(Citation pit ) = Probability of patent p held by firm i being cited by another 3GPP

participant’s patent application in year t

Consortium participationit = Participation in consortia of firm i, using the variables total
membership and consortium connections in year t

3GPP connectionsit = Firm i’s one-mode degree centrality in formal standardization in 3GPP
committees in year t
Patent agept = Set of dummies for the cited patent age

ε pt = Error term

Table 1 describes the main estimation variables.

Table 1: Name and description of the main explanatory variables
       Variable                       Description                  Mean        Std.       Min     Max
                                                                               dev.
Total membershipsit      Number of cited firm’s annual              8.11       6.65        0       24
                         memberships (two-mode network
                         degree) in consortia
Consortium               Number of cited firm’s annual             124.16      99.23       0       280
connectionsit            unique connections (one-mode
                         network degree) through consortia
3GPP connectionsit       Number of unique (one-mode                16.02       17.73       0       63
                         degree) connections to other firms
                         through 3GPP work-item (formal
                         standardization) committees
Patent applications      Number of patent applications             651.65     614.91       0      5312
Patent age dummies       Set of dummies for the age of the
                         cited patent


We thus work with a panel database of patents cited by at least one UMTS essential patent
and estimate a fixed-effect conditional logit model with the likelihood to be cited at year t for
patent p as the dependent variable. Table 2 presents the numbers of years in which the patents
in our sample are cited between 1998 and 2005. The dataset contains a small number of
patents that were cited every year during the period of study (2000-2005). Firms with the
greatest number of patents cited in five or more years include Qualcomm (29 such patents),
Motorola (16 patents), InterDigital (14), AT&T Wireless (12) followed by NEC, Siemens,
                                                                                                      13
and Mitsubishi. Patents that are cited many times and over a long period of time are likely to
represent fundamental inventions in the standardized communication system.

Table 2: Number of years the patent is cited (1998-2005)

                      Number of years the patent              Observations
                              is cited
                                  1                                547
                                  2                                268
                                  3                                 86
                                  4                                43
                                  5                                64
                                  6                                 12
                                  7                                23
                                  8                                 3


The main empirical issue is to disentangle the effects of participation in consortia and
technological strategies of firms. A patent can be highly cited because of the patent holders’
participation in consortia or because the invention is technologically central in the UMTS
wireless system being standardized within 3GPP, for which reason its holder may participate
in many consortia. Innovations emerging during the period of study thus might make firms
more likely to both attend certain consortia and cite their central members. In order to control
for these confounding factors, we deploy a number of empirical tactics: we include a control
variable for firms’ formal standardization strategies; we utilize standard panel-data methods
(fixed effects estimation) to remove time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity; and we utilize
an exogenous source of variation to reduce potential time-variant unobserved heterogeneity.
However, the last approach only works for our main result regarding whether industry
consortia influence subsequent standards-related innovation. For identification of the
additional results on the types of consortia, we need to rely on the two former approaches.

The exogenous event we exploit for identification is a merger of seven industry consortia that
shifted the consortium connections of some but not all firms in our dataset. In late 2002, seven
of the consortia in our database12 merged to create the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA). OMA
was formed by nearly 200 companies including mobile operators, device and network
suppliers, information technology companies and content and service providers. Therefore
we argue that individual firms were unlikely to have substantial influence in the merger. The

12
     Wap Forum, Wireless Village, SyncML Initiative, MGIF, LIF, MWIF, and UMTS Forum.
                                                                                              14
stated reasons for the merger were increasing interactions and synergies between the
technology fields of the seven component consortia: “The purpose of OMA is to address areas
that previously fell outside the scope of any existing organizations, as well as streamline work
that may have been previously duplicated by multiple organizations.”13 As a result of the
merger, consortium connections of some firms increased and those of other firms decreased.
We use this merger to estimate a differences-in-differences model and examine the robustness
of our fixed-effects results.


4. Estimation results


We first run a fixed-effect model estimating the likelihood of a patent to be cited by another
patent that was declared as essential for the UMTS standard, held by another consortium
participant. We control for the age of the cited patent. The results of this model are presented
in Table 3.


Table 3: The effect of consortium participation on the likelihood of citation


                                                          (1)                          (2)

                                                 Coef.          Odds ratio     Coef.         Odds ratio
                                                  (SE)             (SE)        (SE)            (SE)
                Total memberships               0.0341*          1.0347*
                                                (0.019)          (0.019)
                Consortium connections                                       0.0028**        1.0028**
                                                                               (0.001)         (0.001)
                3GPP connections               0.0128 ***       1.0129***    0.0168***       1.0169***
                                                 (0.003)          (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.003)
                Patent age dummies                        Y                             Y
                Observations                             6184                         6184
                Groups                                   1043                         1043
                Chi2                                    685.09                       689.66
                Prob > chi2                                0                            0
                Log Likelihood                         -1575.19                     -1572.85
                Cited firms                               43                           43
Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a patent was cited by an essential patent applied in year t.
Estimation method is conditional logit with fixed effects at the patent level. Unit of analysis is the cited patent.
Standard errors, clustered on patents, in parentheses under the coefficients. * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01




13
     http://www.openmobilealliance.org/AboutOMA/FAQ.aspx, retrieved 8/2/2002.
                                                                                                                   15
According to the basic fixed-effects results at the level of the cited patent as shown in table 3,
the two main explanatory variables, the cited patent holder’s total number of memberships in
wireless industry consortia and their unique consortium connections to peers both have at
least weakly statistically significant and positive effects on the likelihood of a patent to be
cited by another consortium participant. Odds ratios suggest that one additional membership
increases the odds of citation by 3.5%, whereas one additional connection increases the odds
of citation by 0.3%. These effects are aligned in the sense that one additional membership
may generate dozens of new connections. The coefficient of 3GPP connections that controls
for firms’ connections to peers through formal standardization activities is significant and
positive, suggesting that similar information is exchanged in formal standards committees (cf.
Bekkers et al. 2011).

Next, we use the exogenous event, a merger of seven consortia in 2002, to examine the
robustness of our main result. When Mobile Games Interoperability Forum (MGIF), UMTS
Forum, WAP Forum, Wireless Village, SyncML Initiative, Location Interoperability Forum
(LIF) and Mobile Wireless Internet Forum (MWIF) merged to form Open Mobile Alliance,
the consortium connections of the members of the seven consortia were exogenously shifted.
Firms included in the control group who were members of none of the consortia affected by
the merger are listed in appendix 5. We thus dissect the participation effect found in table 3
with respect to timing and OMA vs. other consortia. The results are presented in table 4.

The OMA connections variable (number of unique connections through OMA or its
constituent consortia) has a positive and statistically significant effect on citations. OMA and
the component consortia were thus probably central venues for discussing ongoing
innovation. In fact, the effect of connections from other consortia (other connections) is
statistically insignificant here. The most relevant coefficient in table 4 is that on the variable
OMA connections after that measures the additional effect of OMA-related connections after
the merger. This effect is statistically borderline significant at the 5% level in the two
specifications.




                                                                                               16
Table 4: Impact of the OMA merger on subsequent citations


                                                          (1)                           (2)

                                                   Coef.        Odds ratio       Coef.        Odds ratio
                                                   (SE)            (SE)          (SE)            (SE)
             OMA connections                    0.0028**        1.0028**      0.0036***       1.0036***
                                                  (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
             Other consortium                     0.0003         1.0003         0.0001          1.0001
             connections                         (0.0003)        (0.0003)      (0.0003)        (0.0003)
                                                0.0045**        1.0045**       0.0042*         1.0042*
             OMA connections after
                                                  (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
             Dummy after                       -2.0055***       0.1346***    -2.0851***       0.1243***
                                                  (0.262)         (0.035)       (0.266)         (0.033)
             3GPP connections                                                 -0.0097**       0.9904***
                                                                                (0.004)         (0.004)
             Patent age dummies                           Y                             Y
             Observations                                6184                          6184
             Groups                                      1043                          1043
             Chi 2                                      742.75                        785.07
             Prob > chi2                                   0                             0
              Log Likelihood                           -1500.01                      -1479.32
              Cited firms                                 43                            43
Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a patent was cited by an essential patent applied in year t.
Estimation method is conditional logit with fixed effects at the patent level. Standard errors, clustered on patents,
are in parentheses under the coefficients. * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01


In table 5 we return to the basic fixed-effect approach to further distinguish the effects of
different types of consortia, which we cannot examine with the diff-in-diff method because
OMA and its constituent consortia are all informal and technical in nature. We first
distinguish between formal and informal consortia. Formal consortia are standard-setting
organizations (SSOs) that draft and certify formal standards whereas informal consortia may
develop, discuss, test, and promote technological alternatives, but they submit their
specifications (if any) to formal SSOs for certification. We expect informal consortia to be
more conducive to influencing peers, because their less formal and structured ex-ante
discussions can be more easily used to promote the members’ technologies that might be
utilized or built on in the formal standard-setting context of 3GPP.

Consortia can also be formally allied (related) with 3GPP or unrelated with 3GPP. We assume
that consortia that were listed as the organizational or marketing partners of 3GPP on its
website are closely related. We expect consortia that are allied with 3GPP to provide more

                                                                                                                  17
fruitful venues for influencing peers’ innovation activities related to technologies that 3GPP
standardizes, because the technologies concerned are more likely to be related, too.

The third distinction is between consortia that are technical or marketing-oriented in nature.
From each consortium’s historical website we obtained information about whether its
activities involved drafting of technical specifications. We assume these consortia are
involved in feeding technical feature ideas and specification proposals to 3GPP, and thus
potentially have a direct impact on the standards that are certified in 3GPP. In contrast,
marketing-oriented consortia primarily promote the technologies concerned by providing
information for the media and by lobbying governments and other decisionmakers. They also
may carry out interoperability testing and certification, but do not develop technical
specifications.

We expect that technical consortia are more conducive than marketing consortia to technical
spillovers that influence subsequent patenting of inventions. We also argue that this
distinction sheds some light on the question of the degree of strategic citation. One would
expect that if strategic citation to increase the likelihood of patent validity is driving our
dependent variable, both types of consortia should be useful contexts for strategic interactions
and alignment. In contrast, if knowledge spillovers rather than strategic citation are primarily
driving citations, then technical consortia should be more conducive to them.

We also examine the moderating effect of the technological resources of the patent holder
using an interaction variable, consortium connections*patent apps, that is, consortium
connections multiplied by the number of patents applied by the cited firm during the year.
This variable allows us to assess the potential moderating impact of the (technological) size of
the patent holder on the consortium participation effect. We expect that larger technology
firms are more effective at translating consortium connections into opportunities to influence
others’ innovation activities. The sheer volume of technological resources such as patents and
experts is expected to enhance the power to influence peers.

Regarding the types of consortia, the results in table 5 confirm expectations. Memberships in
informal consortia statistically significantly explain citations whereas the coefficient of
memberships in formal standardization organizations is insignificant. The coefficient and
odds ratio of formal consortia are actually larger but they are much less precisely estimated.


                                                                                                 18
        Similarly confirming expectations, the strategic and technological scope of the consortium
        influences the intensity of the effect of consortium memberships. Consortia that are related to
        3GPP are driving the overall effect. The effect is essentially zero for unrelated consortia.


        Table 5: Effects of different types of consortia and the moderating effect of technological
        resources
                                      (1)                       (2)                        (3)                         (4)
                            Coef.       Odds ratios     Coef.         Odds         Coef.          Odds         Coef.              Odds
                            (SE)                        (SE)          ratios       (SE)           ratios       (SE)               ratios
Informal consortium       0.0027**      1.0027**
memberships                (0.001)       (0.001)
Formal consortium          0.0039        1.0039
memberships                (0.004)       (0.004)
Related consortium                                    0.0156*** 1.0158***
memberships                                             (0.003)   (0.003)
Unrelated consortium                                    -0.0003   0.9997
memberships                                            (0.0002)  (0.0002)
Marketing consortium                                                              0.0422           1.0432
memberships                                                                       (0.041)          (0.042)
Technical consortium                                                            0.1915***        1.2110***
memberships                                                                       (0.017)          (0.020)
Consortium                                                                                                     -0.0001    0.9999
connections                                                                                                    (0.001)    (0.001)
Cons. connections*                                                                                           2.83e-06** 1.0000**
patent apps                                                                                                  (1.14e-06) (1.14e-06)
Patent apps                                                                                                   -0.0005*   0.9995*
                                                                                                              (0.0002)   (0.0002)
3GPP connections          0.0171***     1.0173***     0.0111*** 1.0112***       0.0142***        1.0143***   0.0133*** 1.0134***
                            (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.003)   (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.004)
Patent age dummies                    Y                         Y                           Y                             Y
Observations                        6184                       6184                        6184                         5864
Groups                              1043                       1043                        1043                         1041
Chi2                               694.39                     689.77                      857.61                       631.59
Prob > chi2                           0                          0                           0                             0
Log Likelihood                    -1572.77                  -1554.412                   -1811.963                     -1535.47
Cited firms                          43                         43                          43                            43
         Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a patent was cited by an essential patent applied in year t.
         Estimation method is conditional logit with fixed effects at the patent level. Unit of analysis is cited patent.
         Standard errors, clustered on patents, are in parentheses under the coefficients. * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01



        The third specification in table 5 splits the consortium memberships to those in technical and
        marketing consortia. As expected, the effect of technical consortia is much larger and
        statistically more significant than that of marketing consortia. This supports our assumption
        that spillovers rather than purely strategic citing behaviours are driving subsequent citations.



                                                                                                                             19
In the last specification in table 5 we find that firms’ technological resources (measured by
annual patent applications) statistically significantly moderate the consortium participation
effect on the likelihood to be cited in subsequent patents by peers. However, the odds ratios
seem economically insignificant, partly because the mean number of patent applications is in
the hundreds and many of the sampled firms have thousands of annual applications. A single
additional patent application has only a negligible effect on the odds of citation, but hundreds
of additional patent applications may already begin to amplify the effect of consortium
connections. Our hypothesis that larger technology firms are more effective at translating
consortium connections into opportunities to influence others’ innovation activities is thus
weakly supported. The moderating effect probably is meaningful only for very large
technology firms.

In robustness analyses at the cited patent level, we tested whether the consortium coordination
effect also matters for 3GPP members’ patents that are not declared as essential for the UMTS
standard. We found no significant effect on non-essential patents, even though we focused on
patents in the same wireless technology classes. Thus, our results suggest pre-standardization
consortia are an effective way to coordinate R&D around the relevant compatibility standards
but not more generally to influence innovation in the same technological classes. We also
examined whether the consortium variables enhance the productivity of invention per se. The
literature on R&D consortia (e.g., Branstetter and Sakakibara, 1998) suggest that shared R&D
in consortia enables firms to internalize knowledge externalities and hence enhance the
productivity of R&D. We found mixed evidence for this idea. Whereas consortium
connections are positively associated with subsequent production of essential patents, the
result is not corroborated by the differences-in-differences analysis. Hence, our results do not
provide strong support for the idea that standardization consortia also enhance the
productivity of invention.

Because fixed-effects estimation considerably reduces the number of observations, we also
estimated with a random-effects specification taking into account the overall sample and
using mean variables to control for permanent characteristics (Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 487-
488, 679). This Chamberlain-style procedure includes the means of the time-varying
explanatory variables as additional regressors in the random-effects procedure, assuming that
the permanent characteristics are normally distributed conditional on the explanatory
variables. According to Wooldridge (2002), this method is less robust but more efficient than
                                                                                             20
the conditional fixed-effects approach. The results are presented in appendix 6 and confirm
the findings of the fixed-effects estimation. We also checked the robustness of our results
using a linear probability model. These results are presented in appendix 7 and confirm the
findings presented in the body of the paper, with one exception: according to the linear
probability model, formal consortia are more important for subsequent innovation than are
informal consortia. Finally, we checked whether our results are driven by patents that are
cited only once over the study period by other 3G participants. Excluding these patents in a
robustness test did not change our results.

To summarize our analyses at the cited patent level, our main hypothesis that participation in
technical consortia facilitates coordination of firms’ innovation policies is supported. This
result is robust to the choice of method and variable used to capture the participation effect.
The magnitude of the effect depends on the nature of the consortia. In the conditional logit
estimations, the coordination effect is economically and statistically more significant for
informal rather than formal consortia, for consortia that are technologically and strategically
related rather than unrelated to 3GPP, and for technical rather than marketing-oriented
consortia. Finally, we exploited a merger in the set of consortia to check the statistical
identification of the main coordination effect. Exogenous changes in consortium connections
caused by the merger positively and statistically significantly influenced subsequent citations
by peers.

We next conduct an analysis at the firm-pair level of the impact of co-memberships in
informal industry consortia on the likelihood of cross-citation. This approach follows the
analysis of cooperation among universities by Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008). The dataset is
now set up as a panel of possible firm pairs from the list of 47 firms that ever cite other 3GPP
members’ patents or whose patents ever get cited by other members. The full panel has six
years and 47*47-47 observations each year (we account for the direction of citation and
exclude self citations). We thus have almost 13000 firm-pair-years in total, but in estimations
we narrow this sample down to more relevant sets of observations. We also restrict the
analysis to the years between 2000 and 2003 to focus on the OMA merger “treatment”
impact.

In all specifications, we exclude pairs where the potentially cited firm has never actually been
cited during the period of study, because these may include firms that did not have relevant

                                                                                             21
intellectual property prior to the study period. We then have 7912 firm-pair observations over
the four-year period. Table 6 provides means and cross-tabulations for these data. Citation
from firm j to firm i is a rare occurrence; only 4.6% of the firm-pair-year observations are
associated with a citation. Consortium activities, in contrast, are quite common. 50.5% of firm
pairs include firms that are co-members of either OMA (after 2001) or a consortium that
merged with OMA in 2002 (for 2000-2001). 60.9% of firm-pair-years have firms that are both
members in the same informal consortia, other than OMA or its constituent consortia. The
cross-tabulations show a strong correlation between citation and OMA-related co-
membership, and between OMA and other consortia co-memberships. The correlation
between co-membership in other consortia and cross-citation is also positive but less
pronounced.


Table 6: Sample statistics for the firm-level co-membership analysis (2000-2003;N=7912)

                                        OMA co-        Other consortia
                                       membership      co-membership          Citation
 Variable                  Mean        0         1       0        1       0              1
 Citation                    0.046    0.033    0.058   0.037    0.051     NA         NA
 OMA co-membership           0.505     NA       NA     0.214    0.691    0.498      0.642
 Consortia co-membership     0.609    0.380    0.834    NA       NA      0.605      0.680


In table 7 we present differences-in-differences results from the analysis of the impact of
consortium co-memberships on the likelihood of citation from patent of firm j to a patent of
firm i. The empirical setting is not ideal because of the few positive observations of the
dependent variable (4.6%) and for this reason the estimation model is kept as simple as
possible. We find that the key explanatory variable capturing OMA co-membership after 2001
is positive and statistically significant in most specifications. Thus, two firms that became
OMA co-members because of the merger were significantly more likely to cite each other’s
patents. According to odds ratios for specification 1 (not reported in the table), compared to a
situation where firms are not members of OMA consortia, a co-membership in OMA or its
predecessor consortia increases the odds that a firm pair experiences a cross-citation by 33%,
whereas a co-membership in OMA after 2001 increases these odds by 90%. These numbers
appear to be very high, but considering that the raw probability of citation is very low, then
even with the increased odds the risk of citation remains fairly low. These results are
reasonably robust to the exclusion of pairs where the potential citing firm has never actually

                                                                                             22
cited another 3GPP member firm’s patents in its essential patents (accounting for the concern
that some firms may not be “at risk” of sending a citation to 3GPP peers) and to the addition
of fixed effects for cited firms. These results are reported in specifications 2 and 3.

In all specifications we control for co-memberships in other informal consortia, because they
will reflect the general tendency of firms in this field to join industry consortia. In earlier
estimations, and also in correlation analyses within the current sample, the relationship
between other informal consortium connections and cross-citations is rather strong, but in the
estimation models here, the coefficient of co-memberships in other consortia is usually
insignificant. This is in part influenced by the multicollinearity between OMA and other
consortia co-memberships: firms that join OMA-related consortia are also likely to join other
informal consortia. The collinearity between OMA and other co-memberships is less severe in
earlier years of the study period, because of the lower concentration of citing firms. Hence, if
we exclude the year 2003 from the analyses, this variable becomes statistically significant.
Nevertheless, even when this variable is excluded, the coefficients of OMA variables retain
their levels of significance, and hence the main results are not affected by the
multicollinearity.

The last specification in table 7 includes dummies (fixed effects) for the citing firms. Whereas
there are 43 firms whose patents were cited during our period of study, there are only 17 firms
from which citations originate, so this end of the cross-citation network is highly
concentrated. Bekkers, Bongard and Nuvolari (2011) make similar observations about these
data. In table 7, we are able to identify 13 citing firm dummies for the period 2000-2003. In
this specification, the OMA co-membership and the other consortia co-membership variables
have positive and statistically significant effects, but the coefficient of OMA co-membership
after the merger becomes insignificant. This seems to be driven by the concentration of citing
firms, particularly after 2001. In our essential patent database, we have 367 essential patents
applied in 2002 with citations to earlier patents by 3GPP members. Of these 367 citations, full
87% are made by one of two firms, InterDigital and Qualcomm. In 2003 the share of citations
by these two firms is even higher, 96%.14 Thus, their firm dummies capture all the statistically
relevant information about the likelihood of citation among firm pairs after 2001. For the
same reasons, we cannot identify any effect of consortia co-memberships after including firm-

14
 Before 2002, the shares of InterDigital and Qualcomm were somewhat smaller; for example, in 2000, there
were 12 citing firms and the shares of InterDigital and Qualcomm were 30% and 31%, respectively.
                                                                                                           23
pair fixed effects. Nevertheless, the other co-membership variables still suggest that there is a
strong relationship between consortia and citations.

Although the statistical analysis of the effects of firm-pair co-memberships is hampered by
data concentration, these data are interesting from the perspective of individual firms’
competitive strategies. Qualcomm and InterDigital are not the most active citing firms by
chance; they are the only firms in the sample that have followed a business model primarily
focused on commercialization of intellectual property (although Qualcomm also produces
chipsets that are components for mobile phones). Whereas the likes of Nokia, Matsushita, and
Motorola were very active in IP creation, enforcement, and trading, they were primarily
manufacturers of network or terminal equipment. At the time of this study, Qualcomm was
primarily an IP provider, and InterDigital was purely so.

We interpret these data as indirect evidence of the implications of different business models
through strategic behavior in terms of essential patent declarations. One interpretation for
these data and estimation results is that InterDigital and Qualcomm actively utilize
discussions in industry consortia to assess how the UMTS compatibility standard will evolve
in the near term, and then attempt to place their own stakes in the IP space by patenting
inventions and declaring them (potentially) essential for the standard.




                                                                                              24
Table 7: Probability of citation between firms i and j: differences-in-differences approach

                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                               Coef.       OR        Coef.       OR       Coef.        OR       Coef.        OR
 Citation                      (SE)       (SE)       (SE)       (SE)      (SE)        (SE)      (SE)        (SE)
 Constant                       -2.805             -1.277***             -3.853***             -3.036***
                               (0.164)              (0.166)               (0.713)               (0.471)
 OMA co-membership             0.290**   1.336**     0.259      1.296     0.196       1.216    0.437**       1.549**
                               (0.139)   (0.186)    (0.169)    (0.219)   (0.167)     (0.203)   (0.220)       (0.341)
  OMA co-membership            0.642**   1.900**    0.532*      1.703*   0.644**     1.904**   -0.137          0.872
 after 2001                    (0.265)   (0.504)    (0.280)    (0.477)   (0.270)     (0.514)   (0.322)       (0.281)
 Consortia co-membership        0.208     1.231      0.222      1.249    -0.250       0.779    1.208***     3.348***
                               (0.153)   (0.188)    (0.184)    (0.230)   (0.170)     (0.132)   (0.248)       (0.831)
      Coding Technologies                                                                       0.511           1.667
                                                                                               (0.616)        (1.028)
                   Ericsson                                                                    1.027**        2.793**
                                                                                               (0.423)        (1.181)
                InterDigital                                                                   4.265***    71.181***
                                                                                               (0.524)      (37.274)
                IP Wireless                                                                     -0.210          0.811
                                                                                               (0.742)        (0.601)
                 Matsushita                                                                    1.219***      3.384***
                                                                                               (0.460)        (1.558)
                 Mitsubishi                                                                    -1.522**       0.218**
                                                                                                (0.665)       (0.145)
                  Motorola                                                                      -1.091*        0.336*
                                                                                                (0.560)       (0.188)
                      NEC                                                                       -0.338          0.713
                                                                                               (0.513)        (0.366)
                     Nokia                                                                     1.275***      3.580***
                                                                                               (0.413)        (1.479)
            Nortel Networks                                                                     0.872*         2.393*
                                                                                               (0.451)        (1.078)
                 Qualcomm                                                                      3.099***    22.183***
                                                                                               (0.461)      (10.220)
  Tantivy Communications                                                                         0.186          1.204
                                                                                                (0.479)       (0.577)
         Texas Instruments                                                                     (omitted)
 Observations                   7912                  2196                  7912                 2196
Notes: Dependent variable: binary for citation from j to i. All specifications exclude pairs where firm i was never
cited during 2000-2003. Specification (2) also excludes pairs where firm j never cited patents of other 3GPP
members in 2000-2003. Specification (3) adds fixed effects (dummies) for cited firms. Specification (4) adds
dummies for citing firms that are listed on the lower part of the table. Estimation method is logit with
differences-in-differences variables to utilize the exogenous variation from the merger of consortia that led to
Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) in 2002. 2000-2001 is the pre-merger period and 2002-2003 is the post-merger
period. Year dummies are included in all specifications but not reported.


                                                                                                                25
However, while doing so, they may strategically make citations to consortium peers’ earlier
patents to pre-emptively limit their own short-term returns but also to reduce the likelihood of
validity challenges. Lampe (2012) suggests that firms are more likely to cite relevant prior art
when the invented technology is expected to be very profitable and less likely to do so when
their own portfolio is very large and they can effectively defend their patents. The business
models of both Qualcomm and InterDigital are in fundamental ways based on inserting
patents into wireless standards, which can result in some extremely profitable patents. Their
patent portfolios are also substantially smaller than those of many of their wireless technology
peers. Hence, one might expect them to be extraordinarily active in citing wireless peers’
prior art, which they may learn about in consortium discussions. Although their citation
incentives are attenuated by their non-practicing entity status in wireless technologies for
which reason they might pursue more aggressive litigation strategies than operating company
peers, they are very highly dependent on the validity of their patents.

We conclude these analyses by noting that co-memberships in consortia, particularly those
related to Open Mobile Alliance, are significantly associated with the likelihood of cross-
citation among 3GPP member firms in their essential patents. If a firm attended a relevant
technical consortium, other members of the same consortium were significantly more likely to
cite its earlier patents in their own current patents that eventually led to essential IP
declarations. Thus, this firm-pair-level analysis highlights the mechanism that generates the
results in the earlier patent-level panel analyses. However, there are some empirical
challenges with these analyses.




                                                                                             26
First, the raw probability of citation is very low because relatively few firm pairs generate
cross-citations. Second, the citing behavior is highly concentrated, which hinders the
statistical analysis. Most firms in the dataset (firms whose patents ever cite or get cited) have
rather few cited patents or cite few patents of other firms, whereas the two leading IP firms,
Qualcomm and InterDigital, dominate the activity and are thus associated with enormous
fixed effects. Their strategies highlight the implications of business models. With respect to
wireless communication technologies, these two firms operate almost exclusively in the IP
market rather than the product market, for which reason their strategic drivers are very
different from most other firms who also manufacture products. Nevertheless, industry
consortia, including the OMA consortium after the merger of seven constituent consortia,
appear to be central venues in which these and other firms learn about technologies related to
the UMTS standard on which they subsequently build further inventions.


5. Conclusion


This paper analyzes the impact of firms’ participation in ICT consortia on knowledge sharing
and coordination of innovation strategies related to compatibility standards. We use data on
participation in 32 ICT consortia and prior art citations in essential patents filed by
participants in the 3GPP standardization process. To empirically identify the effect of
consortium connections, we exploit a merger in the network of consortia as a quasi-
experiment that exogenously changed consortium connections of members.

Our empirical analysis highlights the impact of the patent holder’s position in the consortium
network on the likelihood of having its patents cited by other participants in subsequent
research. The more central the firm is in the consortium network, the greater the likelihood of
its patents being cited by other firms in subsequent patents that are declared essential for the
UMTS standard. This result is stronger for consortia that are formally allied with (related to)
3GPP, whereas the result is weaker but still positive and statistically significant for consortia
unrelated to 3GPP. Our findings also suggest that technical consortia are more effective
vehicles for coordinating standards-related innovation compared to marketing consortia.
Finally, whereas participation in informal consortia has a positive and statistically significant
impact on the likelihood to be cited by subsequent research, the same does not hold for more


                                                                                              27
formal consortia such as other standard-setting organizations, although this result is not
completely robust to different estimation methods.

The main result that consortium participation facilitates coordination of firms’ innovation
activities is confirmed by a difference-in-difference analysis using a merger in the network of
consortia as a source of exogenous variation. Additional evidence for this result is also
provided by a firm-pair-level approach where we highlight the knowledge transmission
mechanism through the effect of firm pairs’ co-memberships in specific consortia. The firm-
pair level analyses also highlight the implications of firms’ business models. The two firms
InterDigital and Qualcomm that dominate the citing behavior in the latter half of our period of
study operate under an IP-based business model, whereas other firms also participate in the
product markets.

Based on the variety of empirical evidence, we suggest that industry consortia potentially
improve incentives for R&D because they enable the internalization of knowledge-creation
externalities. They may also speed up standardization by facilitating both committee and
market processes and their interactions. However, in the standard-setting context our findings
also raise questions. Our results demonstrate that standardization takes place not only in the
marketplace and in formal standard-setting organizations, but also in informal upstream
consortia.

Lack of transparency and openness of informal consortia may present challenges for less
prominent innovators. Because of the private and opaque nature of informal consortia, it can
be difficult for an innovating entrant to understand who makes decisions about
standardization, where, when, and through what process. During and preceding the period of
study, many ICT consortia were formed by a small group of industry leaders, and the
consortia tended to have a pre-set agenda and a tiered membership structure where the
founding firms had a more powerful position than latecomers. Moreover, we found some
evidence of technological resources enhancing the effect of consortium connections on
subsequent innovation for technology giants. Even if smaller innovators can find their way to
the right meetings, their impact may be weaker.

Moreover, when standard setting is effectively distributed to dozens of consortia, each with
substantial membership fees and frequent meeting schedules, participation can become
prohibitively costly for cash-constrained firms. Small firms are likely to have few technical
                                                                                            28
experts who are able to travel to consortium meetings, and with several potentially relevant
consortia, this may simply not be possible.

Finally, major firms have justified consortia as a method of speeding up standards
development. Whereas this is a laudable goal for any industry, the actual cause of accelerated
outcomes from consortia may be exactly that smaller firms and those who disagree with a
subset of industry leaders are not participating. Further research would need to be conducted
to properly understand the welfare implications of the effect of upstream consortia in
potentially narrowing down the pool of innovations that are subsequently incorporated in the
ex-ante compatibility standard.

We suggest that these novel results on the organization of compatibility standardization call
for a rethinking of standard-setting policies. Innovation and competition policymakers might
include informal upstream consortia in their frameworks for standardization policy, because
this is where a significant part of coordination is done. Simple requirements for open
membership, publicly available meeting and decision documents, and public disclosure of
decision-making rules and rights of different members might go a long way toward dispelling
the undemocratic reputation of informal consortia. By the same token, our results show that
innovating firms who want to commercialize new products or technologies in network
industries must deploy a standard-setting strategy that involves participation not only in
formal standard-setting organizations but also in informal consortia to optimize opportunities
to influence and align strategies with peers.

The main limitation of our study is the well-known issue related to inference drawn from
patent cross-citations (Alcacer and Gittelman, 2006; Thompson and Fox Kean, 2004). In
particular, it is not known whether the consortium effect actually demonstrates knowledge
flows and coordination of innovation, or whether participation in consortia simply makes
firms aware of each other’s patents and therefore compels them to include citations to peers’
earlier patents for strategic reasons. Corroborating the results with other than patent data, such
as meeting documents or interview-based case studies might be desirable.




                                                                                               29
REFERENCES

Agrawal, A. and A. Goldfarb (2008). Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and the
Democratization of University Innovation. American Economic Review 98(4): 1578-90.

Alcacer, J. and M. Gittelman (2006). Patent Citations as a Measure of Knowledge Flows: The
Influence of Examiner Citations. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 88(4): 774-779

Aldrich, H., M. Bolton, T. Baker and T. Sasaki (1998). Information Exchange and
Governance Structures in U.S. and Japanese R&D Consortia: Institutional and Organizational
Influences. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. 45(3): 263-275

Aldrich, H. and T. Sasaki (1995). R&D consortia in the United States and Japan. Research
Policy. 24: 301-316

Allison, J. and M. Lemley (1998). Empirical Evidence on the Validity of Litigated Patents.
American Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly Journal 26: 185-277.

Anton, J.J. and D. Yao (1995). Standard-Setting Consortia, Antitrust, and High-Technology
Industries. Antitrust Law Journal 64(1): 247-65.

Ballester, C., A. Calvo-Armengol and Y. Zenou (2006): Who’s Who in Networks. Wanted:
the Key Player. Econometrica 74(5): 1403-1417.

Bekkers, R. R. Bongard and A. Nuvolari (2011). An Empirical Study on the Determinants of
Essential Patent Claims in Compatibility Standards. Research Policy 40: 1001-15.

Biddle, Brad (2012). How Many Standards in a Laptop? Paper presented at the NBER
conference on Standards, Patents and Innovation, Tucson AZ, January 2012.

Branstetter, L. and M. Sakakibara (1998). Japanese Research Consortia: A microeconometric
Analysis of Industrial Policy. The Journal of Industrial Economics. 46: 207–233

Brodley, J.F. (1990). Antitrust Law and Innovation Cooperation. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 4: 97-112

Cargill, C. F. (2001). The Role of Consortia Standards in Federal Government Procurement in
the Information Technology Sector: Towards a Redefinition of a Voluntary Consensus
Standards Organization. White paper submitted to the House of Representatives Sub-
Committee on Technology, Environment, and Standards

CEN (2012). ICT Standards Consortia. Retrieved on June                     6,   2012   from
http://www.cen.eu/cen/sectors/sectors/isss/consortia/pages/default.aspx.

Choi, J.P. (1993). Cooperative R&D with Product Market Competition. International Journal
of Industrial Organization. 11: 553-571


                                                                                         30
Chiao, B. J. Lerner and J. Tirole (2007). The Rules of Standard-Setting Organizations: An
Empirical Analysis. Rand Journal of Economics 38(4): 905-930.

Chung, S., H. Singh and K. Lee (2000). Complementarity, status similarity and social capital
as drivers of alliance formation. Strategic Management Journal. 21: 1–22

D'Aspremont, C., and A. Jacquemin (1988). Cooperative and Noncooperative R&D in
Duopoly with Spillovers. American Economic Review. 78(5): 1133-1137

DeLacey, B., K. Herman, D. Kiron, J. Lerner (2006). Strategic Behavior in Standard-Setting
Organizations. Unpublished paper circulated in the Social Science Research Network
(www.ssrn.com).

Dokko, G. and L. Rosenkopf (2010). Social Capital for Hire? Mobility of Technical
Professionals and Firm Influence in Wireless Standards Committees. Organization Science.
21(3): 677-695

Egyedi, T.M. (2001). Beyond Consortia, Beyond Standardization? New Case Material and
Policy Threads. Report for the European Commission, October. Delft University of
Technology.

Farrell J. and T. Simcoe (2011). Choosing the Rules for Consensus Standardization.
Unpublished manuscript. Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1396330.

Fershtman C. and N. Gandal (2011). Direct and indirect knowledge spillovers: the “social
network” of open-source projects. RAND Journal of Economics. 42: 70–91

Hall, B., A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (2001). The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
Insights and Methodological Tools" NBER working paper 8498.

Hawkins, R. (1999). The rise of consortia in the information and communication technology
industries: emerging implications for policy. Telecommunications Policy. 23(2) : 159-173.

Jorde, T.M. and D. Teece (1990). Innovation and Cooperation: Implications for Competition
and Antitrust. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 4: 75-96

Kamien, M., E. Muller and I. Zang (1992). Research Joint Ventures and R&D Cartels.
American Economic Review. 82:1293-1306

Katz, M. (1986). An Analysis of Cooperative Research and Development. Rand Journal of
Economics. 17(4) : 527-543.

Katz, M.L., and J.A. Ordover (1990). R&D Cooperation and Competition. Brookings papers
in microeconomics.

Kodama, F. (1986). Japanese innovation in mechatronics technology. Science and Public
Policy 13(1): 44–51

                                                                                           31
Lampe, R. (2012). Strategic Citation. Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1): 320-333.

Leiponen, A. (2008). Competing Through Cooperation: Standard-Setting in Wireless
Telecommunications. Management Science 54(11): 1904-1919.

Leiponen, A. and J. Byma (2009). If You Cannot Block, You Better Run: Small Firms,
Cooperative Innovation, and Appropriation Strategies. Research Policy 38: 1478-1488.

Lemley, M. A. (2002). Intellectual Property Rights and Standard Setting Organizations.
California Law Review 90: 1889-1990.

MWIF (2000). The Mobile Wireless Internet Forum Antitrust Guidelines. Approved and
Adopted March 2, 2000. Retrieved from www.mwif.org using the Internet Archive on June 4,
2012.

Pfeffer, J. (1981). Power in Organizations. Ballinger: Cambridge, MA.

Romer, P., and Z. Griliches (1993). Implementing a National Technology Strategy with Self-
Organizing Industry Investment Boards. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics. 2: 345-399

Rosenkopf, L., A. Metiu and V. George (2001). From the Bottom Up? Technical Committee
Activity and Alliance Formation. Administrative Science Quarterly. 46:748-772

Sakakibara, M. (2001). The Diversity of R&D Consortia and Firm Behavior: Evidence from
Japanese Data. Journal of Industrial Economics. 49(2): 181-196.

Simcoe, T. (2012). Standard Setting Committees: Consensus Governance for Shared
Technology Platforms. American Economic Review 102(1): 305–336.

Thompson, P. and M. Fox-Kean (2005). Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge
Spillovers: A Reassessment. American Economic Review. 95(1)

Updegrove, A. (2010). Standard Setting Organizations and Standards List. Last updated in
2010. Retrieved from www.consortiuminfo.com on February 1, 2012.

WSJ (2011). The Android Patent War. Wall Street Journal Online, retrieved on May 6 from
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204826704577074523539966352.html.




                                                                                           32
                           Appendix 1: Description cited patents




                    900
                    800
                    700
Number of patents



                    600
                    500
                    400
                    300                                                            Cited patents
                    200
                    100
                     0
                          1976
                          1978
                          1980
                          1982
                          1984
                          1986
                          1988
                          1990
                          1992
                          1994
                          1996
                          1998
                          2000
                          2002
                          2004
                                                Grant year


                                     Figure 1: Grant year of the cited patents




                                                                Communications

                                                                Telephonic Communications
                    4%
     4%                         7%    6%
                                                                Cryptography
                                             12%
                                                        3%      Electrical Audio Signal Processing
                                                                Systems and Devices
                                                   4%
                                                   4%           Information Processing System
                                                                Organization
                                                                Telecommunications

                          56%
                                                                Data Processing

                                                                Electrical Computers and Digital
                                                                Processing Systems
                                                                Error Detection/Correction



                            Figure 2: Technological class of the cited patents

                                                                                                     33
                          Appendix 2 : Description citing patents




                    450
                    400
                    350
Number of patents




                    300
                    250
                    200
                                                                                  Citing patents
                    150
                    100
                    50
                     0
                          2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
                                             Grant year



                                  Figure 3: Grant year of the citing patents




                                      3%

                                                                      Multiplex Communications
                          23%
                                                 39%                  Pulse or Digital
                                                                      Communications
                                                                      Telecommunications

                                                                      Data Processing
                                35%




                            Figure 4: Technological class of the citing patents

                                                                                                   34
               Appendix 3 : List of consortia


 Consortium Name   3GPP related   Affected by the OMA merger
MET                    No                      No
WLANA                  No                      No
SA Forum               No                      No
ATIS                   No                      No
3G Americas            No                      No
CDG                    No                      No
VoiceXML               No                      No
IPv6 Forum            Yes                      No
Hiperlan 2             No                      No
WiFi Alliance          No                      No
GSA                   Yes                      No
TTC                   Yes                      No
Bluetooth              No                      No
GPP 2                  No                      No
UMTS Forum            Yes                      Yes
T1                    Yes                      No
SyncML                 No                      Yes
TTA                    No                      No
UWCC                  Yes                      No
WAP Forum              No                      Yes
Wireless Village       No                      Yes
3GIP                   No                      No
ARIB                  Yes                      No
BWIF                   No                      No
CWTS                   No                      No
ETSI                  Yes                      No
GSM Association       Yes                      No
MGIF                   No                      Yes
MWIF                   No                      Yes
OMA Alliance           No                      No
Symbian                No                      No
WECA                   No                      No




                                                               35
         Appendix 4 : Cited patent holders

Agere                         Matsushita
Alcatel                       Matra
ArrayComm                     Microsoft
AT&T Wireless                 Mitsubishi
Bell South                    Motorola
BT (British Telecom)          NEC
BULL S.A.                     Nokia
Cisco Systems                 Nortel Networks
3Com                          OKI Electrics
Infineon Technology           Panasonic
Ericsson                      Qualcomm
France Telecom                Racal Instruments
Fujitsu Limited               Rogers Wireless
Golden Bridge Technology      Samsung
Hewlett Packard               Seiko Epson
Hughes Network                Sharp
ICO Global                    Siemens
Intel                         Sony
InterDigital                  Texas Instruments
LG Electronics                Thomson
Lucent                        Toshiba

Appendix 5 : Control group for the OMA merger

                      Company Name
                      Hughes Network
                            Agere
                         ArrayComm
                    BT (British Telecom)
                          Bull S.A.
                          Comneon
                  Golden Bridge Technology
                         ICO Global
                            Matra
                      Racal Instruments
                       Rogers Wireless
                        Shanghai Bell




                                                  36
                 Appendix 6: Results using a random effects estimation

                                       (1)                             (2)                          (3)

                             Coef.       Odds ratios         Coef.       Odds ratios      Coef.       Odds ratios
                             (SE)          (SE)              (SE)          (SE)           (SE)          (SE)
                                                        DV= Dummy patent cited/year
Total memberships           0.139***         1.149***
                             (0.018)          (0.021)
Mean memberships           -0.215***         0.806***
                             (0.061)          (0.049)
Consortium connections                                     0.002***          1.002***
                                                           (0.0002)          (0.0002)
Mean consortium                                              -0.002            0.998
Connections                                                 (0.001)           (0.001)
Co-membership                                                                           3.162***       23.610***
                                                                                         (0.168)         (3.976)
Mean Co-membership                                                                      6.463***      640.071***
                                                                                         (0.645)       (412.579)
3GPP connections               0.007           1.007       0.021***          1.021***     -0.002          0.998
                             (0.006)          (0.006)       (0.005)           (0.005)    (0.006)         (0.006)
Mean 3GPPconnections          -0.037           0.964       -0.081***         0.922***   -0.035***       0.965***
                             (0.023)          (0.022)       (0.016)           (0.015)    (0.010)         (0.010)
Patent age                   -0.109*          0.896*         -0.076            0.926      -0.039          0.962
                             (0.053)          (0.048)       (0.053)           (0.049)    (0.064)         (0.062)
Mean patent age             0.305***         1.357***      0.276***          1.318***    0.199**        1.220***
                             (0.052)          (0.070)       (0.051)           (0.068)    (0.062)         (0.075)
Patent quality             -0.068***         0.934***      -0.067***         0.935***   -0.074***       0.929***
                             (0.007)          (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.007)    (0.008)         (0.007)
Mean patent quality         0.080***         1.083***      0.079***          1.082***   0.079***        1.082***
                             (0.008)          (0.008)       (0.008)           (0.008)    (0.008)         (0.009)

Dummy 0/3/6/9                        Y                               Y                             Y
Observations                        6276                            6276                          6276
Number of groups                    1021                            1021                          1021
Chi2                               418.96                          421.75                        539.77
Prob > chi2                           0                               0                             0
Log Likelihood                   -1554.269                       -1558.675                     -1142.618
Unit of analysis                Cited patent                    Cited patent                  Cited patent
Number of cited firms                43                              43                            43
                                     Legend: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001
Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a patent was cited by an essential patent
applied in year t. Estimation method is logit with random effects. Dummy 0/3/6/9 are
nonlinear effects for patent age. Means are computed at the cited patent level.




                                                                                                          37
             Appendix 7: Regression results with a linear probability model


Table 7.1     Main results


                                                     (1)                      (2)
                                                    Coef.                    Coef.
                                                    (SE)                     (SE)
              Total memberships                  0.0050***
                                                  (0.0007)
              Consortium connections                                     0.0002***
                                                                          (0.00004)
              3GPP connections                    0.0003                  0.0007**
                                                 (0.0003)                  (0.0002)
              Dummy Age Cited                        Y                         Y
              Observations                         7297                      6276
              Number of groups                     1021                      1021
              R-sq                                0.1071                    0.0975
              Unit of analysis                  Cited patent             Cited patent
              Number of cited firms                  43                       43

      Notes: Standard errors, clustered on patents, in parentheses under the coefficients.
      Legend: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001



Table 7.2     Types of consortia

                                                    (1)                       (2)
                                                   Coef.                     Coef.
                                                   (SE)                      (SE)
             Informal consortium                 0.0022*
             memberships                         (0.0008)
             Formal consortium                  0.0172***
             memberships                         (0.0032)
             Related consortium                                          0.0191***
             memberships                                                  (0.0022)
             Unrelated consortium                                          -0.0013
             memberships                                                  (0.0008)
             3GPP connections                    0.0006                     0.0001
                                                (0.0003)                  (0.0003)
             Dummy Cited Age                        Y                          Y
             Observations                         6276                       6276
             Number of groups                     1021                       1021
             R-sq                                0.0516                     0.1049
             Unit of analysis                  Cited patent              Cited patent
             Number of cited firms                  43                        43
      Notes: Standard errors, clustered on patents, in parentheses under the coefficients.
      Legend: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

                                                                                             38
Table 7.3     Differences-in-differences estimation of the effects of OMA merger

                                                        (1)                   (2)
                                                       Coef.                 Coef.
                                                       (SE)                  (SE)
             OMA connections                         0.0007***             0.0006***
                                                      (0.0001)              (0.0001)
             Other consortia connections              -0.0001*
                                                     (0.00005)
             Formal consortia connections                                  -0.00009
                                                                           (0.00005)
             Informal consortia connections                                0.0014**
                                                                            (0.0005)
             OMA connections after                   0.0005***             0.0005**
                                                      (0.0001)              (0.0001)
             Dummy_after                            -0.1831***            -0.1811***
                                                       (0.018)               (0.018)
             3GPP connections                       -0.0014***            -0.0014***
                                                      (0.0003)              (0.0003)
             Dummy Cited Age                              Y                     Y
             Number of obs                              6276                  6276
             Number of groups                           1021                  1021
             R-sq                                      0.1109                0.1169
             Unit of analysis                       Cited patent          Cited patent
             Number of cited firms                       43                     43

      Notes: Standard errors, clustered on patents, in parentheses under the coefficients
      Legend: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001




                                                                                            39
