                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE RETURNS TO EDUCATION IN CHINA:
              EVIDENCE FROM THE 1986 COMPULSORY EDUCATION LAW

                                              Hai Fang
                                         Karen N. Eggleston
                                           John A. Rizzo
                                            Scott Rozelle
                                        Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                        Working Paper 18189
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18189


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




The authors did not receive funding for their research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Hai Fang, Karen N. Eggleston, John A. Rizzo, Scott Rozelle, and Richard J. Zeckhauser.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Returns to Education in China: Evidence from the 1986 Compulsory Education Law
Hai Fang, Karen N. Eggleston, John A. Rizzo, Scott Rozelle, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 18189
June 2012
JEL No. J31,O15,P52

                                           ABSTRACT

As China transforms from a socialist planned economy to a market-oriented economy, its returns to
education are expected to rise to meet those found in middle-income established market economies.
This study employs a plausible instrument for education: the China Compulsory Education Law of
1986. We use differences among provinces in the dates of effective implementation of the compulsory
education law to show that the law raised overall educational attainment in China by about 0.8 years
of schooling. We then use this instrumental variable to control for the endogeneity of education and
estimate the returns to an additional year of schooling in 1997-2006. Results imply that the overall
returns to education are approximately 20 percent per year on average in contemporary China, fairly
consistent with returns found in most industrialized economies. Returns differ among subpopulations;
they increase after controlling for endogeneity of education.


Hai Fang                                         Scott Rozelle
Department of Health Systems,                    Stanford University
 Management and Policy                           Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies
University of Colorado Denver                    Encina Hall E407
13001 E 17th Place, Campus Box B119              Stanford, CA 94305-6055
Aurora, CO 80045                                 rozelle@stanford.edu
hai.fang@ucdenver.edu
                                                 Richard J. Zeckhauser
Karen N. Eggleston                               John F. Kennedy School of Government
Stanford University                              Harvard University
Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center         79 John F. Kennedy Street
Encina Hall E311                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
Stanford, CA 94305-6055                          and NBER
karene@stanford.edu                              richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

John A. Rizzo
Stony Brook University
N-637 Social and Behavioral Sciences Bldg.
Stony Brook, NY 11794
John.Rizzo@stonybrook.edu
1. Introduction

           Education plays an important role in determining labor-market performance, with better-

educated individuals generally receiving higher earnings. Educational levels of a labor force may

also explain the overall economic growth in various countries (Becker 1964; Griliches 1970). In

a seminal contribution, Mincer (1974) presented a human capital framework of education and

earnings determination, spawning a large literature in which the natural logarithm of individual

earnings—measured as annual, monthly, and/or hourly wages—is an additive function of

education (in years of schooling or attainment of a high school diploma/college degree), working

experience and other factors.

           More recent studies have investigated the extent to which the correlation between

educational attainment and earnings is causal (Card 1999). Education may well be endogenous,

because, for example, higher inherent ability may lead individuals both to secure more education

and to achieve higher earnings. To deal with the endogeneity, some studies have employed twins

data to control for family background and inherent ability. Other studies have used various other

measures, such as the institutional features of an educational system, to instrument for individual

educational attainment. Several landmark studies that corrected for the endogeneity of education,

using datasets from the 1960s and 1970s, concluded that one additional year of schooling in the

US or Europe boosted earnings by 10 percent or more (Card 1999).1

           China is an important country in which to study the relationship between education and

earnings. Since the Reform and Opening Policy was instituted in 1978, China’s economic system

has been transformed from a socialist planned economy to a predominantly market-oriented


1
    These studies generally found that the ability bias was smaller than had been previously expected (Becker 1964;

Griliches 1977).



                                                         -3-
economy. China’s economic growth has been unprecedented, lifting hundreds of millions of

people out of poverty and making China the world’s second largest economy by 2010 (World

Bank 2011). One important reason that has been proposed for China’s rapid economic growth is

its relatively well-educated labor force, compared to those of other developing nations.

According to the international dataset compiled by Barro and Lee (http://barrolee.com/), China’s

population aged 15 and above had an average of 3.4 years of schooling in 1970, rising to 7.6

years by 2005—higher than values for Brazil, India or Indonesia.2 The returns to education in

China may have increased during this economic transition.

           Researchers have begun to examine the relationship between education and earnings

using data from China. Some have addressed endogeneity by using family background or data on

twins. Most studies find very low returns to education before the early 1990s (Fleisher and Wang

2005). State-owned enterprises and the collective economy remained dominant in the early

reform era of the 1980s; competition for talent was limited, and remnants of the socialist

redistributive economy still limited returns to education (Zhou 2000). Returns to education in

China have increased substantially since the early 1990s (Heckman 2003). To our knowledge,

however, only one previous study uses the implementation of compulsory schooling in China to

address the endogeneity of educational attainment: Song (2012) estimates the labor market

premium for completing primary education and finds that an additional year of schooling

significantly reduces the probability of being in poverty.

           We contribute to the literature in two ways. First, we use differences among provinces in

the dates of effective implementation of the compulsory education law to identify the impact of


2
    In our data, the average number of years of schooling is 8.88. This higher number compared to China’s national

average is expected, because our sample only includes individuals aged 45 or younger.



                                                         -4-
the education law on years of schooling, both overall and among subgroups of the population.3

We show that the Compulsory Education Law of 1986 raised overall educational attainment in

China (by about 0.8 years of schooling) during the 1997-2006 period, and that the impact varied

systematically by location and by gender. Second, using the effective implementation dates of

the law in different provinces as an instrumental variable, we assess the returns to one additional

year of schooling in contemporary China. Our results imply that the overall returns to education

are approximately 20 percent per year on average. This value is fairly consistent with, albeit

slightly higher than, the returns found in most industrialized economies. Returns differ among

subpopulations; they increase after controlling for the endogeneity of education.

           The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the previous literature,

particularly focusing on research in China and on studies using institutional features of

educational systems to control for endogeneity. Section 3 presents our estimation strategy.

Section 4 details the data and Section 5 reports our results. Section 6 concludes with a discussion

of how the 1986 China Compulsory Education Law affected education and how our estimates of

returns to education compare to those of previous studies in China and in other countries.



2. Previous Studies of Education’s Effect on Earnings

           Card’s (1999) excellent overall review of previous research on the returns to education

focuses on methodological issues and on evidence from empirical studies available at that time,

most of which used data from Western countries. This section reviews previous research related




3
    Song (2012) uses the same date of implementation for all provinces. Song focuses on variation in effectiveness of

the law in raising years of schooling for older adolescents and in rural areas



                                                         -5-
to the present study, including those studies using data from China as well as those using

educational-system features as instrumental variables.

Education and earnings in China

       The premise of compulsory education laws is that requiring a basic level of education

improves the well-being of individuals and society, with one of the main channels being the

monetary returns from additional years of schooling. Empirically demonstrating this presumed

beneficial impact of such laws is important in the context of developing countries like China,

where adolescents may find dropping out of school attractive given the opportunity cost of

foregone earnings for unskilled labor, and families may doubt whether the government has their

best interests in mind when passing the law. Moreover, previous studies have shown that returns

to education were at first quite modest in China’s reform era, so that families may have been

acting rationally by assuming that an additional year of schooling was not worth much.

       The wage-compression policies and other institutions of the Maoist era in China

suppressed returns to education. Fleisher and Wang (2005) examine the returns to education

during the period of 1950 – 1994, and find a declining trend up to the Cultural Revolution in

1966. Those low returns are also found to persist for at least a decade after the inception of

reforms in 1978. The average returns to one extra schooling year in China before the 1990s have

been shown to be lower than those in the US, Europe, and other developed areas. Byron and

Manaloto (1990), using a survey of 800 adults in Nanjing city, Jiangsu Province, find that the

returns to an additional year of education in 1986 were less than 4 percent. Johnson and Chow

(1997) also report that the Mincer-type returns to education were only 4.01 percent in rural China

and 3.29 percent in urban China, using data from the 1988 Chinese Household Income Project. Z.

Liu (1998) employs the same dataset to investigate how returns to education differ by level of




                                                -6-
work experience, finding 3 to 6 percent differences. Maurer-Fazio (1999) finds that the returns to

education in China for young people were slightly higher than those for older people, but the

overall returns were still found to be low before the early 1990s.

       Low returns to education have also been found in other transitional economies, such as

those of Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine; but returns increased

substantially after the transition to market-based economies in those countries (Fleisher 2005).

As the state-owned enterprises and collective economy in China declined, especially after the

early 1990s, the entire economic system transitioned from a centrally planned to a market-

oriented economy. With wages increasingly determined by market forces, this economic

transition presumably raised the returns to education in China as it did in other transition

economies.

       A large body of research suggests that during the post-reform period, productivity and

efficiency became stronger predictors of individuals’ earnings in China (Gustafsson and Li 2000;

Knight and Song 2003). Because of education’s link to productivity, the returns to education

grew in both rural and urban areas. Yang (2004) analyzes panel data from Sichuan province for

the period of 1985-1996 to investigate how education affected farmers’ adjustments after

economic policy reforms. Yang finds that in rural areas, schooling played a critical role in

enabling farmers to respond efficiently to changing market conditions, predominantly by

devoting more capital and labor to nonagricultural activities that yield higher returns. These

findings are supported by the Zhang et al. (2002) study of participation in the labor force, entry

into the labor market, and wages in rural Jiangsu households in 1988, 1992, and 1996. Zhang et

al. (2002) find that rural individuals with more education are not only more likely to benefit from




                                                -7-
rising opportunities off the farm, but also to obtain better returns from on-farm activities

compared to their less-educated counterparts.

       Yang (2005) uses data from urban regions of the Chinese Household Income Project to

compare returns to education in 1988 and 1995. He finds that the estimated rate of return to one

additional year of schooling increased from 3.1 percent in 1988 to 5.1 percent in 1995.

Nevertheless, throughout the mid-1990s, wage differences by occupation, level of skill, and level

of education remained very narrow in China compared to other transition economies

(Psacharopolous and Patrinos 2004). Researchers have attempted to determine why during this

period, when educated labor was scarce, the returns to education were not commensurate with its

contribution to productivity. Based on panel data from 200 large rural enterprises in 10 provinces,

Fleisher and Wang (2004) attribute the low private returns to education in China in the mid-

1990s to restrictions on worker mobility along with unexploited economies of scale in

production among rural enterprises. These findings support the idea that returns to education

reflect the extent to which wage rates are allowed to reflect differences in productivity (Fleisher

and Wang 2005).

       Beginning in the late 1990s, returns to education in China appear to have experienced a

broad and sustained rise. Zhang et al. (2005) find returns to education increasing from 4 percent

in 1988 to 10.2 percent in 2001. They observe that the rise in schooling returns through 2001

occurred across all groups of workers—whether defined by gender, experience, region, or firm

ownership—and was robust to adding other control variables. Appleton et al. (2005) use recall

panel data from the China Household Income Project from 1988 to 2002 to examine the impact

of worker characteristics on urban wages in China during a period of industry reform and

ownership restructuring. Based on their cross-sectional Mincerian wage functions and fixed-




                                                -8-
effects panel estimates of changes in the wage structure over time, they conclude that the

increase was greater in China (from 3 percent in 1988 to 5 percent in 2002) than in other (OECD)

countries during this period. They attribute the sustained rise in returns to several potential

demand-side factors, including a competitive labor market, skill-biased technological change,

and increased trade. They also identify several supply-side explanations for the increased returns

to schooling, including the liberalization of controls on migration, which increased the supply of

predominantly low-skilled workers in urban areas and moderated the increase in their wages,

thus raising the returns to education. Appleton et al. (2005) stress that, according to their fixed-

effects estimation, the rise in the returns to education in the panel data cannot be explained by an

increase in the quality of education.

       The documented increase in returns to education since the 1990s in China underscores

the potentially important role of the compulsory education law in improving welfare for those on

the margin of not completing a middle school education. Even if such individuals correctly

understood the returns to education at the time schooling decisions were made in the 1970s and

1980s, they may not have foreseen the rise in returns that would occur after they entered the

labor market. Especially if returns to education diminish at higher levels, those individuals most

tempted to drop out of school to take up low-skill factory wages are precisely the ones who

would most benefit from compulsory education; their future earnings will be significantly higher

with a few more years of education and will accumulate over their work life to far exceed the

earnings they forego by staying in school.

       Li (2003) argues that the returns to education for the more educated population in China,

such as those with education beyond college, are higher than previous studies have shown. After

correcting for reporting errors and ability heterogeneity, the estimated returns to education for a




                                                 -9-
subsample of young workers are approximately 15 percent per year using data from the 1995

Chinese Household Income Project (Li and Luo 2004). This estimated rate of return to education

in China is roughly comparable to that in Western developed countries.

       Heckman and Li (2004) study the returns to college education using data from the 2000

China Urban Household Investment and Expenditure Survey, also correcting for heterogeneity

and selection bias. They find that a four-year college education raises annual income by 43

percent, arguing therefore that the returns to one additional year of college education average

about 11 percent.

       Not all studies find that the returns to education in China really increased dramatically. Li

et al. (2005) find contradictory evidence. Using identical twins data from 5 cities in 2002, they

find that a large portion of the observed returns to education reflect ability bias. After employing

the twins fixed-effects estimation, the returns to education decrease from 8.4 percent to 2.7

percent; Li et al. (2005) argue that this low rate of return is due to the inefficient education

system in China. Moreover, these results using twins data in China are at variance with much

higher rates found by Ashenfelter and Rouse (1998) and Miller et al. (1995) using twins data in

other countries. This suggests that the method of analysis does not explain the discrepancy. It

also suggests that selective education according to ability may play a larger role in China than

elsewhere.

Finding an appropriate instrument for education

       Given the widely acknowledged endogeneity of educational attainment, it is important to

find instruments to control for this phenomenon. Angrist and Krueger (1991) use the specific

quarter of the year of an individual’s birth as the instrument for his or her education, finding that

individuals born earlier in the year have slightly less schooling than those born later in the same




                                                - 10 -
year. The likely explanation is that individuals born earlier in the year can attain the minimum

legal age for leaving school at a lower grade. Their empirical analysis shows that the IV

estimates of returns to education are slightly higher than those estimated by OLS (increasing

from 7 percent to 10 percent), but these differences are not statistically significant. Staiger and

Stock (1997) re-analyze Angrist and Krueger (1991)’s data, using limited-information

maximum-likelihood methods, and find similar results.

       Economists hypothesize that the distance to school may determine an individual’s

educational achievement, thus serving as a potential instrument. Growing up near a high school,

college, or university may have a positive effect on an individual’s educational attainment (Card

1995; Kane and Rouse 1993). The returns to education found from these school-proximity IV

estimations are more than 50 percent higher than those using OLS.

       Harmon and Walker (1995) study the returns to education using British data. The

minimum age at which individuals were allowed to leave school in Britain was raised from 14 to

15 in 1947 and from 15 to 16 in 1973. Based on these institutional changes in the British

schooling system, Harmon and Walker (1995) construct three cohort dummies: men born before

1932, men born between 1933 and 1957, and men born after 1957. Using these cohort dummies

as instruments, Harmon and Walker find that returns to education based on OLS (6 percent) are

underestimated compared to those in the two-stage least squares (2SLS) model (15 percent),

producing results similar to those found by other studies using instrumental variables for

education.




                                                - 11 -
3. Estimation Strategy

           A change in China’s laws enabled us to find an appropriate instrument for educational

attainment. China’s Compulsory Education Law was passed on April 12, 1986 and officially

went into effect on July 1, 1986. This was the first time that China used a law to specify

educational policies for the entire country. However, provinces were allowed to have different

effective dates for implementing the law, since the central authorities recognized that not all

provinces would be ready to enforce the law immediately.

           This law had several important features (China Ministry of Education 1986). First, 9

years of education became compulsory. Second, children were generally supposed to start their

compulsory education at 6 years of age. Third, in principle, compulsory education was free of

charge. Fourth, it became unlawful to employ children who are in their compulsory schooling

years. Fifth, local governments were allowed to collect education taxes to finance compulsory

education.

           There are two significant differences between China’s Compulsory Education Law and

its counterparts in the US and UK, which have been the focus of much of the previous literature

on compulsory education. First, China’s per capita income at the time of implementation was

much lower than recent per capita income in the US and UK. In addition, fiscal decentralization

implemented around the same time reduced the central government’s redistributive power,4

4
    In 1985, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) issued the Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese

Communist Party on the Reform of the Educational System, devolving educational responsibility to lower levels of

government. This reform increased inequality of funding between rural and urban schools, leading rural schools to

diversify the sources of their funding. These diverse sources included school fees, levies, school- and community-

generated revenues (Hannum 2003; Tsang 2000). Just one year later, the Compulsory Education Law officially

made nine years of schooling compulsory throughout China, with implementation to be carried out in different



                                                       - 12 -
leaving many local governments in poor provinces or regions with insufficient resources to

implement the law fully (Hannum 2003; Zhang and Kanbur 2005).5 These factors suggest that

the effectiveness of this program in achieving educational gains was almost certain to be uneven

across China. Second, China’s law stipulates 9 years of compulsory education instead of setting a

minimum age for leaving school (although children cannot legally leave school if they are less

than 15 years old). Those under 15 who had already left school by the law’s effective date were

required by the local education system to return to school until they turned 15. Local government

and education officials are held responsible for school enrollment rates, and their promotions

may be delayed as a punishment for low enrollment. However, the compulsory schooling law has

been enforced unevenly in different parts of the country. Therefore, one of our main objectives is

to use the actual effective date of implementation in each province to demonstrate that the law

did impact educational attainment for those on the margin of completing 9 years of schooling.

Then we use this impact as a method to estimate returns to education in contemporary China.

           Our estimation strategy exploits the fact that, as of the law’s effective date, a Chinese

child was supposed to have begun primary school when he or she reached 6 years of age. In this

way, the child was supposed to complete his/her compulsory education when he or she reached

15 years of age. Children over 15 years old when the law became effective were not affected by

the law and, thus, serve as our comparison group.




phases (Hawkins 2000). The reforms must be discussed together because, despite the compulsory education law

mandating 9 years of education, children whose families could not pay some fees (such as textbooks) were not

allowed to attend school (Brown and Park 2002).
5
    For example, all areas were expected to have primary education available for all students after 1986, but in reality,

only 76 percent of counties had realized universal primary education by 1990 (Connelly and Zheng 2003).



                                                          - 13 -
       The staggered implementation of China’s compulsory education law created a series of

natural experiments. The effective date of the law’s implementation in the province of residence

will serve as our instrumental variable for estimating each individual’s completed years of

schooling. This obviates the problem of endogeneity due to unobservable variables that are

correlated with both education and earnings (Card 1999). While an individual’s inherent ability

is generally unobservable, it should be expected to affect both education and earnings positively,

as higher-ability individuals tend to obtain more education and higher incomes. If so, OLS

estimation will overestimate the returns to schooling, although Griliches (1977) and Angrist and

Krueger (1991) argue that the ability biases in OLS estimations are relatively small.

       OLS may also underestimate returns to education, especially if there are diminishing

marginal returns to education. If years of schooling are over-reported, the OLS estimate of the

returns to education will be underestimated due to measurement error. In addition, Card (1999)

suggests that the instrumental-variable estimates based on compulsory education laws may

reveal higher returns to schooling than those estimated by OLS because individuals subject to

compulsory education laws typically have marginal returns to schooling that are higher than

average. Asymptotically unbiased estimates of the causal effect of schooling on earnings have

been argued to be higher than those estimated by OLS (Card 1999; Staiger and Stock 1997). In

fact, many of the previous studies using educational-system features as instruments report such

higher returns--an increase of 30 percent or more compared to returns estimated with OLS

without controlling for endogeneity (Card 1999).

       As noted, China’s Compulsory Education Law serves as our instrument to address the

endogeneity of years of schooling. We proceed as follows. First, following a standard Mincer




                                              - 14 -
(1974) analysis, we assume that the natural logarithm of individual earnings is a function of

schooling years and other explanatory variables:

        ln(E )   0  1 S   2 X                                                         (1)

where

        ln( E )         =       natural logarithm of annual earnings in 2006 Chinese currency

(Renminbi Yuan);

        S               =       school years completed;

        X               =       a vector of other explanatory variables;

                       =       a disturbance term; and

        0  2         =       coefficients to be estimated.

        If education is endogenous,  1 in Equation (1) may be biased and it might be possible to

use an instrumental variable approach to account for the endogeneity. To be appropriate, the

instrumental variable should be correlated with the years of schooling, but should not affect

earnings except through the effect of years of schooling. The instrumental variable employed in

this study is a binary variable indicating whether an individual was less than 15 years old on the

law’s effective date. As discussed above, the individual would not be affected by this

compulsory education law if s/he was 15 years old or older when the law became effective in his

or her home province. Thus, we construct a binary variable equal to 1 (treatment cohort) if the

individual was less than 15 years old on the law’s effective date, and equal to 0 otherwise

(control cohort). Our hypothesis is that only individuals less than 15 years old on the law’s

effective date are potentially affected by China’s Compulsory Education Law of 1986.

        The first stage estimates years of schooling as follows:

        S   0  1 IV   2 X                                                             (2)


                                                - 15 -
       where

        IV             =       a dummy variable equal to 1 if the individual was less than 15

years old on the law’s effective date.

                      =       a disturbance term; and

        0 2         =       coefficients to be estimated.

       We pursue a two-stage least-squares estimation employing this instrumental variable. For

this analysis, we define a treatment cohort of all individuals aged less than 15 years on the law’s

effective date in their home province, and a control cohort of all individuals aged 15 or older on

the law’s effective date. One basic strategy is to contrast the outcomes for these overall treatment

and control cohorts. This strategy is similar to those used by Angrist and Krueger (1991) and

Harmon and Walker (1995).

       One concern with our instrumental variable strategy is that a time trend may also be

affecting individual earnings. If this is true, it is possible that the treatment cohort may have

higher earnings and/or better education than the control cohort simply because they came along

later. Such a concern would be grave for one of two reasons: a.) if the study data spanned a long

time period; or b.) if the country experienced rapid economic growth during this period. Since

our time period is relatively short, “a” is not really a concern.

       However, China’s economy was growing rapidly during this period. To overcome this

potential concern, we employ a more refined estimation procedure that defines treatment and

control groups that are similar in age. Specifically, we compare a two-year treatment cohort

(aged 13 and 14 on the law’s effective date) to a two-year control cohort (aged 15 and 16 on the

law’s effective date). Within these two-year treatment and control cohorts, the time trends that

we are concerned about will, by definition, be much smaller than for the overall sample. We



                                                - 16 -
choose two years for the following reasons. First, one year’s data would provide a smaller

sample size. Second, our approach enables us to test on either side of the dividing line, to see

whether there is considerable growth in education between two successive years in either the

two-year treatment cohort or the two-year control cohort. Consistent with the latter approach, we

test year dummies within these two-year treatment and two-year control cohorts.

       If China’s Compulsory Education Law is a valid instrument for educational attainment,

the two-year treatment cohort will have significantly higher educational attainment than the two-

year control cohort. However, a dummy variable for the second year within each of these two-

year treatment or control cohorts will not explain differences in schooling, even if a year-trend

effect exists. In other words, a dummy variable for being age 16 (the second year of the two-year

control cohort) should not affect schooling within the control cohort; similarly, a dummy

variable for being age 14 of the two-year treatment cohort should not affect schooling within the

treatment cohort.

       A further robustness check involves testing for the effects of “placebo laws,”

counterfactually assuming the law was enforced two years earlier or two years later than it was

actually enforced in a given province. If our instrument is valid, we should find no effects for

these two different hypothetical law years. Any differences would only reflect a time trend, and

these counterfactual year dates should fail tests for being a valid instrument for education. In the

two-stage least-squares estimation, we also employ an exclusion test of the instrumental variable

to identify whether the instrumental variable has no direct effect on the earnings measure when

controlling for all other explanatory variables.




                                               - 17 -
4. Data and Variables

       We use data from the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), which is maintained at

the Carolina Population Center of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The CHNS is

collected by the Carolina Population Center and the National Institute of Nutrition and Food

Safety at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Our study uses four recent

waves of data collected in 1997, 2000, 2004, and 2006. We use four waves of data to ensure that

we have a large enough sample of individuals affected by the 1986 China Compulsory Education

Law, particularly for the models using two-year restricted cohorts.

       Mainland China consists of 32 province-level administrative units. The CHNS data were

collected from 9 provinces: Heilongjiang, Liaoning, Jiangsu, Shandong, Henan, Hubei, Hunan,

Guangxi, and Guizhou. These 9 provinces account for approximately 44 percent of the Chinese

population. They vary substantially in geography, economic development, public resources, and

health indicators, with greater wealth and development in the eastern coastal provinces.

Heilongjiang and Liaoning are two heavily industrialized provinces in northeastern China.

Jiangsu and Shandong are two lightly industrialized provinces in eastern China. Henan, Hubei,

and Hunan are three agricultural provinces in central China, and Guangxi and Guizhou are

relatively underdeveloped southwestern provinces.

       The CHNS employed sophisticated sampling techniques. A multistage, random cluster

process was used to draw the sample surveyed in each of the provinces. Counties in the 9

provinces were stratified by income (low, middle, and high), and a weighted sampling scheme

was used to select randomly 4 counties within each province. In addition, the provincial capital

and a lower-income city were selected when feasible. Villages within the counties, and urban

and suburban neighborhoods within the cities, were chosen at random.




                                              - 18 -
           The effective dates of the China Compulsory Education Law differed by province, as

provincial governments had first to enact specific regulations (equivalent to provincial laws)

before the law was enforced in that province. For the 9 provinces in the CHNS data, the actual

effective dates are July 1, 1986 in Heilongjiang and Liaoning; September 9, 1986 in Jiangsu;

September 12, 1986 in Shandong; October 1, 1986 in Henan; March 1, 1987 in Hubei; January 1,

1988 in Guizhou; and September 1, 1991 in Hunan and Guangxi. Because the official effective

date of China’s compulsory education law as dictated by the central government was July 1,

1986 and schools in China have summer break in July and August, we use September 1 as the

effective date if the provincial effective date was within summer break.

           Migration raises another issue: if an individual permanently migrates to another province

after completing compulsory education, the schooling province and household registration

province for that same individual in CHNS survey data may be different. In reality, however,

much of China’s large migrant workforce only migrates temporarily and/or migrates from rural

to urban areas within the same province. Interprovincial migration has been relatively limited in

China and has been strictly controlled by the government at various levels, using the household

registration (hukou) system.6 Previous studies show that interprovincial migration was only 3

percent between 1990 and 2000 (Johnson 2003; Fan 2005), so interprovincial migration is

unlikely to invalidate our instrumental variable.

           Another consideration is how to define a good comparison group. Cohorts born in the

pre-Mao and early Mao era, or during the Great Leap Famine (1959-1960), may not be

6
    For example, urban social safety net policies only cover households registered as urban in that locality, and

children of migrant workers usually cannot attend urban public schools. During the period of our study, children of

migrants sometimes attended schools specifically set up for migrants, but such children have always been required

to return to their household registration locality to take the tests for progression to higher levels of schooling.



                                                          - 19 -
appropriate, given the very different social and economic conditions of their childhoods

compared to contemporary China. In particular, the schooling of those born in the 1950s was

severely impaired by the political turmoil of the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). During that

decade, many high schools and colleges were closed, and millions of junior high school

graduates in urban areas were required to work in rural and mountainous areas. Students in

primary and middle school were less likely to be affected. If we include those who were affected

by China’s Cultural Revolution, their actual educational attainment may be lower than those who

are younger, despite official statistics indicating otherwise. Therefore, we include in our sample

only those born in 1961 or later, so that they were younger than 15 by the end of the Cultural

Revolution in 1976. This conservative strategy avoids a potential downward bias in schooling

within the control group due to political disruption.7

           Our dependent variable is the natural logarithm of total individual yearly earnings, which

include annual income from all sources collected in the CHNS data: wages; income from

business, farming, gardening, fishing, and/or raising livestock;8 and retirement and non-

retirement transfers. Because earnings measures are right-skewed, we define our dependent

variable as the natural logarithm of yearly earnings (Mincer 1974). The key explanatory variable

is the number of years of schooling that an individual has completed. Students currently studying

in school are excluded from our study sample because they do not have earnings. Our

7
    Other studies also have this potential problem of large political disruptions in schooling; the Harmon and Walker

(1995) study, for example, includes students impacted by World War II.
8
    These incomes from business, farming, gardening, fishing, and/or raising livestock are often at the household level

and these economic activities are run by the entire household. CHNS allocates these household-based incomes to

individual members according to the hours that individuals spend on those economic activities as a proportion of the

total hours spent by the entire household for the same type of economic activities.



                                                          - 20 -
multivariate framework controls for other explanatory variables, such as age, gender, ethnic

minority, marital status, urban residency, self-reported health status,9 province, and CHNS

survey wave. We use data from 1997 to 2006 to enlarge our sample size.10

Descriptive statistics

           We employ two levels of analysis. The first level comprises all the people who were born

in 1961 or later as the “All” sample. The second level moves to our restricted cohorts of people

aged 13, 14, 15, and 16 by the law’s effective dates in the various provinces. The restricted

cohorts are more homogenous, and the year-trend effects are minimal. Table 1 shows summary

statistics for the first level of analysis for three groups: the entire sample (“All”), the control

cohort (aged 15 or older by the law’s effective date), and the treatment cohort (less than 15 years

old on the law’s effective date). The descriptive statistics in Table 1 show that the average

educational attainment of individuals in the treatment cohort is indeed higher than that of the

control cohort (9.28 vs. 8.66) years, a difference that is statistically significant at the 1 percent

level. A comparison of the raw difference in income is more difficult to interpret, since multiple

forces impact individual income, including age and experience in the labor force. Since the

treatment cohort is, by definition, younger and came along later than the control cohort, average


9
    Health has been found to affect income significantly in China (Liu et al. 2008), but our estimation without

controlling for self-reported health status shows a similar trend as reported in the paper. The results without

controlling for health are available from the authors upon request.
10
     Earlier data from CHNS 1989-1993 are not used in this study. Very few observations that encompassed the period

of educational reform were included in that earlier data, since the Chinese Compulsory Education Law was not

enforced until 1986. CHNS is an unbalanced panel data set, so the same individual may appear in more than one

wave of the data. We have used a sample weight variable in the estimation to control for this issue as weighted

estimation.



                                                          - 21 -
earnings may be higher or lower depending on whether greater age outweighs income growth

over time. In our data, the treatment cohort is approximately ten years younger than the control

cohort, and this factor may work to reduce the average yearly earnings of the treatment cohort

relative to the control.

                                           (Insert Table 1)



5. Results

        Table 2 shows results from the first stage of the two-stage least squares (2SLS)

estimation. In the first column, the estimated coefficient of 0.79 on the dummy variable for being

less than 15 years old by the law’s effective date is statistically significant in the entire sample.

Next, we study the four-year period spanning immediately before and after implementation of

the compulsory education law (ages 13-16 by the law’s effective date in a given province). When

we study these selected control and treatment cohorts (the second column), the estimated

coefficient on the dummy variable for treatment year is 0.66 and is statistically significant. To

demonstrate that the treatment dummy does not merely proxy for year trends in education,

columns 3 and 4 show that a year dummy does not affect educational attainment either within the

two-year control cohort or within the two-year treatment cohort. A number of statistical tests of

our instrument also reveal that the instrument is valid in terms of the excluded-instrument test,

under-identification test, weak-identification test, and weak-instrument-robustness test. Our

results suggest that the Compulsory Education Law of 1986 did significantly raise educational

attainment and that these changes in schooling do not simply reflect a time trend toward more

schooling for younger cohorts.

                                           (Insert Table 2)




                                                 - 22 -
       Researchers are also interested in knowing the differential impact of compulsory

schooling by gender, urban versus rural residence, and inland versus coastal location. For

example, a stronger impact for girls might be expected, since lower overall schooling implies

that more girls than boys would be on the margin of being impacted by the law. Whether

compulsory schooling would raise schooling more in rural or urban areas is less clear, given

several countervailing forces. First, urban areas are more likely to have enforced the law strictly

on the legally effective date. Second, given their higher quality of schools, families in urban

areas may have been more likely to comply, thus reducing the costs of enforcement compared to

rural areas. However, rural areas are home to more children on the margin of dropping out of

junior high school, and therefore the requirement of 9 years of education would have a higher

impact in rural areas for a given enforcement level. A similar set of forces may have shaped the

effectiveness of the compulsory education law among inland and coastal provinces, with

enforcement in the less-developed inland provinces more likely compromised by lower-quality

governance (higher enforcement costs), lower-quality schools, and more limited local

opportunities for returns to education.

       As Table 3 shows, the OLS estimation of the first stage regression using our instrumental

variable finds that the marginal effects of the compulsory education law are highly significant

and positive for each of the different subsamples. The various tests of our instrumental variable

shown in Table 3 ensure its validity. We find that the law increases years of schooling for all

subgroups, but most strongly for girls (1.17 years) rather than for boys (0.4 years). The law also

increases years slightly more strongly in rural (compared to urban) and coastal (compared to

inland) areas.




                                               - 23 -
                                                    (Insert Table 3)

           We turn next to estimating the returns to education. Table 4 shows that without

addressing endogeneity (that is, using OLS) in the entire sample, one additional year of

schooling increases individual annual earnings by 9 percent. Using our IV in 2SLS, the marginal

effect becomes 20 percent. This result of higher estimated returns when controlling for

endogeneity is consistent with previous studies that use the features of schooling systems as

instruments (Angrist and Krueger 1991; Card 1999; Harmon and Walker 1995). The magnitude--

20 percent estimated returns--is slightly higher than the magnitudes found in those previous

studies, which focus on more developed countries.11

                                                    (Insert Table 4)

           The results in Table 5 show that our instrument remains valid even when using four years

of data, as we did with the two-year control cohort and two-year treatment cohort. For this more

narrowly defined sample, the marginal effect is 9 percent with OLS (significant at the 1 percent

level) and 26 percent using 2SLS (also significant at the 1 percent level). Further validation of

our identification strategy comes from the fact that the 2SLS coefficients are not statistically

significant either within the two-year control cohort or within the two-year treatment cohort.

This result is not surprising, given that the series of statistical tests reported in Table 2 reveals

that a year dummy within these two-year control or two-year treatment cohorts is not a good

instrument for educational attainment.

                                                    (Insert Table 5)



11
     Our estimates also reveal that controlling for endogeneity of education reduces the returns to being male and the

returns to age/experience, although both are still quite significant in explaining higher earnings. Controlling for

endogeneity also reduces the roles of health, province, and wave of data in explaining variation in earnings.



                                                          - 24 -
       Table 6 shows the marginal effect of one extra year of schooling on earnings. The

marginal effect is 9 percent for both females and males using OLS. However, when estimated

with 2SLS, the marginal effect for males increases to 51 percent, while that for females remains

essentially unchanged. This large marginal effect may be related to the relative weakness of our

instrument for males, as shown in Table 3.

                                          (Insert Table 6)

       In the OLS estimation, the returns to an additional year of schooling (8-9 percent) are the

same in rural and urban areas, but after correcting for the endogeneity of years of schooling in

the two-stage least squares estimation, the marginal effect rises to 18 percent for rural areas and

only 14 percent for urban areas.

       Turning to inland and coastal differences, we find that with OLS estimation, the marginal

effect of one additional year of schooling is 9 percent for both inland provinces and coastal

provinces. After addressing endogeneity with 2SLS, the marginal effect for coastal provinces

increases to 37 percent, and that for inland provinces moves only slightly higher to 12 percent.

       As a final sensitivity test, we examine two “placebo” (or hypothetical) law years, one

prior to the actual compulsory education law and one after the law went into effect. By definition,

the law was not implemented in these “placebo” years. For example, in no province was the law

implemented in 1984. If our results are truly capturing the impact of the compulsory education

law rather than a time trend, results should not also appear for a placebo year like 1984. We first

make the counterfactual assumption of implementation two years after the actual effective date

for a given province. To do so, we examine a sample of individuals aged 15 and 16 on the law’s

actual effective date (Cohort 1) compared to a sample aged 17 and 18 on the law’s actual

effective date. We find that a dummy variable for Cohort 2 does not affect educational




                                               - 25 -
attainment. Thus, a placebo law of two years earlier shows no significant effect. These results are

reported in Table 7.

                                           (Insert Table 7)

       Similarly, we study a sample of individuals whose birth dates make them the first four

years of students after the compulsory education law went into effect. These two cohorts of

youths include those aged 11 and 12 by the law’s effective date (Cohort 3) and those aged 13 and

14 by the law’s effective date (Cohort 4). We find that a dummy variable for being in Cohort 4

affects education, but its coefficient is only 0.25. In addition, this instrument cannot pass the

weak-instrument test, and the F statistic in the first stage is only 3.65 (much less than 10). Thus,

although there does appear to be a year trend of increasing education within the two two-year

cohorts immediately following the compulsory education law, an instrument based on being born

in Cohort 4 is not valid. These placebo-law results--employing the same strategy as we did with

our main results--show no significant impact of a counterfactual “law” either two years earlier or

two years later than the actual first enforcement of the law. These results offer reassurance that

our 2SLS results in Table 4 are capturing the impact of the actual compulsory education law.


6. Discussion and Conclusion

       In the early 1960s one-third of Chinese were illiterate; now, fewer than 5 percent are

(Peng 2011). In 1986 China’s central government passed a law requiring 9 years of education,

and over the subsequent several years, provincial authorities began enforcing compulsory

education in their localities. By 2010 China had 8,930 college graduates for every 100,000

people, with about 120 million having a college degree (Peng 2011). A comparatively educated

labor force has been singled out as one important determinant of China’s unprecedented

economic growth since the early 1980s. Yet, to date, no study has definitively shown whether the



                                                - 26 -
1986 compulsory education law played a causal role in China’s substantial increases in education,

and whether the law benefited the individuals whom it compelled to stay in school, by yielding

significant returns at the individual level. China’s case also has broad implications for

understanding the role of education in economic development and whether returns to education

in a globalized world have converged toward similar levels.

       In this study, we test whether the China Compulsory Education Law of 1986 raised

educational attainment overall and in specific subpopulations. We then use the phased

implementation of compulsory education across provinces as an instrument to estimate the

returns to each additional year of schooling in contemporary China.

       Our first main finding is that the law increased years of schooling by about 0.8 years on

average, with slightly higher effects for rural and coastal areas, compared to urban or inland

areas. These results may reflect the interplay of many factors, including the fact that enforcement

of the law was probably least stringent in precisely those regions where the most people could

benefit from such a law, that is, in less developed rural areas. The compulsory education law also

increased years of schooling strikingly more for girls (1.17 years) than for boys (0.4 years).

       Our second main result is that, as China transformed from a socialist planned economy to

a market-oriented economy, its returns to education rose to meet those found in established

market economies around the globe. Using the effective implementation date of the law in each

province as an instrumental variable to control for endogeneity of schooling, we estimate that

that the overall returns to schooling are approximately 20 percent for one additional year of

schooling. This estimate is fairly comparable with – albeit somewhat higher than – the double-

digit returns found in most Western countries. These higher returns might be expected in a

rapidly growing economy when there are diminishing returns to additional years of schooling;




                                               - 27 -
those affected by the compulsory schooling law are on the lower range of the schooling

distribution and have higher-than-average returns to an additional year of schooling (Card 1999).

Because of the law, those individuals are better equipped to move from unskilled to semi-skilled

jobs as the economy develops.12

           We also report results exploring how returns to education vary by gender, by urban vs.

rural regions, and by inland vs. coastal provinces. We find that the estimated returns to schooling

are significantly higher for men (50 percent) than for women (10 percent), and higher for

individuals from rural and coastal areas than from other areas of China.

           The striking gender difference in returns could arise from several factors. With more boys

than girls already completing middle school education before the law, the first stage impact was

lower for boys than girls. The boys affected by the compulsory schooling law were even lower in

the range of the male schooling distribution than the girls were in the female schooling

distribution. The men would therefore be expected to have higher-than-average returns to an

additional year of schooling. Higher labor market returns to schooling for men probably are also

related to lingering differences in the occupations and wages for women relative to men in China,

consistent with existing literature (P. Liu et al. 2000; Rozelle et al. 2002) showing a gender gap




12
     Our estimate also is approximately double the returns to schooling estimated by OLS without controlling for

endogeneity. Previous studies have often shown that the returns to education by IV estimation are larger than those

by OLS estimation, and the results in the present study are consistent with this literature. For example, Trostel et al.

(2002) estimate the economic returns to education for 28 countries. They find that correcting for the endogeneity of

education using various instrumental variables increases the estimated returns to education by more than 20 percent,

compared to those estimated by OLS.



                                                         - 28 -
in employment opportunities and earnings.13 Although higher returns might therefore be

expected for men, the large magnitude of the difference we found suggests that our instrumental

variable approach has limits for estimating the more generalizable difference in returns to

education by gender, which merits further research.

           Highly educated people in rural China are scarcer than in urban China, so the returns to

education would be expected to be higher in the rural areas. We estimate that the higher rural

returns are concentrated mostly in coastal rather than inland rural areas. These higher returns for

coastal provinces may reflect overall “better governance,” including better enforcement of the

law (consistent with the first-stage results in Table 3), as well as better transport infrastructure

and more vibrant off-farm economies that would facilitate employment for those with sufficient

schooling. Lack of any statistically significant returns to education in inland provinces may arise

because the inland areas suffer from lower-quality schools (a factor not evaluated here).

Moreover, with constraints on inter-provincial permanent migration, the increase in population

with junior high school education could have begun to saturate the market for low-skill industrial

workers in inland areas, depressing the wages relative to more skilled (senior high school and

above) workers. Further study, with controls for school quality, should investigate this

geographic difference in returns to education and our conjectured explanations.




13
     Women’s overall employment rates declined in the reform era (compared to very high female labor-force

participation in the Mao era). In addition, our sample is relatively young, so that the women are concentrated in their

child-bearing years and may suffer an earnings loss compared to the control group of women who are older and

mostly past their child-bearing years. (Recall that the average age of the treatment group is 24.7 years old, compared

to 35.6 for the control cohort; see Table 1.) A larger allocation of family business earnings to men than to women

could also be playing a role in the large gender difference in returns.



                                                         - 29 -
           We employed numerous sensitivity analyses to check the robustness of our results.

Nevertheless, several limitations of the present study should be noted. First, we employ a

threshold date as the instrument for education, but we know that not all regions within the same

provinces implemented the new law equally and immediately, and we cannot completely rule out

a year-trend effect. Second, the China Health and Nutrition Survey data only cover 9 provinces,

and thus is not nationally representative. Our results do not generalize to all of China. Third, the

cohorts impacted by the 1986 China Compulsory Education Law are still relatively young, and

we are unable to look at the returns to education over a lifetime of earnings. Fourth, the treatment

and control cohorts are not homogenous in terms of age, although our two-year restricted cohorts

were employed to minimize this limitation. Fifth, the CHNS data precludes separately

identifying migrants from rural to urban areas (either temporary or permanent); China’s

urbanization has been rapid, and the returns to education for migrant workers may be different.

Moreover, some of their gains may be due to migration to higher-wage areas, as a byproduct of

seeking education, rather than due to the education itself. Sixth, the power of our instrumental

variable is probably reduced by the uneven implementation of the compulsory schooling laws.

           The present study provides updated results to the literature regarding returns to education

in China by employing data collected between 1997 and 2006. Most previous studies use data

from before 1995.14 The returns to education in China have increased from less than 5 percent

prior to the early 1990s to about 20 percent during the period of 1997 to 2006. The updated

returns to education in China reflect a significant increase in returns, converging to levels

comparable to or exceeding those in Western countries. As China’s economy has transitioned


14
     Heckman and Li (2004) use data from 2000, and Zhang et al. (2005) use data from 2001; but the data in the

present study covers multiple years from 1997 to 2006.



                                                         - 30 -
from its previous socialist redistributive institutions and become much more deeply integrated

into the global market, equivalent returns to education are now being realized.



Acknowledgments:

We thank Ang Sun and participants in the Sixteenth International Economics Association

Congress on July 4-8, 2011 in Beijing for helpful comments on an earlier draft.


References

Angrist, J.D., Krueger, A.B., 1991. Does compulsory school attendance affect schooling and
earnings? Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106, 979-1014.

Appleton, S., Song, L., Xia, Q., 2005. Has China crossed the river? The evolution of wage structure
in urban China during reform and retrenchment. Journal of Comparative Economics. 33, 644–663.

Ashenfelter, O., Rouse, C.E., 1998. Income, schooling and ability: evidence from a new sample
of identical twins. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 253-284.

Becker, G.S., 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education. Columbia University Press: New York.

Brown, P. H., Park, A., 2002. Education and poverty in rural China. Economics of Education
Review. 21(6), 523-541.

Byron, R.P., Manaloto, E.Q., 1990. Returns to education in China. Economic Development and
Cultural Change. 38(4), 783-796.

Card, D., 1995. Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to
schooling. In Christofides LN, Grant Kenneth, Swidinsky R eds. Aspects of Labour Market
Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp. University of Toronto Press: Toronto
Canada, pp. 201-222.

Card, D., 1999. The causal effect of education on earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics,
Edited by Ashenfelter O and Card D. Volume 3 (Part 1): 1801-1863.




                                              - 31 -
China Ministry of Education. 1986. Compulsory Education Law of People’s Republic of China
1986. http://www.edu.cn/20060303/3176577.shtml, accessed on 04/02/2011.

Connelly, R., Zheng, Z., 2003. Determinants of school enrollment and completion of 10 to 18
year olds in China. Economics of Education Review. 22(4), 379-388.

Fan, C.C., 2005. Interprovincial migration, population redistribution, and regional development
in China: 1990 and 2000 Census comparisons. The Professional Geographer. 57(2), 295-311.

Fleisher, B.M., 2005. Returns to schooling in transition: the Chinese, European, and Russian
experiences. Journal of Comparative Economics. 33(2), 223-226.

Fleisher, B.M., Sabirianova, K., Wang X., 2005. Returns to skills and the speed of reforms: Evidence
from Central and Eastern Europe, China, and Russia. Journal of Comparative Economics. 33, 351–
370.

Fleisher, B.M., Wang, X., 2004. Skill differentials, return to schooling, and market segmentation
in a transition economy: the case of Mainland China. Journal of Development Economics. 73,
315– 328.

Fleisher, B.M., Wang, X., 2005. Returns to schooling in China under planning and reform.
Journal of Comparative Economics. 33(2): 265-277.

Griliches, Z., 1970. Notes on the role of education in production functions and growth
accounting. In Hansen L ed. Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol 35. Columbia University Press:
New York.

Griliches, Z., 1977. Estimating the returns to schooling: some econometric problems.
Econometrica. 45: 1-22.

Gustafsson, B. Li, S., 2000. Economic transformation and the gender earnings gap

in urban China. Journal of Population Economics. 13, 305-329.

Gustafsson, B.,Li, S., 2001. The Anatomy of Rising Earnings Inequality in Urban China. Journal
of Comparative Economics. 29, 118–135.

Hannum, E., 2003. Poverty and basic education in rural China: Villages, households, and girls'
and boys' enrollment,. Comparative Education Review. 47(2), 141-159.




                                               - 32 -
Harmon, C., Walker, I., 1995. Estimates of the economic return to schooling for the United
Kingdom. American Economic Review. 85: 1278-1286.

Hawkins, J.N., 2000. Centralization, decentralization, recentralization--educational reform in
China. Journal of Educational Administration. 38(5), 442-455.

Heckman, J.J., 2003. China’s investment in human capital. Economic Development and Cultural
Change. 51(4), 795-804.

Heckman, J.J., Li, X., 2004. Selection bias, comparative advantage and heterogeneous returns to
education: evidence from China in 2000. Pacific Economic Review. 9(3), 155-171.

Johnson, D.G., 2003. Provincial migration in China in the 1990s. China Economic Review. 14(1),
22-31.

Johnson, E.N., Chow, G.C., 1997. Rates of return to schooling in China. Pacific Economic
Review. 2(2), 101-113.

Kane, T.J., Rouse, C.E., 1993. Labor market returns to two- and four-year colleges: is a credit a
credit and do degrees matter? NBER Working Paper no. 4268.

Knight, J., Song, L., 2003. Increasing urban wage inequality in China: Extent, elements and
evaluation. Economics of Transition 11(4), 597–619.

Li. H., 2003. Economic transition and returns to education in China. Economics of Education
Review. 22(3), 317-328.

Li, H., Luo, Y., 2004. Reporting errors, ability heterogeneity, and returns to schooling in China.
Pacific Economic Review. 9(3), 191-207.

Li, H., Liu, P., Ma, N., Zhang, J., 2005. Does education pay in urban China? Estimating returns
to education using twins. City University of Hong Kong working paper,
http://www.econ.cuhk.edu.hk/~discusspaper/00013.pdf

Liu, P., Meng, X., Zhang, J., 2000. Sectoral gender wage differentials and discrimination in the
transitional Chinese economy. Journal of Population Economics, 13(2), 331-352.

Liu, Z., 1998. Earnings, education, and economic reforms in urban China. Economic
Development and Cultural Change. 46(4), 697-725.




                                               - 33 -
Maurer-Fazio, M., 1999. Earnings and education in China’s transition to a market economy:
survey evidence from 1989 and 1992. China Economic Review. 10(1), 17-40.

Mincer, J., 1974. Schooling, Experience and Earning. Columbia University Press: New York.

Peng, X. 2011. China's Demographic History and Future Challenges. Science 333, 581-587.

Psacharopoulos, G., Patrinos, H.A., 2004. Returns to investment in education: a further update.
Education Economics. 12(2), 111 — 134

Rozelle, S., Dong, X., Zhang, L., Mason, A., 2002. Gender wage gaps in post-reform rural China.
Pacific Economic Review. 7(1), 157-179.

Song, Y., 2012. Poverty reduction in China: The contribution of popularizing primary education.
China & World Economy. 20(1), 105–122.

Staiger, D., Stock, J.H., 1997. Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
Econometrica. 65: 557-586.

Trostel, P., Walker, I., Woolley, P., 2002. Estimates of the economic return to schooling for 28
countries. Labor Economics, 9(1), 1-16.

Tsang, M.C., 1994. Costs of education in China: issues of resource mobilization, equality, equity,
and efficiency. Education Economics. 2(3), 287-312.

------, 1996. Financial reform of basic education in China. Economics of Education Review.
15(4), 423-444.

------, 2000. Education and national development in China since 1949: Oscillating policies and
enduring dilemmas. China Review. 579-618.

World Bank. 2011. China Overview. http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/china/overview
(accessed on November 13, 2011).

Wu, X., Xie, Y., 2003. Does the market pay off? Earnings returns to education in urban China.
American Sociological Review. 68(3), 425-442.

Yang, D.T., 2004. Education and allocative efficiency: household income growth during rural
reforms in China. Journal of Development Economics,74, 137– 162.




                                              - 34 -
Yang, D.T., 2005. Determinants of schooling returns during transition: evidence from Chinese
cities. Journal of Comparative Economics. 33(2), 244-264.

Zhang, X., Kanbur, R., 2005. Spatial inequality in education and health care in China. China
Economic Review. 16(2), 189-204.

Zhang, J., Zhao, Y., Park, A., Song, X., 2005. Economic returns to schooling in urban China,
1988 to 2001. Journal of Comparative Economics. 33(4), 730-752.

Zhang, L., Huang, J. Rozelle, S., 2002. Employment, emerging labor markets, and the role of
education in rural China. China Economic Review. 13, 313–328.

Zhou, X., 2000. Economic transformation and income inequality in urban China: Evidence from
panel data. American Journal of Sociology, 105(4), 1135-1174.




                                             - 35 -
Table 1: Descriptive statistics

 Variablea                              All              Control cohortb    Treatment cohortb    P valuec
 Sample size                        N = 11271              N = 7380             N = 3891
 Treatmentb                               0.35                   0.00                1.00           N/A
 School years completed                   8.88                   8.66                9.28          <0.01
                                        ( 3.07   )             ( 3.17 )            ( 2.84 )
 Yearly earnings in natural
                                          8.44                  8.56                 8.21          <0.01
 log
                                        ( 1.22   )            ( 1.09    )          ( 1.39   )

 Age                                     31.83                  35.57               24.74          <0.01
                                        ( 7.12   )             ( 4.93   )          ( 4.88   )
 Male                                     0.51                   0.50                0.52           0.07
 Race minority                            0.13                   0.12                0.15          <0.01
 Married                                  0.75                   0.90                0.47          <0.01
 Urban                                    0.25                   0.27                0.21          <0.01
 Health status                                                                                     <0.01
   Excellent                             0.19                 0.17             0.24
   Good                                  0.58                 0.58             0.58
   Fair                                  0.21                 0.22             0.17
   Poor                                  0.02                 0.02             0.01
 Province                                                                                          <0.01
   Heilongjiang                          0.14                 0.13             0.15
   Liaoning                              0.07                 0.08             0.07
   Jiangsu                               0.12                 0.12             0.13
   Shandong                              0.09                 0.09             0.11
   Henan                                 0.11                 0.10             0.14
   Hubei                                 0.11                 0.12             0.10
   Hunan                                 0.09                 0.11             0.05
   Guangxi                               0.13                 0.16             0.08
   Guizhou                               0.13                 0.11             0.16
 CHNS wave                                                                                         <0.01
   1997                                  0.27                 0.28             0.26
   2000                                  0.21                 0.22             0.19
   2004                                  0.26                 0.25             0.28
   2006                                  0.26                 0.25             0.27
 Data source: China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS) 1997, 2000, 2004, and 2006.
 a
  Standard deviations are reported in parentheses for continuous variables.
 b
  The control cohort includes respondents that were not affected by the 1986 China Compulsory
 Education Law, and the treatment cohort includes respondents that were affected by the 1986 China
 Compulsory Education Law. The effective dates of the 1986 China Compulsory Education Law in the
 different provinces varied. We define the sample so that a treatment respondent was less than 15 years
 old on the law’s effective date in the province where he or she lived, and a control respondent was 15
 years or older on the effective date.
 c
  Chi-square tests for categorical variables and students’ t tests for continuous variables between the
 control cohort and treatment cohort.
 N/A: not applicable.




                                                     - 36 -
Table 2: The impact of the compulsory schooling law on years of schooling: Selected results from the first stage of the 2-stage least

squares estimation (2SLS)

First stage estimation in 2SLS                             School years completed is the dependent variable (OLS coefficient)a
                                                                  Two-year control
                                                                                             Two-year              Two-year
                                                         All        and two-year
                                                                                          control cohort       treatment cohort
                                                                  treatment cohort
Age on the date the law was implemented                  N/A      13 - 16 years old      15 - 16 years old     13 - 14 years old
Instrumental variable
   Less than 15 years old by the effective date        0.79***          0.66***
   (Treatment dummy of compulsory education law)       (0.11)           (0.14)

   Less than 16 years old by the effective date                                                  0.12
   (Year dummy variable)                                                                        (0.21)

   Less than 14 years old by the effective date                                                                         0.38**
   (Year dummy variable)                                                                                                (0.18)

Test of excluded instruments
   F statistic                                             54.78***            21.85***          0.33                  4.23**
Under-identification tests
   Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                         55.15***            21.79***          0.33                  4.28**
   Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic                       54.89***            22.06***          0.33                  4.32**
Weak identification test
   Kleibegen-Paap Wald rk F statisticb                      54.78*              21.85*           0.33                    4.23
Weak-instrument-robust inference
   Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F statistic                   10.69***             9.97***          0.41                    0.03
   Anderson-Rubin Wald test: Chi-square statistic          10.71***            10.07***          0.40                    0.03
   Stock-Wright LM S statistic                             10.69***             9.98***          0.40                    0.03
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.
a
  All the estimations have controlled for other explanatory variables in Table 1.
b
  10% maximal IV size as the Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values is 16.38, and smaller maximal IV sizes are not available in
Stock-Yogo (2005).
N/A: not applicable.



                                                                     - 37 -
Table 3: The impact of the compulsory schooling law by gender and location: Selected results of the first stage estimation in 2SLS for

various sub-populations

First stage estimation in 2SLS                               School years completed is the dependent variable (OLS coefficient)a
                                                          Female        Male         Rural         Urban         Inland       Coastal
Instrumental variable
    Less than 15 years old by the effective date          1.17***      0.40***       0.82***      0.76***       0.72***       0.83***
    (Treatment dummy of compulsory education law)         (0.15)       (0.15)        (0.16)       (0.21)        (0.12)        (0.22)


Test of excluded instruments
  F statistic                                             59.84***     7.36***      45.96***      21.68***      35.02***      14.43***
Under-identification tests
  Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                        60.00***      7.43***      46.26***      12.91***      35.34***      14.49***
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic                      60.06***      7.39***      46.07***      12.78***      35.10***      14.51***
Weak identification test
  Kleibegen-Paap Wald rk F statisticb                     59.84*        7.36         45.96*        12.68         35.02*        14.43
Weak-instrument-robust inference
  Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F statistic                    3.33*       8.56***       6.47***        2.05          2.21        15.18***
  Anderson-Rubin Wald test: Chi-square statistic           3.34*       8.59***       6.48***        2.06          2.22        15.26***
  Stock-Wright LM S statistic                              3.34*       8.54***       6.47***        2.06          2.22        15.01***
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.
a
  All estimations have controlled for the other explanatory variables in Table 1. Descriptive statistics for these subpopulations are
given in the appendix table.
b
 10% maximal IV size as the Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values is 16.38, and smaller maximal IV sizes are not available in
Stock-Yogo (2005).




                                                                       - 38 -
Table 4: Returns to schooling results by OLS and 2SLS for CHNS respondents born after 1961

(the “All” sample)

Variable                                          OLS                             2SLS
                                        Coeff.       S.E.                Coeff.       S.E.
School years completed                    0.09   *** (0.004)               0.20   *** (0.06)
Age                                       0.25   *** (0.02)                0.22   *** (0.02)
Age squared                               0.00   *** (0.0003)              0.00   *** (0.0003)
Male                                      0.21   *** (0.02)                0.15   *** (0.04)
Race minority                            -0.12   *** (0.05)               -0.09   *   (0.05)
Married                                  -0.14   *** (0.04)               -0.06       (0.06)
Urban                                     0.19   *** (0.03)               -0.10       (0.16)
Health status
   Excellent (reference)
   Good                                   -0.04        (0.03)               -0.05       (0.03)
   Fair                                   -0.15 *** (0.04)                  -0.14 *** (0.04)
   Poor                                   -0.34 *** (0.10)                  -0.24 ** (0.12)
Province
   Heilongjiang (reference)
   Liaoning                                0.11 ** (0.06)                    0.03       (0.07)
   Jiangsu                                 0.50 *** (0.04)                   0.44 *** (0.05)
   Shandong                                0.14 *** (0.05)                   0.11 ** (0.05)
   Henan                                  -0.19 *** (0.05)                  -0.20 *** (0.05)
   Hubei                                  -0.17 *** (0.05)                  -0.16 *** (0.05)
   Hunan                                   0.02        (0.05)               -0.05       (0.07)
   Guangxi                                -0.04        (0.05)               -0.02       (0.05)
   Guizhou                                -0.21 *** (0.05)                  -0.14 ** (0.07)
CHNS wave
   1997 (reference)
   2000                                   -0.01        (0.03)               -0.07       (0.05)
   2004                                    0.15 *** (0.04)                   0.04       (0.08)
   2006                                    0.43 *** (0.04)                   0.28 *** (0.10)
Constant                                   3.24 *** (0.28)                   2.64 *** (0.48)
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                     - 39 -
Table 5: Robustness check on instrument

                                     Two-year control
Yearly earning in natural log                                       Two-year                    Two-year
                                      and Two-year
as the dependent variablea                                        control cohort            treatment cohort
                                    treatment cohorts
Age by the effective date           13 - 16 years old           15 - 16 years old          13 - 14 years old
                                   Coeff.       S.E.           Coeff.       S.E.          Coeff.       S.E.
OLS
  School years completed             0.09   ***   (0.01)        0.09    ***   (0.01)        0.10   ***   (0.02)

2SLSb
  School years completed             0.26   ***   (0.09)        0.54          (1.11)        0.04         (0.22)
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.
a
    All estimations have controlled for the other explanatory variables in Table 1.
b
    Using the instrumental variables as those in Table 3 for various study cohorts respectively.




                                                     - 40 -
Table 6: Selected results by gender, urbanization, and province location (the “All” sample)

The dependent variable is the annual income             Coefficients on "School years completed"
in natural log                                                 OLS                            2SLS
                                                      Coeff.         S.E.            Coeff.          S.E.
By gender
  Female                                                0.09   ***   (0.01)           0.10     *     (0.05)
  Male                                                  0.09   ***   (0.01)           0.51     **    (0.23)

By urbanization
  Rural                                                 0.09   ***   (0.01)           0.18     ***   (0.07)
  Urban                                                 0.08   ***   (0.01)           0.14           (0.09)

By province location
  Inland provinces                                      0.09   ***   (0.01)           0.12           (0.08)
  Coastal provinces                                     0.09   ***   (0.01)           0.37     ***   (0.12)
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                                            - 41 -
Table 7: Selected results for the sensitivity analysis using “placebo” law years

                                                           Four-year                Four-year
School years completed is the dependent                  control cohort         treatment cohort
variablea                                                (cohort 1 and            (cohort 3 and
                                                            cohort 2)               cohort 4)
Age by the effective date                               15 - 18 years old       11 - 14 years old
The first stage estimation in 2SLS
Instrumental variable
   Less than 17 years old by the effective date               0.21
   (year dummy variable)                                     (0.14)

   Less than 13 years old by the effective date                                       0.25*
   (year dummy variable)                                                              (0.14)

Test of excluded instruments
  F statistic                                                 2.28                    3.64*
Under-identification tests
  Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                             2.29                    3.66*
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic                           2.3                     3.68*
Weak identification test
  Kleibegen-Paap Wald rk F statisticb                         2.28                    3.64
Weak-instrument-robust inference
  Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F statistic                      3.10*                    2.90*
  Anderson-Rubin Wald test: Chi-square statistic             3.13*                    2.93*
  Stock-Wright LM S statistic                                3.13*                    2.93*

The second stage estimation in 2SLS
  School years completed                                            0.44                      0.43
                                                                   (0.33)                    (0.29)
* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.
a
 All estimations have controlled for the other explanatory variables in Table 1.
b
 10% maximal IV size as the Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values is 16.38, and smaller maximal
IV sizes are not available in Stock-Yogo (2005).




                                                                      - 42 -
Appendix: Descriptive statistics by sub-populations
Variable                        Female           Male         Rural         Urban         Inland       Coastal
Sample size                     N=5574        N=5697        N=8468        N=2803        N=7994         N=3277
Treatmenta                         0.34          0.35          0.36          0.29           0.34          0.36
Yearly earning in natural log      8.32          8.56          8.29          8.88           8.29          8.79
                                 ( 1.18   )    ( 1.24   )    ( 1.27   )    ( 0.90   )    ( 1.23    )    ( 1.11   )
School years completed             8.46          9.29          8.14         11.09           8.73          9.24
                                 ( 3.27   )    ( 2.81   )    ( 2.84   )    ( 2.67   )    ( 2.99    )    ( 3.23   )
Age                             ( 32.12   )   ( 31.54   )   ( 31.36   )   ( 33.23   )   ( 31.45    )   ( 32.74   )
                                   7.04          7.18          7.25          6.51           7.16          6.94
Male                               0.00          1.00          0.51          0.51           0.51          0.49
Race minority                      0.13          0.13          0.14          0.09           0.15          0.08
Married                            0.79          0.71          0.75          0.76           0.74          0.78
Urban                              0.25          0.25          0.00          1.00           0.25          0.24
Health status
  Excellent                        0.16          0.22          0.18          0.23          0.16           0.27
  Good                             0.58          0.58          0.59          0.56          0.59           0.55
  Fair                             0.23          0.18          0.21          0.19          0.22           0.17
  Poor                             0.02          0.02          0.02          0.01          0.02           0.01
Province
  Heilongjiang                     0.13          0.14          0.13          0.15          0.19           0.00
  Liaoning                         0.08          0.07          0.08          0.06          0.00           0.25
  Jiangsu                          0.13          0.11          0.12          0.13          0.00           0.42
  Shandong                         0.09          0.09          0.09          0.10          0.00           0.32
  Henan                            0.11          0.12          0.11          0.12          0.16           0.00
  Hubei                            0.12          0.11          0.11          0.12          0.16           0.00
  Hunan                            0.09          0.09          0.08          0.11          0.13           0.00
  Guangxi                          0.13          0.13          0.14          0.10          0.18           0.00
  Guizhou                          0.12          0.13          0.13          0.11          0.18           0.00
CHNS wave
  1997                             0.27          0.28          0.28          0.25          0.29           0.21
  2000                             0.20          0.22          0.22          0.20          0.21           0.22
  2004                             0.26          0.25          0.26          0.27          0.25           0.28
  2006                             0.27          0.25          0.25          0.28          0.25           0.29




                                                            - 43 -
a
 The control cohort includes respondents that were not affected by the 1986 China Compulsory Education Law, and the treatment
cohort includes respondents that were affected by the 1986 China Compulsory Education Law. The effective dates of the 1986
China Compulsory Education Law in the different provinces varied. We define the sample so that a treatment respondent was less
than 15 years old on the law’s effective date in the province where he or she lived, and a control respondent was 15 years or older
on the effective date.




                                                                     - 44 -
