                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      FRAGMENTATION AND TRADE IN VALUE ADDED OVER FOUR DECADES

                                         Robert C. Johnson
                                         Guillermo Noguera

                                        Working Paper 18186
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18186


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We thank Rudolfs Bems, Emily Blanchard, Donald Davis, Andreas Moxnes, Nina Pavcnik, Jonathan
Vogel, David Weinstein, and Kei-Mu Yi for helpful conversations, as well as seminar participants
at Columbia, the IMF, MIT, the NBER Spring ITI Meetings, University of Colorado, and University
of Houston. Johnson thanks the Rockefeller-Haney fund at Dartmouth College for financial support,
and Joseph Celli, Michael Lenkeit, and Sean Zhang for research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert C. Johnson and Guillermo Noguera. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Fragmentation and Trade in Value Added over Four Decades
Robert C. Johnson and Guillermo Noguera
NBER Working Paper No. 18186
June 2012
JEL No. F1

                                           ABSTRACT

We combine data on trade, production, and input use to compute the value added content of trade for
forty-two countries from 1970 to 2009. For the world, the ratio of value added to gross trade falls
by ten to fifteen percentage points, with two-thirds of this decline in the last two decades. Across
countries, declines range from zero to twenty-five percentage points, with large declines concentrated
among countries undergoing structural transformation. Across bilateral trade partners, declines are
larger for nearby partners and partners that adopt regional trade agreements. That is, both policy and
non-policy trade costs shape production fragmentation.


Robert C. Johnson
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
robert.c.johnson@dartmouth.edu

Guillermo Noguera
Columbia Business School
325-F Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
gn2195@columbia.edu
    Recent decades have seen the emergence of global supply chains in which production
stages are sliced up and distributed across countries. Despite their prominence, we lack a
comprehensive understanding of the causes and consequences of this production fragmen-
tation. One reason is that measuring changes in supply chains across countries and over
time in a systematic way has proven difficult. A fundamental challenge is that the national
accounts record data on gross shipments of goods across borders, not the locations at which
value is added at different stages of the production process. Yet for many questions, ranging
from how global supply chains influence income distribution to how they transmit shocks
across borders, what we care about is how fragments of value added are combined via the
global supply chain to form final goods.1 That is, we would like to pierce the veil of the
gross flows and measure trade in value added directly.
    This paper computes and analyzes the value added content of trade over the last four
decades (1970-2009). In doing so, we make three main contributions. First, we combine
time series data on trade, production, and input use to construct an annual sequence of
global input-output tables covering forty-two countries back to 1970. For each year, we link
national input-output tables together using bilateral trade data to form a synthetic global
input-output table that tracks shipments of final and intermediate goods between countries.
We then use this global table to compute ‘value added exports.’ Analogous to gross exports,
value added exports measure the amount of value added from a given source country that is
consumed in each destination (i.e., embodied in final goods absorbed in that destination).
    In the aggregate, the ratio of value added to gross exports measures the extent of double-
counting in trade statistics, an important metric of production fragmentation in the context
of models of sequential, multi-stage production.2 At the bilateral level, the ratio of value
added to gross trade is a marker for both bilateral production chains, as well as multi-country
production chains in which value added transits through third countries en route from source
to destination. Therefore, changes in the ratio of value added to gross trade through time are
a metric for changes in the structure of cross-border supply chains. Measuring these changes
is a prerequisite both for empirical work aimed at identifying the fundamental drivers of
fragmentation and for calibrating models that measure the consequences of rising fragmen-
tation.
   1
     As Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2007, p.66-67) put it: “The measurement of trade as gross values of
imports and exports was perhaps appropriate at a time when trade flows comprised mostly finished goods.
But such measures are inadequate to the task of measuring the extent of a country’s international integration
in a world with global supply chains...we would like to know the sources of the value added embodied in the
goods and the uses to which the goods are eventually put.”
   2
     For example, see Dixit and Grossman (1982), Yi (2003, 2010), Baldwin and Venables (2010), or Costinot,
Vogel, and Wang (forthcoming). Standard ‘gravity-style’ trade models also often include an input-output
loop that can be interpreted as a multi-stage production process.



                                                     2
    Our second contribution is to document new stylized facts regarding the evolution of
fragmentation for the world as a whole, individual countries, and among bilateral trade
partners. For the world as a whole, the ratio of value added to gross exports – henceforth
the ‘VAX ratio’ for short – is declining over time, falling by ten to fifteen percentage points
over four decades. Interestingly, this decline is not uniform through time: the world VAX
ratio falls during the 1970’s, is stable through the 1980’s, and then falls dramatically during
the 1990’s. The decline in the VAX ratio after 1990 is roughly three times as fast as the
decline prior to 1990.
    Beneath these global results, both the magnitude and timing of declines in VAX ratios
differ across countries and bilateral trading partners. Across countries, the median decline
is roughly −0.13 (for the Netherlands or France), with an interdecile range of −0.24 (for
Ireland) to −0.04 (for the United Kingdom or Japan). We show that declines tend to be
largest for fast growing countries undergoing structural transformation, but some advanced
countries (e.g., Germany) also experience large declines. Across bilateral partners, there is
also ample variation. For example, the VAX ratio falls by 0.29 for U.S. exports to Mexico,
but is nearly unchanged for U.S. exports to Japan. This bilateral variation reflects both
changes in the extent to which exports to a given destination are used in production of
exports (i.e., the extent of vertical specialization in the destination), as well as changes in
how a given source country serves the destination via third markets.
    Our third contribution is to show that trade barriers are significant determinants of
changes in fragmentation patterns. Among non-policy trade barriers, distance is particularly
important. In the cross-section, bilateral VAX ratios are higher for distant trading partners,
meaning that on average value added exports ‘travel further’ than gross exports. In the
time series, distance is a strong predictor of changes in the VAX ratio, with the largest
declines in VAX ratios concentrated among proximate trading partners.3 While both gross
and value added trade become more sensitive to distance over time, the change for gross
trade is significantly larger than trade in value added. This suggests that fragmentation
may be important in explaining the increasing influence of distance on trade, highlighted by
Disdier and Head (2008).
    Turning to policy trade barriers, we show that regional trade agreements have large
effects on bilateral VAX ratios. In levels, these agreements raise both gross and value added
trade, but gross trade rises substantially more. For a typical agreement, gross trade rises by
around 30% and value added trade rises by 23%, so the VAX ratio falls by 7%. Further, deep
trade agreements (e.g., common markets and economic unions) are associated with larger
declines in VAX ratios than shallow agreements (e.g., preferential agreements or free trade
  3
      See Johnson and Noguera (2012b) for additional results on distance and fragmentation.


                                                     3
agreements). These results demonstrate that trade policy changes influence fragmentation.
They are also interesting in light of the fact that many agreements were explicitly adopted to
promote integration of production chains across borders, yet systematic evidence that they
have succeeded in this goal is scarce.
    Our study contributes to an active recent literature on global input-output linkages.4 To
date, this literature mostly focuses on measuring trade in value added over short time spans,
often a single recent year. In contrast, we focus here on changes over long periods of time.
In that focus, our work is closely related to Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001), who constructed
measures of the import content of exports for ten countries from 1970 to 1990. Our work
extends both country and time coverage relative to Hummels et al. Most importantly, the
global input-output framework we use allows us to measure changes in value added trade at
the bilateral level, a dimension of the data that has been under-explored.5
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 articulates the input-output framework we use
to construct measures of trade in value added, and Section 2 discusses interpretation of value
added trade flows. Section 3 then describes how we construct the empirical counterpart to
this framework from available data, with details on data and methods in the appendix.
Section 4 provides a general overview of variation in VAX ratios through time for the world,
individual countries, and bilateral trade partners. We then explore the role of trade costs in
shaping bilateral flows in detail in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.


1       Tracking Value Added in Global Supply Chains
We begin by laying out the global input-output framework, drawing on the exposition in
Johnson and Noguera (2012a). We then demonstrate how to compute the value added
content of trade. The basic procedure has two main steps. First, using the global input
requirements matrix, we compute the total output from each country and sector needed to
produce the vector of final goods absorbed in a given destination. Second, we use source
country value added to export ratios to compute the domestic value added embodied in that
output.
    4
     Among others, see Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2010), Trefler and Zhu (2010), Daudin, Rifflart, and
Schweisguth (2011), Erumban, Los, Stehrer, Timmer, and de Vries (2011), Johnson and Noguera (2012a,
2012b), and Koopman, Powers, Wang, and Wei (2011). This literature itself builds on a long tradition of
multi-region input-output models, dating to Moses (1955).
   5
     Other related work aimed at measuring changes in input-output linkages over time includes the IDE-
JETRO Asian Input-Output Tables (which we draw on for data) and the new World Input-Output Database
(WIOD). Working contemporaneously, WIOD researchers assembled detailed data for the 1995-2007 period
(see Timmer (2012)). See also Wang (2011) for work on the post-1995 period. These post-1995 tables miss
many important changes in value added versus gross trade over time. As will be evident below, most of our
results depend on measuring linkages over longer periods of time.


                                                   4
1.1    A Global Input-Output Framework
To start, let there be S sectors and N countries in a given year t. Output in each sector of each
country is produced using domestic factors (capital, labor, etc.) and intermediate inputs,
which may be sourced from home or foreign suppliers. Output is tradable in all sectors,
and may used to satisfy final demand or used as an intermediate input in production at
home or abroad. Final demand itself consists of consumption, investment, and government
expenditure.
    To track shipments of final and intermediate goods, we define a four-dimensional nota-
tion denoting source and destination country, as well as source and destination sectors for
shipments of intermediates. We define i to be the source country, j to be the destination
country, s to be the source sector, and s0 to be the destination sector.
    For a given year, the global input-output framework organizes these flows using market
clearing conditions. Because we observe the value of cross-border transactions in the data,
not quantities shipped, we write these market clearing conditions in value terms. Since
markets implicitly clear in quantities, this means we are evaluating the underlying quantity
flows at a common set of prices to ensure that revenue for producers equals the value of
expenditure across destinations. We write the market clearing condition as:
                                        X                XX
                            yit (s) =       fijt (s) +            mijt (s, s0 ),               (1)
                                        j                j   s0


where yit (s) is the value of output in sector s of country i, fijt (s) is the value of final goods
shipped from sector s in country i to country j, and mijt (s, s0 ) is the value of intermediates
from sector s in country i shipped to sector s0 in country j. Gross bilateral exports, denoted
xijt (s), include goods destined for both final and intermediate use abroad: xijt (s) = fijt (s) +
                 0
P
    s0 mijt (s, s ). Then Equation (1) equivalently says that output is divided between domestic
final use, domestic intermediate use, and gross exports.
     These market clearing conditions can be stacked to form a compact global input-output
system. First, we collect the total value of production in each sector in the S × 1 vector
yit . Second, we organize shipments of final goods from i to country j into S × 1 vectors fijt .
Third, we denote use of intermediate inputs from i by country j by Aijt yjt , where Aijt is an
S × S input-output matrix with elements Aijt (s, s0 ) = mijt (s, s0 )/yjt (s0 ). A typical element
describes the value of output from sector s in source country i used in the production of
sector s0 output by destination country j. The vector of gross exports from i to j (i 6= j) is
then xijt = fijt + Aijt yjt .




                                                    5
   Then we can rewrite the S × N market clearing conditions from Equation (1) as:

                                               y t = A t y t + ft ,                                       (2)
                                                                                     P          
              A11t        A12t       ...    A1N t               y1t                        j   f 1jt
                                                                                       P
             A21t        A22t       ···    A2N t             y2t                    j f2jt 
                                                                                                 
  with At ≡ 
             ..           ..        ..      ..  ,     yt ≡ 
                                                               ..  ,
                                                                             and ft ≡      ..      .   (3)
             .             .           .     .               . 
                                                                                       
                                                                                             .
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                         P
                   AN 1t AN 2t . . . AN N t                           yN t                j fN jt


We refer to At as the global input-output matrix. It concisely summarizes the entire structure
of within-country, cross-country, and cross-sector intermediate goods linkages at a given point
in time.
    Rearranging Equation (2), we can write the output vector as:

                                             yt = (I − At )−1 ft .                                        (4)

The matrix (I − At )−1 is the “Leontief inverse” of the global input-output matrix. The
Leontief inverse tells us how much output from each country and sector is required to produce
a given vector of final goods, where here the vector of final goods is total world absorption of
final goods ft . The gross output required to produce ft includes the final goods themselves
plus all the intermediate goods used up in successive rounds of the production process.


1.2    The Value Added Content of Trade
To compute the value added content of trade, we split ft into destination specific vectors f˜jt ,
where f˜jt is the (SN × 1) vector of final goods absorbed in country j. Then Equation (4)
can be re-written as:
                                                                  
                                                              f1jt
                                                             f2jt 
                                                                  
                            X
                                        −1 ˜          ˜
                       yt =    (I − At ) fjt with fjt ≡     ..  .
                                                                                           (5)
                                 j                           . 
                                                                             fN jt

Inside the summation, (I − At )−1 f˜jt is the vector of output used directly and indirectly to
produce final goods absorbed in country j.
    Then, Equation (5) decomposes output from each source country i into the amount
of output from the source used to produce final goods absorbed in each destination. To



                                                        6
formalize this, we define:                    
                                          y1jt
                                         y2jt 
                                              
                                         .  ≡ (I − At )−1 f˜jt ,                                   (6)
                                         . 
                                         . 
                                            yN jt
where yijt is the S × 1 vector of output from i used to produce final goods absorbed in j.
    Given that we know how much output from each source is needed to produce final goods
in each destination, then we can naturally compute the value added from the source country
embedded in this output. If the ratio of value added to gross output in sector s of source
country i is rit (s) = 1 − j s0 Ajit (s0 , s), then the amount of value added from sector s in
                          P P

country i embodied in final goods absorbed in j is: vaijt (s) ≡ rit (s)yijt (s), where yijt (s) is
an individual element of yijt defined above. We refer to vaijt (s) as value added exports.


2         Interpreting Value Added Trade
To guide interpretation of the empirical results below, we pause here to discuss the mechanics
of the value added calculation.6 First, we highlight how the value added to export ratio can
be linked to alternative models with fragmented production. Second, we interpret differences
between value added and gross exports using a first-order approximation to the full value
added calculation. Third, we discuss how value added trade is related to measures of trade
in intermediate goods.


2.1         Models with Fragmented Production
The basic accounting system outlined in Equations (1) and (2) above could be consistent
with various underlying models of production, as it simply tracks shipments of intermediates
and final goods by industrial sector. Moving from Equations (2) to (4) entails making the
assumption that the production process is circular, composed of an effectively infinite number
of stages, where input requirements and the uses of output at each stage are identical.
    These are strong restrictions, yet they are embedded into many standard trade models.
For example, many gravity-style models satisfy these restrictions. These models typically
assume that gross output is produced using a CES composite intermediate input, which
aggregates tradable intermediates from different sectors and country sources, and is allocated
interchangeably to final and intermediate uses.7 Therefore, the procedure for computing the
    6
        See also Johnson and Noguera (2012a) for interpretative discussion.
    7
        See Caliendo and Parro (2010), Eaton, Kortum, Neiman, and Romalis (2011), and Levchenko and Zhang


                                                     7
value added content of trade naturally emerges from these models.
    Models of sequential multi-stage production also generate flows of final and intermediate
that are consistent with Equations (1) and (2).8 In this type of model, there is a sequence of
production stages that must be performed in order, with intermediate output being passed
from one stage to the next. When stages are split across countries, this feature generates
gross trade that is a multiple of trade in value added. This discrepancy between gross and
value added trade flows is a key metric that summarizes how much fragmentation has taken
place.
    It is worth noting, however, that multi-stage models do not necessarily feature circularity
in the production process, and therefore need not imply the inversion operation in Equation
(4). For example, in the two-stage model of Yi (2003), stage one goods are used to produce
stage two goods, which are then fed into final demand channels. As such, there is no
intermediate goods loop in which stage two goods are used as intermediates in stage one.
Nonetheless, that model does produce double-counting in trade statistics, even if it does not
imply the exact accounting procedure in this paper.9 We now turn to explaining the link
between two-step and many-step production processes in detail, as the two-step process is
useful for building intuition.


2.2     Approximate Accounting
To aid interpretation, we outline an approximate two-step formulation of the general account-
ing procedure. This approximation enables us write down simple analytical expressions for
value added and gross trade that capture the first-order influence of cross-border input link-
ages. These expressions echo the two-step computations in Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001)
and Yi (2003), though extended here for the multilateral context. This approximation also
captures roughly half of the bilateral variation in the true data, so it will prove useful to
study the mechanics underlying deviations of value added from gross trade.10
   To understand the approximation, note that the Leontief Inverse can be expressed as a
geometric series: (I − A)−1 = ∞          k
                                 P
                                    k=0 A . If we multiply the k-th order term by the final
demand vector – i.e. compute Ak f˜jt – then we get the value of intermediates used in the
(2011) for Ricardian models with these features. Armington type gravity models with production functions
for gross output also typically satisfy these restrictions.
   8
     See Yi (2003, 2010), Dixit and Grossman (1982), Baldwin and Venables (2010), or Costinot, Vogel, and
Wang (2011).
   9
     Yi (2010) does include an intermediate goods loop, in which the second stage goods are used to form a
CES composite input used in the first stage. Mapping this model to our data is topic for future work.
  10
     Though the algebra is more cumbersome, we can obviously perform higher order approximations as well.
By definition, these fit the data better and capture an additional layer of nuance. They do not add new
fundamental insights, however.


                                                    8
k-th step of the production process. The two-step approximation restricts attention to the
zero and first order terms of this expansion: the final goods themselves and intermediates
directly used to produce them. That is, we compute the first-order approximate amount
of output needed to produce final goods, defined as: ȳt ≡ j [I + At ]f˜jt . The output from
                                                              P

country i used to produce f˜jt is then: ȳij ≡ fij + k Aik fkj .
                                                    P

    Using these output transfers, along with the underlying shipments of final and interme-
diate goods, we construct approximate gross and value added exports as:
                                                                     X
                               xij ≡ fij + Aij fjj + Aij fji +                Aik fkj                           (7)
                                     |    {z     } | {z }
                                                                     k6=i,j
                                         absorption     reflection   |        {z       }
                                                                         redirection
                                                                                   0        X
               vaij ≡ fij + Aii fij + Aij fjj − [ι [Aii + AIi ] diag(fij )] +                       Aik fkj ,   (8)
                      |                        {z                         }
                                                                                           k6=i,j
                                            net absorption                                 |        {z    }
                                                                                           indirect exports

               P
where AIi = k6=i Aki is the overall imported input use matrix for country i.
    We group the components of approximate exports into three terms.11 First, fij + Aij fjj
is shipments from i to j that are absorbed in j, including both final goods (fij ) and interme-
diates from i embodied in country j’s consumption of its own final goods (Aij fjj ). Second,
Aij fji is shipments of intermediates from i to j that are ‘reflected’ back to country i, embod-
                                             P
ied in final goods produced by j. Third, k6=i,j Aik fkj is shipments of intermediates from i
to j that are ‘redirected’ onward to third markets, embodied in final goods produced by j.
    We group the components of approximate value added exports into two terms. Aggre-
gated across sectors, the first term is equal to ‘absorption’ (defined above) minus the imported
                                                                                           0
intermediate goods used to produce exported final goods fij , given by [ιAIi diag(fij )] . We
therefore refer to this term as ‘net absorption’.12 The second term records ‘indirect exports’:
the amount of value added from country i absorbed in country j that travels through third
countries. In the two-step calculation, this is equal to shipments of intermediates from i to
third destinations k that are embodied in final goods produced by k and absorbed in j.
    At the bilateral level, we can then define the approximate ratio of value added to gross
  11
      In Johnson and Noguera (2012a), we defined these terms somewhat differently. Rather than decomposing
approximate exports, we chose to decompose actual exports in that paper. The intuition for how we broke
down actual gross exports is closely related to the intuition presented here.
   12
      At the sector level, net absorption is equal to absorption plus the domestic intermediates used to produce
                                                                                         0
final goods exports (Aii fij ) minus total intermediate use ([ι [Aii + AIi ] diag(fij )] ). Aggregating across
sectors, domestic intermediates cancel out. Further, recall that we have a two-step production process here,
so no intermediates are used to produce intermediates. Therefore, intermediates themselves are 100% value
added under this approximation.




                                                       9
exports as:

                              ιvaij     net absorptionij + indirect exportsij
                  V AX ij =         =                                             .                   (9)
                               ιxij   absorptionij + reflectionij + redirectionij

Note three ways in which production fragmentation influences the approximate VAX ratio.
    First, if ‘indirect exports’ are zero, then V AX ij is less then one. Absorption less imported
inputs is guaranteed to be less than absorption itself, and gross exports are composed of
absorption plus reflected/redirected exports. Further, note that for a given source country i,
the ratio of net absorption to total absorption varies across destinations only to the extent
that final goods sectors vary in imported input intensity and the composition of final goods
exports varies across destinations.13 In practice, this limits variation in V AX ij , because
export composition tends to be similar across destinations for a given exporter.
    Second, if ‘indirect exports’ are greater than zero, these push up V AX ij . In fact, if
indirect exports are large enough, then V AX ij may exceed one. These indirect exports
are a natural outcome of fragmented production, as they reflect redirection trade in third
destinations (k 6= i, j)).
    Third, V AX ij is decreasing in the extent of ‘re-direction and reflection’ in bilateral trade.
This component of gross exports reflects double-counting, as it includes shipments to j that
are not absorbed there, but show up in j’s own exports.
    For convenience, we refer to these three margins of adjustment in approximate VAX ra-
tios as the absorption, indirect exports, and reflection/redirection margins. All three reflect
different dimensions of cross-border fragmentation, so we use this breakdown to illustrate the
mechanics of changes in VAX in later sections. As we move from approximate to actual bilat-
eral VAX ratios that include higher order terms, we lose this exact decomposition. However,
the basic intuition of the approximate decomposition survives. The core of this intuition is
that bilateral value added to export ratios are shaped by both bilateral production chains,
which involve back-and-forth shipments of intermediates and final goods between bilateral
partners, as well as multilateral production chains that involve three or more countries.
    Moving from bilateral to multilateral trade, the multilateral VAX ratio is straightforward
to interpret. Starting with the approximation, note that the indirect exports and redirection
terms are two sides of the same coin. As we aggregate across destinations, these then appear
in both the numerator and denominator. So in the aggregate, they do not affect the value
added to export ratio. The only remaining components are: (a) the use of imported inputs
to produce exports, driving a wedge between absorption and net absorption, and (b) the
  13
   This is an outcome of the assumption that gross output is homogeneous within sectors, so input require-
ments do not depend on how the good is used or where it is shipped.


                                                   10
reflection of exports back to the source, embodied in final goods imports. Increases in either
of these drive the aggregate VAX ratio down.14 This intuition survives intact when moving
from the approximate to full calculation.


2.3     Trade in Intermediates
In contrast to our focus on value added versus gross trade, many other researchers have
used measures of intermediate goods trade or trade in parts and components as a measure
fragmentation.15 These measures capture different information than the information embed-
ded in value added to export ratios. We therefore pause to contrast our approach to this
alternative.
    While countries must trade intermediates in order to have gross trade in excess of value
added trade, trade in intermediates does not guarantee this result. Specifically, what matters
is how intermediates are used in particular destinations. If shipments of intermediates are
used to produce goods absorbed in the destination, then these intermediate goods shipments
represent trade in value added. This is captured in the Aij fjj term in approximate value
added exports above. In contrast, if the intermediates are reflected or redirected to be
absorbed either in the source or third countries, then there is a wedge between gross and
value added trade.
    The fact that intermediate goods trade and value added to export ratios capture different
information helps us reconcile the observation that the share of intermediate goods in trade
has not apparently risen over time, documented for example by Chen, Kondratowicz, and
Yi (2005), with our observation that the global ratio of value added to gross trade is falling.
It also guides us in interpreting our results on RTAs. Whereas we detect differential effects
of RTAs on gross and value added trade, Orefice and Rocha (2011) find that trade in parts
and components increases by the same amount as ‘final’ trade (i.e., total trade less parts
and components) following adoption of bilateral trade agreements.16 These examples make
the point that care is needed in reading our results in the context of this related literature.
  14
     Further, the ratio of value added to gross exports is bounded by one.
  15
     Among others, see Yeats (2001), Baldwin and Taglioni (2011), Behar and Freund (2011), and Orefice
and Rocha (2011).
  16
     Also related to our results below, they find that final and intermediates goods respond similarly to
increasing depth of trade agreements.




                                                   11
3       Empirical Procedure
To measure the value added content of trade, we need to track output yt , the global input-
output matrix At , final goods shipments fijt , and value added to output ratios rit through
time. We confront two challenges in doing so. First, sector-level production, input use,
and trade data for many countries is incomplete and split across sources. Therefore, we
need to clean and harmonize available data sources. Second, national input-output tables
do not disaggregate imported inputs and final goods across sources. Therefore, we need to
apply proportionality assumptions to construct bilateral input use and bilateral final goods
shipments. We describe how we deal with these two issues here, and relegate additional
details regarding data construction to Appendix A.


3.1       Data Sources
We take annual trade data from national accounts and commodity trade statistics, annual
production data from national accounts and industrial output sources, and data on final
and intermediate use from national accounts and input-output tables for benchmark years.
Broadly speaking, our objective is to assemble hard data where available, fill in missing
data where needed using reasonable imputation techniques, and impose internal consistency
across data sources and countries using accepted harmonization procedures.
    We focus on building the global input-output framework for four composite sectors: (1)
agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing; (2) non-manufacturing industrial production; (3)
manufacturing; and (4) services. We focus on four sectors for several reasons. First, ag-
gregation allows us to maximize the country and time coverage of our estimates. National
accounts GDP data for these four sectors is available for nearly all countries after 1970.
Aggregation also facilitates linking data sources recorded in different sector classifications
(e.g., commodity vs. industry classifications). Second, only a small number of sectors are
needed to generate accurate value added estimates in practice.17 We lose relatively little
information in aggregation because individual sectors within the four composite sectors are
more similar among themselves than to sectors in other composite sectors.
    Data availability governs the set of countries that we include in the global input-output
framework. For information on input use and disaggregate final demand, we rely on national
input-output tables from the OECD Input-Output Database and the IDE-JETRO Asian
Input-Output Tables. We use tables for 42 countries, covering the OECD plus many emerging
markets (including Brazil, Russia, India, and China), for benchmark years from 1970 to the
present. These 42 countries – listed with benchmark years in Appendix A – account for
 17
      We document this assertion in the appendix using disaggregated data for one benchmark year.


                                                    12
roughly 80% of world GDP and 70-80% of world trade in the 1970-1990 period, rising to
cover over 90% of GDP and 80-90% of world trade after 1990. The remaining countries are
aggregated into a rest of the world composite.18
    In using this input-output data, we face two challenges. First, even where benchmark
years are available, data in the input-output tables is not consistent with national accounts
aggregates or sector-level trade data available from other sources.19 Second, benchmark
years are infrequent, unevenly spaced, and asynchronous across countries. To construct a
time series or even conduct cross country comparisons at a single point in time, we therefore
need to extrapolate the benchmark data to non-benchmark years.
    To deal with both these challenges simultaneously, we apply a procedure that imputes
input-output coefficients subject to hard data constraints. In this procedure, unknowns
include sector-level input shares for domestic and imported intermediates and sector-level
shares for domestic and imported final goods absorption. In each year, we solve for these
unknowns using a constrained least squares procedure. We solve for shares that are: (a) close
(in a least squares sense) to the observed coefficients in benchmark years (or interpolations
thereof if two or more benchmark years are available); and (b) satisfy adding up constraints
in the data. We impose that the solution must match sector-level GDPs, sector-level exports
and imports, and aggregate final demand data exactly.
    The result of this procedure is a dataset containing gross output by sector (yit ), value
added to output ratios by sector (rit ), final demand for domestic and imported goods by
sector (fiit and fIit ), and domestic and imported intermediate use matrices (Aiit and AIit )
for 42 countries. In our calculations, we do not use any information on these objects for
the rest-of-the-world composite. To make this work, we assume that all exports from the
42 countries in our data to the rest-of-the-world composite region are absorbed there.20 We
discuss the robustness of our results to relaxing this assumption in Appendix A.


3.2     Assembling the Global Input-Output Framework
To set up the global input-output framework, we need to split imported input use and final
goods imports across bilateral trading partners. That is, we need to turn AIi into bilateral
  18
     Due to lack of data, we include the Czech Republic, Estonia, Russia, Slovakia, and Slovenia in the rest of
the world composite during 1970’s and 1980’s, and report results for them separately starting in the 1990’s.
  19
     These discrepancies are partly due to differences in definitions across different data sources. They
also arise due to measurement error. Based on examination of OECD data documentation, we believe
measurement error is more severe in the input-output data than in the national accounts sources. Therefore,
we give priority to national accounts data in our reconciliation procedures.
  20
     Assuming that exports to the rest-of-the-world are composed entirely of final goods is sufficient to
guarantee this assumption holds. However, this assumption can also hold if exports of intermediates to the
rest-of-the-world are only used to produce final goods absorbed there.


                                                      13
matrices Aji , and turn fIi into bilateral final goods shipments fji for all j 6= i.
    To do so, we use bilateral trade data and a proportionality assumption. Specifically, we
assume that within each sector imports from each source country are split between final and
intermediate use in proportion to the overall split of imports between final and intermediate
use in the destination. Further, conditional on being allocated to intermediate use, we
assume that imported intermediates from each source are split across purchasing sectors in
proportion to overall imported intermediate use in the destination. These assumptions can
be written as:
                                                                                  
                                       xji (s)                              xji (s) 
          Aji (s, s0 ) = AIi (s, s0 ) 
                                      X
                                                      and fji (s) = fIi (s) 
                                                                             X
                                                                                         .
                                          xji (s)                                xji (s)
                                                                                        
                                      j                                        j


    To form the bilateral trade shares here and sector-level trade data used above, we combine
national accounts and bilateral trade data sources. Aggregate exports and imports, covering
all sectors, are taken from the national accounts. We split this aggregate trade across goods
and services sectors using balance of payments statistics. Then we further disaggregate
non-services trade across sectors and countries using trade shares constructed from bilateral
commodity trade data, including the NBER-UN Database for 1970-2000 and the CEPII
BACI Database for 1995-2009. As is well known, bilateral services trade data has not
been collected with the same scope and rigor as goods trade data. We therefore apply an
imputation procedure to form bilateral services trade shares. See Appendix A for details
regarding how we combine trade data sources.


4     The Evolution of Fragmentation
This section summarizes how the value added content of trade has evolved over the last four
decades. We present results for the world as a whole, for individual countries aggregated
across trading partners, and for bilateral trading partners separately. We focus on describing
stylized facts in this section, and defer formal analysis to the next section.


4.1    The World
We begin by plotting the value added to export ratio for the world as a whole in Panel (a) of
Figure 1, computed as the sum of value added exports
                                                   P
                                                          divided
                                                          P
                                                                       by the sum of gross exports
                                                     i6=j   s vaij (s)
across all country pairs and sectors: V AXworld ≡ P P xij (s) . We plot two series in the
                                                             i6=j   s




                                                      14
figure: one that includes shipments to/from the rest of the world and one that excludes
them. In most figures below, we plot results including these shipments.21
    The world VAX ratio declines by 0.10 including the ROW and 0.13 excluding the ROW
from 1970-2009.22 These cumulative changes are attenuated by a rise in the world VAX
ratio coincident with the collapse of world trade in 2009.23 Truncating the sample in 2008 to
exclude the trade collapse, the VAX ratio declines by 0.13 including the ROW and by 0.16
excluding the ROW.
    This decline is spread unevenly over time. We identify three stages in the evolution of the
world VAX ratio. There is a first wave of fragmentation in the 1970s, taking the ratio from
0.87 to 0.84 (including the ROW). The 1980s are the lost decade, with almost no change in
the ratio. A second wave of fragmentation starts around 1990, taking the ratio from 0.84 to
0.74 in 2008 and rebounding to 0.77 in 2009. The decline in the VAX ratio is roughly three
times as fast during the 1990-2008 period as during the pre-1990 period.24
    Disaggregating these results, we plot
                                       P
                                               sector-level VAX ratios in Figure 1, where these
                                         i6=j vaij (s)
ratios are defined as: V AXworld (s) ≡ P xij (s) . Strikingly, manufacturing is the only sector
                                          i6=j
in which the VAX ratio is falling over time. The ratio is increasing for agriculture and
services and stable in non-manufacturing industrial production. Linking these sector-level
results to the overall VAX ratio above, we can decompose the overall decline in the world
VAX ratio into components due to changes in VAX ratios within sectors versus changes in
composition of trade across the three sectors. That is, the decline in the overall VAX ratio
could either be due to the declining VAX ratio within manufacturing, or composition shifts
that put a larger weight manufacturing, which has a relatively low VAX ratio.
    To examine the role of each force, we decompose changes in the world VAX ratio into
within and between effects. As an accounting identity, yearly changes in world VAX ratio
can be decomposed into the yearly change in sector-level VAX ratios (within effect) and into
the yearly change in sector shares in world exports (between effect):
                                                   X                                    
               X                 ωt (s) + ωt−1 (s)                 V AXt (s) + V AXt−1 (s)
   ∆V AXt =          ∆V AXt (s)                     +    ∆ωt (s)                            ,
                                         2                                    2
               |s               {z                 } | s
                                                                       {z                  }
                                  Within                                   Between

                 xt (s)
where ωt (s) =    xt
                          and we define ∆xt ≡ xt − xt−1 .
  21
     The VAX ratio including the ROW is larger partly due to our assumption that all exports to the ROW
are absorbed there. The dynamics of the VAX ratio are similar for the two series.
  22
     The annual series, including the ROW, is included in the final column of Table 6 of Appendix B.
  23
     Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2011) discuss how composition effects can drive changes in the world VAX
ratio. That paper focuses on a simulation exercise to explore these composition effects, whereas the new
data introduced here can be used in an explicit accounting exercise.
  24
     Including the rebound in 2009, the decline is still twice as fast post-1990.

                                                   15
    Performing this decomposition from 1970 to 2009, we find that the Within term accounts
for about 85% of the total change in the world VAX ratio.25 Given that VAX ratios outside
manufacturing are stable or increasing, the Within term picks up the large decline in the
VAX ratio within the manufacturing sector, interacted with the large share of manufactures
in total trade (≈ 60 − 70%). The Between term is not important because sectoral trade
shares at the world level are relatively stable from 1970-2009. The slight negative Between
effect is driven by the declining share of agriculture and natural resources, and corresponding
increase in manufactures, in total trade.


4.2     Individual Countries
Moving down one level of aggregation from the world to individual countries, significant
cross-country heterogeneity emerges. First, the total size of declines is heterogeneous across
countries and correlated with country characteristics, such as growth in GDP per capita.
Second, the sources of declines in VAX ratios differ across countries. Third, the timing of
changes in fragmentation is heterogeneous across countries. We discuss each point in turn.
    Figure 2 contains cumulative VAX ratio changes from 1970-2009 for the 37 countries
for which we have data back to 1970.26 Nearly all countries experience falling VAX ratios.27
Most experience declines larger than 10 percentage points, though some large and prominent
countries (e.g., Japan, the UK, Brazil, etc.) have smaller declines. Among countries with
large declines, one sees many emerging markets, but also some important advanced economies
(e.g., Germany).
    To organize this variation across countries, we plot the average annual change in the
VAX ratio against the average annual growth rate in real GDP per capita in Figure 3.28
The correlation is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. Cumulated over
four decades, the point estimate implies that a country at the 90th percentile of the growth
distribution (4.5% per year) has a decline in the VAX ratio of roughly 0.14, while a country
at the 10th percentile (1% per year) has a decline of 0.04. Because emerging markets on
average have higher growth than advanced countries, this also reinforces the observation
  25
     The data needed to perform this decomposition are presented in Table 6 of Appendix B.
  26
     These declines are reported in the second column of Table 7 in Appendix B, along with declines for the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Russia, Slovakia, and Slovenia who have shorter time coverage. We also report
total VAX ratio changes for manufacturing versus non-manufacturing. As in the world-level data, VAX
ratios within manufacturing fall markedly and rise within non-manufacturing for most countries.
  27
     The initial level of the VAX ratio in 1970 is uncorrelated with subsequent changes, so there is no tendency
toward convergence in VAX ratios across countries over time.
  28
     We compute the average annual growth rate in real GDP per capita taking log differences in PPP GDP
per capita from the WDI. For Poland and Vietnam, PPP GDP per capita data is available for only the last
20 years from the WDI, so we plot changes over this shorter interval for these countries.



                                                      16
above that VAX declines are larger on average for these countries.
    Underlying this result, changes in the composition of trade are important determinants
of the aggregate VAX ratio.29 Broadly, the share of manufactures in trade is rising in most
(though not all) countries, with the largest increases in non-commodity exporter emerg-
ing markets. Since the VAX ratio is lower for manufacturing than non-manufacturing, an
increase in the share of manufacturing in trade mechanically lowers the aggregate VAX ratio.
    To examine the role of trade composition versus sector-level changes in VAX ratios, we
compute a Between-Within decomposition of the change in each country’s VAX ratio:
                                                      X                                        
               X                 ωit (s) + ωi,t−1 (s)                  V AXit (s) + V AXi,t−1 (s)
∆V AXit =           ∆V AXit (s)                        +    ∆ωit (s)                                ,
                                          2                                        2
               |s               {z                    } | s
                                                                           {z                     }
                                 Withini                                       Betweeni


where ωit (s) = xitxit(s) and we define ∆xit ≡ xit − xi,t−1 . To reiterate, the Between effect is
driven by changes in trade shares for a given country, while the Within effect is driven by
changes in VAX ratios within sectors in that country.
    We project these Between and Within terms on income growth in Figure 4.30 The Within
term tends to be positively correlated with income growth, while the Between term tends to
be negatively correlated with income growth. As such, the fact that growth predicts declines
in the overall VAX ratio is entirely due to the Between term. That is, structural change
in which fast growing countries increase the share of manufacturing in their exports is the
driving force behind the overall correlation. The Within term tends to be more important for
advanced countries that have already completed the structural transformation process. For
example, the decline in the Within term is larger than the overall VAX change for Germany,
Japan, and the United States.
    These country-level results focus on cumulative changes over the 1970-2009 period. How-
ever, there is also important variation in the time dimension. Declines in VAX ratios are
not uniformly distributed through time, nor coincident across countries. Reflecting the ag-
gregate world series, VAX ratio declines for most countries are most rapid during the 1990’s.
However, the exact timing of declines do not line up across countries. To illustrate this, we
plot VAX ratios over time for the four largest exporters (U.S., Germany, China, and Japan)
in Figure 5. For the big four exporters, there are notable crossing points where country
orderings are reversed. For example, China starts with the highest VAX ratio, and ends up
with a VAX ratio lower than both Japan and the U.S. Further, there are notable acceler-
ations/decelerations in the figure. For example, Germany’s VAX ratio decline accelerates
 29
      Changes in the share of manufactures in exports are reported in column five of Table 7 in Appendix B.
 30
      Numerical values for the Between and Within terms are provided in Table 7 in Appendix B.


                                                     17
post-1990, which points to intensified integration of the European production structure.
    Differences in the timing of changes in VAX ratios is even clearer looking at the emerging
market countries, and so we plot selected emerging markets in Figure 6. Thailand’s value
added to export ratio falls precipitously starting in the mid-1980’s, coincident with the be-
ginning of their export-led industrialization boom and transition out of agriculture. Poland’s
VAX ratio declines post-1990, signaling re-integration into the European production struc-
ture. Finally, Mexico’s value added to export ratio starts declining during the mid-1980’s
as well, first falling during a unilateral trade liberalization and then continuing to fall as
the process of North American integration accelerates. In contrast, Brazil stands out in the
figure as a country whose VAX ratio has had a modest decline. Whereas Mexico begins
on par with Brazil in 1970, Mexico ends up with a value added to export ratio that is 20
percentage points lower than Brazil as of the late 2000’s.


4.3     Bilateral Country Pairs
Shifting our focus from the country level to bilateral country pairs, further heterogeneity
emerges. There is ample variation in VAX ratios both across pairs in the cross-section and
within pairs over time. Because our focus below is on changes in VAX ratios over time, we
focus on this dimension of the data here.31
     Changes in value added to export ratios through time differ substantially across bilateral
partners. We plot changes in bilateral value added to export ratios across trade partners
for four large countries (Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States) in Figure
7. Though country mean/median changes differ, there is wide variation in bilateral changes
around these average levels. For example, for the United States, the interdecile range of
VAX changes across bilateral export destinations is (−0.31, 0.04). Similar patterns obtain
for other countries as well. To illustrate the magnitude and sources of variation, we examine
two decompositions.
     First, we construct a Between-Within decomposition at the bilateral level (analogous to
those above) to check whether changes in the composition of bilateral exports drive these
changes. Looking at a variance decomposition of ∆V AXijt = V AXij,2009 − V AXij,1970 , we
find that the Within term accounts for nearly all the variation in bilateral changes.32 That
is, changes in trade composition plays a small role in explaining bilateral changes.
     Second, we draw on the approximate accounting exercise from Section 2.2 to break down
  31
    See Johnson and Noguera (2012a) for extensive discussion of cross-sectional differences in VAX ratios.
  32
    The components of this decomposition are: var(∆V AXijt ) = 0.037, var(Within) = 0.074,
var(Between) = 0.039, and cov(Within,Between) = −0.038. We plot elements of this Between-Within
decomposition against changes in bilateral VAX ratios in Appendix B.



                                                   18
changes across margins of trade. To do this, we split the log bilateral VAX ratios into three
terms:
                              
                                net absorptionijt
                                                        
                                                              indirect exportsijt
                                                                                  
          log(V AXijt ) = log                       + log 1 +
                                  absorptionijt                net absorptionijt
                          |          {z           } |              {z             }
                                   Absorption Ratio               Indirect Exports Adjustment
                                                                                                (10)
                                      reflectionijt + redirectionijt
                            − log 1 +                                  .
                                              absorptionijt
                              |                 {z                   }
                                      Reflection/Redirection Adjustment


The first term picks up changes in net absorption, and we call this the Absorption Ratio.
The second term picks up changes in indirect exports as a share of value added trade,
and we call this the Indirect Exports Adjustment. The third term picks up changes in
reflection/redirection trade, and we call this the Reflection/Redirection Adjustment.
    We plot changes in the actual bilateral VAX ratio, approximate VAX ratio, and these
margins for four representative countries (Australia, Chile, Germany, and Italy) in Figure 8.
The upper left figure in each group is a plot of changes in the VAX ratio against changes in the
approximate VAX ratio. As is evident, the two series are highly correlated, though changes in
the approximate VAX ratio are approximately one-half the size of the true change. Therefore,
the decomposition of the approximate VAX ratio captures the mechanics of adjustment for
roughly half the overall variation in the data. Thus, we view this decomposition as illustrative
evidence on channels of adjustment, though it should be kept in mind that higher order
elements matter as well.
    For the four countries depicted, as in countries not in the figure, net absorption plays a
relatively small role in explaining bilateral changes, which is consistent with the Between-
Within decomposition above since net absorption is driven entirely by differences in compo-
sition of final goods shipments across destinations. The role played by the indirect exports
margin versus the reflection/redirection margin varies across countries. For example, reflec-
tion/redirection trade plays a strong role for Germany and Italy, but changes in indirect
exports are much more important for Chile and Australia.33 The median country in the
data tends to look more like Chile/Australia than Germany/Italy, with changes in indirect
exports accounting for around 80% of the variation in approximate bilateral VAX ratios
across destinations. That said, reflection/redirection accounts for more than 40% of the
variation in roughly 1/3 of the countries, including the United States, France, and Japan
(plus Germany and Italy in the figure).
  33
    In the cross-section, indirect trade tends to be more important for commodity exporters. It is also
very important early in the period for many former Communist countries, who had relatively concentrated
bilateral trade patterns before 1990.


                                                      19
    As in the aggregate country-level time series, there is also variation in the timing of
changes in bilateral VAX ratios across trading partners. For example, we plot VAX ratios
for U.S. exports to France and Germany in the left panel of Figure 9. Despite the similarity
between France and Germany in income levels and trade policy, the dynamics of the VAX
ratios differ sharply across the two destinations. While VAX ratios are initially similar, they
diverge sharply after 1990, despite the absence of obvious changes in bilateral trade policy or
frictions. Sharp changes at the bilateral level can be seen for other trading partners as well.
For example, we plot U.S. VAX ratios to Mexico and Canada in the right panel of Figure
9. Here there are sharp changes occur during the period of North American integration,
starting with CUSFTA in 1989 and continuing with the adoption (and phase-in) of NAFTA
in 1994. Whereas the French/German example above suggests factors other than bilateral
trade policy may shape bilateral VAX ratios, these point to the role of trade policy. We
focus on sorting through possible drivers VAX ratio changes below.


5       Trade Costs and Fragmentation
Theoretical work focuses on trade costs as an important driver of production fragmentation.34
In this section, we use our bilateral data to explore how various types of bilateral trade
costs and proxies thereof are related to bilateral VAX ratios over time. We also document
how trade costs influence gross exports and value added trade separately, which aids in
understanding why the VAX ratio responds to trade costs.
    In our analysis of trade costs, we focus on trade costs that are bilateral in nature. We
examine commonly used bilateral proxies for non-policy barriers, such as distance, language,
borders, and colonial origin. We then turn to analyzing responses to changes in trade policy,
specifically the adoption of regional trade agreements. We begin this section explaining how
we use trade cost measures in a general regression framework, and then explain the details
of each empirical specification we run as we discuss the results.


5.1       Empirical Framework
Our analysis is built around three equations, one each for the bilateral VAX ratio, gross
exports, and value added exports. If we let yijt ∈ {V AXijt , xijt , vaijt } be the outcome
 34
      See Yi (2003, 2010), Bridgman (2008, 2012), or Baldwin and Venables (2010).




                                                    20
variable of interest, then the core specification we use can be written as:

                              log(yijt ) = φyit + φyjt + β y log(τijt ) + εijt
                                                                                             (11)
                              with εijt = γijy + ηijt
                                                  y
                                                      ,

where the parameters φy denote source and destination fixed effects associated with outcome
y and τijt is a vector of time-varying bilateral trade costs (with β y being the associated row
vector of coefficients for outcome y). Further, the composite error εijt is the sum of a pair-
specific latent variable γijy and an idiosyncratic error ηijt y
                                                                . In all specifications, we assume
                                  y
that the idiosyncratic error ηijt is uncorrelated with the regressors at all leads/lags. We vary
assumptions regarding the correlation of γijy with regressors depending on the context, and
we elaborate on these assumptions where appropriate below.
     The meaning of the time varying costs τijt deserves additional comment here. In some
cases, we have measures of trade costs that are explicitly time varying, such as indicator
variables for membership in a regional trade agreement. In others, we have time invariant
proxies for bilateral trade costs, such as distance, for which we analyze how the influence
of that proxy changes over time. For example, we are interested in how the influence of
distance changes over time. We can model these effects by writing the trade cost as log(τijt ) =
δt log(distij ), where δt is a time-varying distance coefficient measuring the penalty associated
with distance in a particular year. With this interpretation, we can then accommodate all
the results below within the general specification above.
     We see two complementary motivations for Equation (11). The first is a mechanical
identification argument. We are interested in narrowing our focus on analyzing the response
of bilateral trade to bilateral frictions. The fixed effects in Equation (11) help us hone in on
this dimension of the data. The source-year and destination-year fixed effects absorb all time-
varying source and destination characteristics that influence all trade partners symmetrically.
For example, a unilateral tariff liberalization that applies to all trade partners symmetrically
would be captured by the destination fixed effects. When we include a pair fixed effect in
the regression, then this absorbs all time invariant bilateral characteristics as well.
     The second motivation builds on the large literature on gravity regressions. Equation
(11) for gross exports is simply a reduced form gravity regression, identical to specifications
that emerge from several prominent trade models.35 By analogy to gravity for gross exports,
one can substitute value added exports for gross exports and reinterpret Equation (11) as
‘gravity for value added.’ While the analogy is clear, it comes with an important caveat.
Whereas the reduced form for gross exports can be explicitly derived from structural models,
 35
      See Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), Eaton and Kortum (2002), and Chaney (2008).



                                                    21
there is currently no theory of fragmentation or trade in value added that would imply that
value added trade should also follow a gravity-type equation. However, from a practical
perspective, this specification does fit the data well.
     Once one accepts the specification of the regressions for gross and value added trade,
then the specification for the VAX ratio follows. Because log(V AXijt ) = log(vaijt )−log(xijt )
by construction, the difference in coefficients on variable trade costs in these regressions –
β va − β x – equals the coefficient on trade costs (β vax ) in the VAX ratio regression. The three
trade cost coefficients then provide an integrated description of how VAX ratios, gross trade,
and value added trade are shaped by trade costs.


5.2     Non-Policy Trade Barriers
There are a large number of commonly used proxies for non-policy trade costs. We focus
here on four of the most common: distance, language, common borders (contiguity), and
common colonial origin.36 We are interested in two questions. First, how do VAX ratios,
gross trade, and value added trade respond to bilateral frictions? Second, how have these
responses changed over time?
   To address these questions, we start by estimating:

 log(yijt ) = φyit + φyjt + β̃1t
                              y                   y
                                 log(distij ) + β̃2t              y
                                                     contigij + β̃3t                y
                                                                     languageij + β̃4t colonyij + εijt , (12)

where we have substituted log(τijt ) = δ1t log(distij ) + δ2t contigij + δ3t languageij + δ4t colonyij
                                             y       y
into Equation (11) and therefore define β̃kt    ≡ βkt   δkt . In doing so, we assume that εijt is
uncorrelated with the trade cost proxies and cluster standard errors by country pair. This
specification has the advantage of allowing us to recover the level of the trade cost coefficients,
as well as allowing us to look at their evolution through time. The countervailing concern,
however, is that there may be omitted bilateral pair-specific trade costs that are correlated
with the proxies included in the regression and therefore bias the results.
    To allow for possible unmodeled pair-specific, time-invariant trade costs, we also estimate
Equation (12) in long differences. This specification takes the form:

 ∆ log(yijt ) = ∆φyit+∆φyjt+β̆1t
                              y                 y
                                 log(distij )+β̆2t             y
                                                   contigij +β̆3t               y
                                                                  languageij +β̆4t             y
                                                                                   colonyij +∆ηijt , (13)
  36
    We use data from the CEPII Gravity Dataset, available at http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/
gravity.htm. We measure distances using the simple distance between the most populated cities in the
two countries. The contiguity indicator takes the value one if the two countries share a land border. The
common colonial origin indicator takes the value one if the two countries were ever in a colonial relationship.
The common language indicator takes the value one if the two countries share a common official language.
In the CEPII data, these correspond to variables ‘dist’, ‘contiguity’, ‘colony’, and ‘commlang off’.



                                                      22
                                y       y
where t = {1975, 2005} and β̆kt   ≡ ∆β̃kt  is an estimate of the change in regression coefficients
over time. In taking differences over time, note that the pair specific latent variable γijy drops
away.
    Before turning to results, there are two issues regarding the estimation sample that
merit comment. First, small bilateral trade flows tend to be associated with extreme VAX
ratios (e.g., > 10), which muddy inference. Most of these observations appear to be due to
problematic bilateral trade data for countries during the 1970’s and early 1980’s, where the
raw data is of lower quality (e.g., for emerging markets or former communist countries). To
remove these outliers, we drop bilateral flows less than one million dollars in the estimation
and any remaining flows with VAX ratios greater than ten.37 Second, our country sample
includes advanced countries and emerging markets almost exclusively. This implies that
one must be careful in comparing point estimates from our sample to estimates from the
literature computed in samples that include developing countries.
    Regression coefficients for trade cost proxies in Equation (12) are plotted in Figure 10.
Coefficients for the VAX ratio are in the left panel, while coefficients for gross and value
added trade are in the right panel. Looking first at distance, the correlation of VAX ratios
and distance is generally positive. This means that on average, gross trade travels shorter
distances than trade in value added. This is picked up in coefficients on gross and value
added trade directly in the right panel. Both coefficients are negative, meaning that distance
depresses both gross and value added trade. However, the absolute value of the distance
coefficient on gross trade is larger in all years than the coefficient on value added trade.
    Interestingly, there is also evidence that the differential effect of distance on gross and
value added trade is strengthening over time. This is evident in the left panel, where the
distance coefficient for the VAX ratio is rising over time. The point estimate rises slightly
from around 0.05 to 0.1 prior to the mid-1980’s and then rises to 0.2 by the end of the
2000’s. This gap emerges primarily due to an increase in the absolute value of the distance
coefficient for gross trade, which increases from roughly 0.9 to 1.1, concentrated in the 1985-
1995 decade. The coefficient on value added trade also rises in absolute value during this
period, however the change is about half as large.
    Looking at the other trade cost proxies, country pairs with common language and colo-
nial origin tend to have lower bilateral VAX ratios on average. These signs are intuitive,
since common language and colonial origin ought to lower trade costs, thereby promoting
fragmentation. Results for borders do not speak as clearly. Early in the sample, common
  37
    Alternative sample criteria to deal with outliers yield similar results. We also implicitly drop all obser-
vations with zero trade flows. In practice, our raw data has relatively few exact zero trade flow observations
since we work with aggregate bilateral trade among advanced and major emerging countries.



                                                      23
borders are associated with higher VAX ratios, but this effect goes to zero over time. Rela-
tive to the effect of distance on VAX ratios, the result that stands out here is that there are
not large changes (if any) in the effect of these trade cost proxies over time. This is of course
reflected in the coefficients on gross and value added trade. These coefficients trend over
time, with coefficients on language and colonial origin falling somewhat over time and the
coefficient on borders rising somewhat over time.38 Yet, unlike for distance, coefficients for
gross and value added trade move in lock step. Hence, there are minimal changes in terms
of how VAX ratios vary with these trade cost proxies.
    This basic story can be seen clearly in estimates of the long differences specification in
Equation (13), which are presented in Table 1. In the table, we present results for regressions
of ∆ log(V AXijt ), ∆ log(vaijt ), ∆ log(xijt ) on the trade cost proxies. Looking at the results
for the VAX ratio, we see that declines in the VAX ratio are smaller for countries that
are farther apart. As in the time series presentation of coefficients above, there is no clear
relationship between changes in the VAX ratio and common colonial origin, language, or
borders.
    Looking at gross and value added exports separately, increases in both gross and value
added trade are smaller for countries that are far apart, but the costs of distance hit gross
trade harder. It is also worth noting that even though there is no relationship between
changes in VAX ratios and colonial origin or common language, these variables do help
predict changes in trade. Common language and colonial origin are associated with smaller
increases in both gross and value added trade, with roughly similar magnitudes. These
effects are again consistent with trends in the level of the trade cost coefficients reported in
Figure 10.
    To examine the mechanics underlying the effect of distance on VAX ratios, we revisit
the approximate accounting decomposition introduced Section 2.2. Specifically, we re-run
the long difference regression specification in Equation (13) with the log of the Approxi-
mate VAX Ratio and components defined in Section 4.3 as dependent variables. The log
Approximate VAX Ratio declines in distance with an elasticity of 0.043 (s.e. = 0.006). This
elasticity is roughly half that reported for the actual VAX ratio in Table 1, consistent with
the Approximate VAX ratio accounting for half the variation in overall VAX ratios. This
elasticity is mostly a product of a strong positive correlation between the Indirect Exports
Adjustment and distance, with a distance elasticity of 0.042 (s.e. = 0.006).39 This sug-
gests that an important reason why value added tends to ‘travel further’ than gross trade is
  38
   See Head, Mayer, and Reis (2010) on the changing importance of colonial origin over time.
  39
   The elasticity of the Absorption Ratio with distance is near zero (−0.001) and insignificant (s.e. = 0.001).
The Reflection/Redirection Adjustment is negatively correlated with distance, but small in magnitude
(−0.002 with s.e. = .001).


                                                      24
that source countries tend to serve distant destinations indirectly, exporting intermediates
to third countries that get re-exported for absorption in distant destinations.40 This echoes
the logic of ‘export platforms’ in multinational production chains, though here applied to all
trade rather than just multinational activity.


5.3     Trade Agreements
We now turn to analyzing the response of value added and gross trade to adoption of bilateral
or regional trade agreements (RTAs).41 We use two complementary approaches to evaluating
the consequences of these agreements. We start with a quasi event study, in which we
illustrate how bilateral VAX ratios change through time for country pairs as they enter
preferential bilateral or regional agreements. To pin down the effects of the agreements with
greater precision, we then turn to panel regressions for VAX ratios, gross trade, and value
added trade.
    We use data on economic integration agreements assembled by Scott Baier and Jeffrey
Bergstrand, which covers the 1960-2005 period.42 There are five types of trade agreements
recorded in the Baier-Bergstrand data: (1) one-way preferential agreements, (2) two-way
preferential agreements, (3) free trade agreements, (4) customs unions, (5) common markets,
and (6) economic unions. These agreements are ordered from “shallow” to “deep,” where
deeper agreements entail larger border concessions, tighter integration of trade policies, and
more substantial coordination of economic policy.43
    We define an indicator for the existence of a regional trade agreement that takes the value
one if a country pair has an agreement that is classified as a free trade agreement or stronger
(i.e., agreements 3 to 6). Further, we present some results splitting agreements by type,
defining separate indicators for preferential trade agreements (PTA) covering both one-way
and two-way preferential agreements, free trade agreements (FTA), and “deep integration
agreements” (CUCMEU) covering customs unions, common markets, and economic unions.
With this classification, an individual country pair may transit from no agreement to an
agreement, as well as transit from one type of agreement to another.44
  40
      In the cross-section, indirect trade is particularly important for countries whose exports are dominated
by agriculture and natural resources, which are extensively used as intermediates.
   41
      One might expect that adoption of multilateral agreements, such as WTO entry, would influence frag-
mentation as well. Unfortunately, we cannot examine this proposition given the country coverage of our
data. Since 38 of the 42 countries in our sample are WTO members during the entire sample, there is not
enough variation to confidently pin down the effects of WTO entry.
   42
      The data is available at: http://www.nd.edu/~jbergstr/.
   43
      Agreement types 4 to 6 entail common tariff policies against outsiders. Common markets entail substan-
tial behind-the-border integration. Economic unions are associated with coordination of economic policy,
such as adoption of common monetary policy.
   44
      For example, Argentina and Brazil have a pre-existing preferential agreement that switches to a free


                                                     25
5.3.1    Changes in VAX Ratios around RTAs

To begin, we present a visual demonstration of how VAX ratios change surrounding adoption
of regional trade agreements. Loosely speaking, we take an event study approach. We
compare VAX ratios for the ‘treatment group’ of bilateral country pairs that are members
of an RTA during our sample to VAX ratios for a pair-specific ‘control group’ in a window
surrounding adoption of the RTA.
    To be concrete, let (i, j) denote a pair of countries that form an RTA during the sample
period. Then we define the composite VAX ratio at time t for this pair as:

                                     vaijt + vajit
                  CV AXt (i, j) =
                                      xijt + xjit
                                                                                                       (14)
                                                    xijt                      xjit
                                   = V AXijt                  + V AXjit                 .
                                                xijt + xjit               xijt + xjit

This is simply a trade-weighted average of V AXijt and V AXjit . As a dating convention, we
normalize t for each pair to count years before and after the adoption of the RTA.45
   Further, let us define a set of countries C(i, j) to be used in constructing counterfactual
VAX ratios for pair (i, j). We define the composite VAX ratio for countries i and j vis-a-vis
these countries as:
                         X (vacjt + vajct ) + (vacit + vaict )
    CV AX t (i, j) =
                                 (xcjt + xjct ) + (xcit + xict )
                       c∈C(i,j)
                                                                                                       (15)
                         X                      xcjt + xjct                      xcit + xict
                     =          CV AXt (c, j)                  + CV AXt (c, i)                 ,
                                                   X(c)                            X(c)
                        c∈C(i,j)


where X(c) ≡ xcjt + xjct + xcit + xict . This counterfactual is the analog to Equation (14)
constructed for countries i and j against the country set C(i, j) separately, and then averaged
across i and j using trade weights. There are many possible ways to define C(i, j). Here we
define C(i, j) to be the set of countries with whom both i and j never form an RTA.46
    For each pair, we compute CV AXt (i, j) and CV AX t (i, j), and then take an unweighted
trade agreement with the adoption of Mercosur. Similarly, many Eastern European countries have FTAs
during the 1990’s that transition to CUCMEUs as they enter the EU.
  45
     For example, the U.S. and Mexico have t = 0 in 1994 when NAFTA is formed, t = −1 in 1993, and t = 1 in
1995. In our calculations, we include country pairs that form RTAs prior to 1970 (e.g., France and Germany),
starting the counter at t = 0 in 1970 for these pairs. Results are not sensitive to inclusion/exclusion of these
pairs, since most RTA’s are formed after 1970.
  46
     For example, say i is Spain and j is Germany. Spain enters the EU in 1986, and we want to look at how
the bilateral VAX ratio between Spain and Germany changes around that time. We compare this change to
VAX ratios for Spain and Germany with countries that neither Spain nor Germany ever form an RTA (e.g.,
the United States, Japan, etc.).



                                                      26
average of each series across all pairs. We plot the resulting ‘treatment’ and ‘control’ series in
Figure 11 in a forty year window around the date of adoption of the RTA. Most agreements
are adopted near the middle of the sample, but obviously not all agreements have all twenty
years of data on each side of the agreement. Therefore, we also plot a 90% confidence interval
around the mean in the figure, which naturally increases as we move away from the event
date as sample sizes fall.
    Prior to RTA adoption, CV AXt (i, j) and CV AX t (i, j) are quite similar across the treat-
ment and control groups. There is then a strong divergence between the two, coinciding
with adoption of the RTA. CV AXt (i, j) drops sharply near the RTA adoption date, and
then continues to fall for roughly a decade thereafter. This slow adjustment is not surpris-
ing, both because RTAs are typically phased in and trade patterns may be slow to adjust.
Suffice it to say, the sharp divergence in value added to export ratios between the ‘treat-
ment’ and ‘control’ groups here is strong prima facie evidence that trade agreements influence
fragmentation.

5.3.2    Panel Regressions

To formalize these results and control for confounding factors, we turn to panel regressions.
Specifically, the core regression takes the form:

                 log(yijt ) = φy0 + φyit + φyjt + β y T radeAgreementijt + γijy + ηijt
                                                                                   y
                                                                                       ,               (16)

where T radeAgreementijt takes the value one if i and j are both in a particular trade
agreement at time t. In some specifications, we add a pair-specific linear trend (δijy t) as
well.47
    In this estimation, we treat the latent variable γijy as a fixed effect, following Baier and
Bergstrand (2007). The pair fixed effect accounts for endogenous adoption of agreements
based on characteristics of the bilateral pair that are not time varying.48 The estimate of β y
is then an estimate of how outcomes vary within country pair before and after adoption of the
trade agreement, controlling for time-varying source and destination effects. We also report
results for specifications below that include a pair-specific linear trend, which further removes
the concern that RTA adoption depends on pair-specific trends in trade or fragmentation.
  47
     Given the correlation between VAX changes and distance, we have also run this specification controlling
for the changing effect of distance over time. The results, included in Appendix B, are robust to including
this additional control.
  48
     See also Magee (2008) and Anderson and Yotov (2011). In addition, pair fixed effects obviously absorb
pair-specific unobserved trade costs. They have therefore been used in related work not focused on RTAs,
such as Glick and Rose (2002), Baldwin and Taglioni (2007), and Head, Mayer, and Reis (2010).



                                                    27
    In Figure 2, we report estimation results for panel regressions with data at 5 year intervals
from 1970 to 2005. We use data at five year intervals due to concerns about serial correlation
in shocks and possibly sluggish adjustment of trade to shocks or policy changes.49 Further,
we run the panel regressions both in levels and first differences, and cluster standard errors
in both specifications by country pair.
    We turn first to estimation results for the VAX ratio in Panel A. We find that adoption
of trade agreements typically lowers VAX ratios among countries in those agreements. For
RTAs, we find that the VAX ratio falls by 5-7% following adoption of an agreement. In
columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, we split out the effects of different agreements. We find that there
is no effect on the VAX ratio of signing a preferential agreement (which does not induce the
RTA indicator to switch on). In contrast, both adoption of an FTA or CUCMEU lower the
VAX ratio. Further, “deeper” agreements are associated with larger declines in the VAX
ratio than shallow agreements. Following adoption of a CUCMEU, the VAX ratio declines
between 10-15% in the levels regresion, whereas adoption of a FTA is associated with a drop
of 6-7%.50
    The response of gross and value added trade flows to RTA adoption are reported in
Panels B and C. Consistent with the changes in VAX ratios, we find that gross exports rise
more following the adoption of RTAs than do value added exports, and more for “deep”
rather than “shallow” agreements.51 That said, both value added and gross exports rise
following adoption of trade agreements in level terms. This is sensible, since RTAs lower
trade costs for both final goods, as well as intermediate inputs (some of which are absorbed
in the destination). The key is that there appears to be a differential effect on final versus
intermediate trade that results in a lower value added content of bilateral trade.
    In the specifications thus far, the RTA indicators measure the average treatment effect
comparing all pre-agreement observations to all post-agreement observations for each pair.
There are a number of reasons to believe that this may bias downwards the estimated effect of
trade agreements. For one, trade agreements are phased in, so there may be a relatively small
initial impact of the agreement that grows over time. Moreover, even once trade barriers
come down, it may take some time for trade flows to respond to those changes. Finally,
in the data, countries that adopt FTAs often adopt strong agreements (such as common
  49
     Baier and Bergstrand (2007) and Anderson and Yotov (2011) also use data at four or five year intervals.
The main problem with using the data at five year intervals is that many trade agreements are signed in
intervening years, so we lose some precision in dating agreements. We have checked that our results go
through in specifications using annual data and the exact timing of agreements.
  50
     The effects are slightly smaller in the first differences specification, but the ordering of effects by agree-
ment strength holds there as well.
  51
     Magee (2008) and Roy (2010) have also documented larger responses of trade to deep versus shallow
trade agreements.



                                                        28
markets) at a later date. So the depth of liberalization evolves over time within pairs. The
adjustment dynamics observed in the ‘event study’ diagrams suggest these issues may be
worth examining more carefully.
    To illustrate the dynamics surrounding adoption of the trade agreements, we adopt a
more flexible functional form.52 We define separate indicator variables for five year intervals
following adoption of an RTA: RTA one is the first year, RTA two is the 5th year, RTA
three is the tenth year, and RTA four/more takes the value one for years 15 onward. Each
coefficient then estimates the average difference in the VAX ratio in a particular year after
the adoption of the RTA from the average VAX ratio during the pre-RTA period.
    We report the coefficients on these phased-in RTA indicators in Table 3.53 Consistent
with the dynamics in Figure 11, the impact of RTA adoption appears to grow over time.
Upon adoption of the RTA, VAX ratios fall by 5-7% and then continue to fall over the
duration of the agreement. In the first-differenced specifications, the total effect of the RTA
levels off at around 12% decline in the VAX ratio. Value added and gross exports follow
similar adjustment dynamics, with value added exports rising between 25-35% and gross
exports rising between 35-45% in the long run.

5.3.3    Decomposing Changes in VAX Ratios around RTAs

Finally, we use the approximate VAX ratio again to examine the mechanics of adjustment
following RTA adoption. In Figure 12, we plot the log Approximate VAX Ratio and compo-
nents for bilateral partners around four major trade reforms: United States-Mexico (Mexican
liberalization and NAFTA), United States-Canada (CUSFTA), Argentina-Brazil (Mercosur),
and Germany-Spain (EU entry and completion of the Single Market). In the figure, we break
up the Reflection/Redirection Adjustment into separate terms for Reflection and Redirec-
tion, and we plot the negative of each term so that the four series in the figure sum to the
log Approximate VAX ratio.54 There are three points to take away from the figures.
    First, changes in the Absorption Ratio and Reflection/Redirection Adjustments tend to
dominate changes in the Approximate VAX ratio in these RTA episodes. In contrast, indirect
  52
     Our approach is similar to Head, Mayer, and Reis (2010), who use this non-parametric procedure to
explore trade dynamics following decolonization.
  53
     All columns in this table include exporter-year and importer-year fixed effects. Columns 1 and 2 contain
a pair fixed effect, while column 2 also contains a pair-specific linear trend. Columns 3 and 4 are regressions
in first differenced data, where column 4 includes
                                                   a pair fixed effect toabsorb pair-specific linear trends.
  54                                             reflection
                                                         ijt  +redirection
                                                                     ijt      reflection     redirection
     To do this, we use the fact that log 1 +          absorptionijt       ≈ absorptionijt + absorptionijt when
                                                                                        ijt            ijt
reflection and redirection are small relative to absorption. In practice, this approximation is very accurate
in our data. To keep the figures from getting cluttered, we do not plot the actual VAX ratios in the figure.
Changes in actual VAX ratios tend to be about twice as large as changes in Approximate VAX ratios upon
adoption of RTAs, consistent with previous results.



                                                      29
exports are smooth around RTA dates. For United States-Mexico, United States-Canada,
and Argentina-Brazil, changes in indirect exports are practically zero. For Germany-Spain,
indirect trade actually rises slowly over time, consistent with Spain and Germany serving
each other through third countries (e.g., common EU partners). This attenuates the amount
by which their bilateral VAX ratios fall. Second, adjustment tends to be asymmetric across
partners depending on the direction of trade. A common pattern is that one partner sees
changes in the Reflection/Redirection Adjustments, while the other sees changes in the
Absorption Ratio.
    This general characterization masks important heterogeneity across agreements in how
reflection versus redirection adjust, however. This heterogeneity is the third takeaway. Look-
ing at United States-Mexico or United States-Canada, the common pattern is that increases
in Reflection trade dominate changes in Approximate VAX ratios for the United States ex-
porting to Canada/Mexico. On the flipside, the VAX ratio for exports from Mexico/Canada
to the United States falls mainly due to adjustment in the Absorption Ratio. These are of
course two sides of the same coin, as one country’s reflected/redirected exports are the other
country’s imported inputs used to produce exports. These agreements therefore induced
fundamentally bilateral adjustments in production chains.
    In contrast, for Argentina-Brazil or Germany-Spain, adjustments vis-a-vis third countries
are more important. For example, for Argentina exporting to Brazil, there is a substantial
decline in the Absorption Ratio, but no corresponding rise in reflection in flows from Brazil
to Argentina. This is consistent with Argentina increasingly being used as a platform to
serve the Brazilian market.55 A similar triangular pattern emerges for Spanish exports to
Germany after 1992, where redirection trade rises substantially. On the flip side, Germany’s
absorption ratio falls after 1992, explaining most of the drop in the VAX ratio for German
exports to Spain. These example highlight the rich adjustment dynamics that underlie the
overall decline in VAX ratios following RTAs.


6      Conclusion
Theorists and policymakers alike are devoting attention to analyzing cross-border production
fragmentation. Consistent with this attention, we have shown that the rise in production
fragmentation over time is pervasive. We highlight, however, changes in fragmentation are
unevenly distributed across sectors, time, countries, and trade partners. The value added
  55
    For Brazil exporting to Argentina, redirection trade becomes more important over time – particularly
after the 2001 Argentine devaluation. This is further evidence suggesting that Argentina emerged as an
input processing cog in triangular regional production chains.



                                                  30
content of trade has fallen most in the past two decades, fallen most within manufacturing,
fallen most for countries undergoing structural transformation toward manufacturing, and
fallen most among trade partners that are physically proximate or have adopted bilateral
trade agreements.
    The fact that fragmentation has increased unevenly suggests two paths for future work.
On the one hand, one can take changes in fragmentation for granted and explore what they
imply for analysis of international trade and macroeconomic data. For example, how does
the rise in fragmentation influence the mapping between observed changes in trade and the
associated production or welfare gains? Or, how has the rise of production fragmentation
changed how shocks are transmitted across borders? On the other hand, one can explore
the determinants of fragmentation within the context of quantitative models. For example,
how important are trade frictions relative to country-specific determinants of fragmentation?
Or, how might fragmentation patterns evolve under alternative policy scenarios? In future
work, we plan to exploit the rich historical variation in fragmentation in parameterizing
quantitative frameworks to address these questions.




                                             31
References
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
   to the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.

Anderson, James E., and Yoto V. Yotov. 2011. “Terms of Trade and Global Efficiency
   Effects of Free Trade Agreements.” NBER Working Paper No. 17003.

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. “Do Free Trade Agreements Actually
    Increase Members’ International Trade?” Journal of International Economics, 71: 72–
    95.

Baldwin, Richard, and Anthony Venables. 2010. “Relocating the Value Chain: Off-
    shoring and Agglomeration in the Global Economy.” NBER Working Paper No. 16611.

Baldwin, Richard, and Daria Taglioni. 2007. “Trade Effects of the Euro: a Comparison
    of Estimators.” Journal of Economic Integration, 22(4): 780–818.

Baldwin, Richard, and Daria Taglioni. 2011. “Gravity Chains: Estimating Bilateral
    Trade Flows When Parts and Components Trade Is Important.” NBER Working Paper
    No. 16672.

Behar, Albert, and Caroline Freund. 2011. “Factory Europe?            Brainier but not
   Brawnier.” Unpublished Manuscript, The World Bank.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010. “Demand Spillovers and
   the Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 295–326.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. “Vertical Linkages and the
   Collapse of Global Trade.” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
   101(3): 308–312.

Bridgman, Benjamin. 2008. “Energy Prices and the Expansion of World Trade.” Review
    of Economic Dynamics, 11: 904–916.

Bridgman, Benjamin. 2012. “The Rise of Vertical Specialization Trade.” Journal of In-
    ternational Economics, 86(1): 133–140.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2010. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare
    Effects of NAFTA.” Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University.

Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of
   International Trade.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1707–1721.

Chen, Hogan, Matthew Kondratowicz, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2005. “Vertical Special-
   ization and Three Facts about U.S. International Trade.” North American Journal of
   Economics and Finance, 16: 35–39.

Costinot, Arnaud, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang. forthcoming. “An Elementary
    Theory of Global Supply Chains.” The Review of Economic Studies.

                                          32
Daudin, Guillaume, Christine Rifflart, and Daniele Schweisguth. 2011. “Who Pro-
   duces for Whom in the World Economy?” Canadian Journal of Economics, 44: 1403–
   1437.

Disdier, Anne-Celia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance
    Effect on Bilateral Trade.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1): 37–48.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Gene M. Grossman. 1982. “Trade and Protection with Multi-
    stage Production.” Review of Economic Studies, 49(4): 583–594.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.”
    Econometrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2011. “Trade
    and the Global Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16666.

Erumban, Abdul Azeez, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, Marcel Timmer, and
   Gaaitzen de Vries. 2011. “Slicing Up Global Value Chains: The Role of China.”
   Unpublished Manuscript, University of Groningen.

Glick, Reuven, and Andrew K. Rose. 2002. “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade?
    The Time-Series Evidence.” European Economic Review, 46: 1125–1151.

Grossman, Gene, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2007. “The Rise of Offshoring: It’s
   Not Wine for Cloth Anymore.” In The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy
   Implications. 59–102. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Reis. 2010. “The Erosion of Colonial Trade
   Linkages After Independence.” Journal of International Economics, 81: 1–14.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
   Specialization in World Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 54: 75–96.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012a. “Accounting for Intermediates:
   Production Sharing and Trade in Value Added.” Journal of International Economics,
   82(2): 224–236.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012b. “Proximity and Production Frag-
   mentation.” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3): 407–411.

Koopman, Robert, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “Give
   Credit Where Credit Is Due: Tracing Value Added in Global Production Chains.”
   NBER Working Paper No. 16426.

Levchenko, Andrei, and Jing Zhang. 2011. “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage:
    Measurement and Welfare Implications.” NBER Working Paper 16806.

Magee, Christopher S.P. 2008. “New Measures of Trade Creation and Trade Diversion.”
   Journal of International Economics, 75: 349–362.

                                         33
Moses, Leon. 1955. “The Stability of Interregional Trading Patterns and Input-Output
   Analysis.” The American Economic Review, 45: 803–826.

Noguera, Guillermo. 2011. “Augmented Gravity: Accounting for Production Sharing.”
   Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia Business School.

Orefice, Gianluca, and Nadia Rocha. 2011. “Deep Integration and Production Networks:
    An Empirical Analysis.” WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD-2011-11.

Roy, Jayjit. 2010. “Do Customs Union Members Engage in More Bilateral Trade than
    Free-Trade Agreement Members?” Review of International Economics, 18(4): 663–681.

Timmer, Marcel. 2012. “The World Input-Output Database (WIOD): Contents, Sources
   and Methods.” WIOD Working Paper Number 10.

Trefler, Daniel, and Susan Chun Zhu. 2010. “The Structure of Factor Content Predic-
    tions.” Journal of International Economics, 82: 195–207.

Wang, Zhi. 2011. “A Model to Construct Time Series Databases for Global Trade, Produc-
   tion, and Consumption Linkages.” Unpublished Manuscript, U.S. International Trade
   Commission.

Yeats, Alexander J. 2001. “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” In Fragmen-
    tation: New Production Patterns in the World Economy. , ed. Sven Arndt and Henryk
    Kierzkowski, Chapter 7. Oxford University Press.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?”
    Journal of Political Economy, 111: 52–102.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2010. “Can Multi-Stage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?” The
    American Economic Review, 100(1): 364–393.




                                         34
Table 1: Long Difference Panel Regressions with Proxies for Trade Costs
                       Panel A: Change in log of VAX Ratio
                         (A1)        (A2)        (A3)         (A4)        (A5)
   Log Distance          0.097***    0.092***    0.097***     0.096***    0.091***
                         (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.013)
   Contiguity                        -0.038                               -0.034
                                     (0.034)                              (0.036)
   Colonial Origin                               0.008                    0.021
                                                 (0.032)                  (0.038)
   Common Language                                            -0.016      -0.016
                                                              (0.026)     (0.031)
   R2                    0.48        0.48        0.48         0.48        0.48

                  Panel B: Change in log of Value Added Exports
                         (B1)        (B2)        (B3)         (B4)        (B5)
   Log Distance          -0.089*** -0.111*** -0.087*** -0.112***          -0.109***
                         (0.029)   (0.032)   (0.028)   (0.029)            (0.031)
   Contiguity                      -0.170                                 -0.054
                                   (0.106)                                (0.110)
   Colonial Origin                           -0.444***                    -0.338***
                                             (0.102)                      (0.119)
   Common Language                                     -0.280***          -0.177**
                                                       (0.072)            (0.090)
   R2                    0.66        0.66        0.67         0.66        0.67

                      Panel C: Change in log of Gross Exports
                         (C1)        (C2)        (C3)         (C4)        (C5)
   Log Distance          -0.186*** -0.203*** -0.184*** -0.207***          -0.200***
                         (0.036)   (0.041)   (0.035)   (0.036)            (0.040)
   Contiguity                      -0.132                                 -0.019
                                   (0.126)                                (0.130)
   Colonial Origin                           -0.451***                    -0.358**
                                             (0.127)                      (0.149)
   Common Language                                     -0.264***          -0.161
                                                       (0.090)            (0.111)
   R2                    0.61        0.61        0.61         0.61        0.61
   Obs.                  1180        1180        1180         1180        1180

 Note: Changes in the logs of bilateral VAX ratios, value added exports, and gross
 exports between 2005 and 1975 (e.g., log(yij,2005 ) − log(yij,1975 ) are regressed on
 trade cost proxies and exporter and importer fixed effects. Robust standard errors
 are in parentheses. Significance levels: * p < .1 , ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Sample
 excludes pairs with bilateral exports smaller than $1 million or VAX ratios larger
 than ten in 1975.




                                            35
                  Table 2: Panel Regressions with Regional Trade Agreements
                                            Panel A: log of VAX Ratio
                                In Levels                                   In First Differences
                 (A1)       (A2)         (A3)        (A4)          (A5)       (A6)        (A7)       (A8)
 RTA          -0.069***   -0.068***                             -0.050***   -0.049***
               (0.015)     (0.017)                               (0.014)     (0.016)
 PTA                                     -0.005    -0.006                                 0.003     0.005
                                        (0.012)   (0.015)                                (0.012)   (0.015)
 FTA                                   -0.057*** -0.068***                              -0.047*** -0.047***
                                        (0.016)   (0.018)                                (0.015)   (0.017)
 CUCMEU                                -0.145*** -0.096***                              -0.072*** -0.054***
                                        (0.019)   (0.023)                                (0.017)   (0.020)
 R2              0.76        0.86         0.77        0.86         0.22       0.32        0.22       0.32

                                      Panel B: log of Value Added Exports
                                In Levels                                   In First Differences
                 (B1)        (B2)        (B3)        (B4)          (B5)       (B6)        (B7)       (B8)
 RTA           0.256***   0.223***                               0.167***   0.163***
                (0.031)    (0.033)                                (0.022)    (0.026)
 PTA                                     0.020        0.005                               -0.001     -0.007
                                        (0.033)      (0.032)                             (0.028)    (0.033)
 FTA                                   0.235***     0.219***                            0.161***   0.158***
                                        (0.034)      (0.035)                             (0.025)    (0.030)
 CUCMEU                                0.418***     0.319***                            0.262***   0.231***
                                        (0.045)      (0.046)                             (0.032)    (0.041)
 R2              0.97        0.99         0.97        0.99         0.62       0.67        0.62       0.67

                                         Panel C: log of Gross Exports
                                In Levels                                   In First Differences
                 (C1)        (C2)        (C3)        (C4)          (C5)       (C6)        (C7)       (C8)
 RTA           0.325***   0.290***                               0.217***   0.212***
                (0.041)    (0.045)                                (0.032)    (0.038)
 PTA                                     0.025        0.011                               -0.004     -0.012
                                        (0.041)      (0.043)                             (0.037)    (0.044)
 FTA                                   0.293***     0.287***                            0.208***   0.205***
                                        (0.045)      (0.049)                             (0.036)    (0.043)
 CUCMEU                                0.563***     0.415***                            0.334***   0.285***
                                        (0.058)      (0.063)                             (0.044)    (0.056)
 R2              0.96        0.98         0.96        0.98         0.47       0.53        0.47       0.53


 Pair Trend                   X                        X                       X                      X
 Obs.           11184       11184        11184       11184         9362       9362        9362       9362

Note: All regressions include exporter-year and importer-year fixed effects. Columns 1 to 4 include pair fixed
effects, and columns 2 and 4 include a linear pair-specific trend. Columns 6 and 8 include pair fixed effects,
capturing pair-specific trends. Standard errors, clustered by country pair, are in parentheses. Significance
levels: * p < .1 , ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Sample excludes pair-year observations with bilateral exports
smaller than $1 million or VAX ratios larger than ten.

                                                       36
Table 3: Panel Regressions with Regional Trade Agreements with Phase In Effects
                                 Panel A: log of VAX Ratio
                                      In Levels           In First Differences
                                  (A1)        (A2)           (A3)      (A4)
              RTA one       -0.057*** -0.067***          -0.056*** -0.060***
                             (0.014)   (0.017)            (0.014)   (0.017)
              RTA two       -0.089*** -0.103***          -0.083*** -0.090***
                             (0.017)   (0.023)            (0.017)   (0.023)
              RTA three     -0.130*** -0.117***          -0.098*** -0.099***
                             (0.021)   (0.028)            (0.021)   (0.029)
              RTA four/more -0.169*** -0.144***          -0.115*** -0.114***
                             (0.023)   (0.035)            (0.024)   (0.034)
              R2                  0.77        0.86           0.22      0.33

                            Panel B: log of Value Added Exports
                                      In Levels           In First Differences
                                  (B1)        (B2)           (B3)      (B4)
              RTA one           0.201***    0.209***      0.183***   0.189***
                                 (0.027)     (0.032)       (0.023)    (0.029)
              RTA two           0.309***    0.315***      0.265***   0.277***
                                 (0.036)     (0.046)       (0.031)    (0.044)
              RTA three         0.409***    0.331***      0.280***   0.267***
                                 (0.046)     (0.057)       (0.038)    (0.056)
              RTA four/more     0.358***    0.323***      0.260***   0.248***
                                 (0.054)     (0.069)       (0.045)    (0.068)
              R2                  0.97        0.99           0.62      0.67

                               Panel C: log of Gross Exports
                                      In Levels           In First Differences
                                  (C1)        (C2)           (C3)      (C4)
              RTA one           0.258***    0.276***      0.239***   0.249***
                                 (0.030)     (0.034)       (0.032)    (0.037)
              RTA two           0.398***    0.417***      0.348***   0.367***
                                 (0.036)     (0.045)       (0.046)    (0.058)
              RTA three         0.539***    0.448***      0.378***   0.366***
                                 (0.043)     (0.054)       (0.059)    (0.077)
              RTA four/more     0.527***    0.467***      0.375***   0.362***
                                 (0.048)     (0.067)       (0.072)    (0.092)
              R2                  0.96        0.98           0.47      0.53
              Obs.               11184       11184           9362      9362

            Note: All regressions include exporter-year and importer-year fixed
            effects. Columns 1 and 2 contain pair fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4
            control for linear pair trends. Standard errors, clustered by country
            pair, are in parentheses. Significance levels: * p < .1 , ** p < .05,
            *** p < .01. Sample excludes pair-year observations with bilateral
            exports smaller than $1 million or VAX ratios larger than ten.



                                             37
                                                               Figure 1: World Value Added to Export Ratios
      .9




                                                                                                                                       Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing                          Non−Manufacturing Industrial Production




                                                                                                                                                                                         1.3
                                                                                                      1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2
                                                                                                              VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                   VAX Ratio
      .85




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.1 1
          .8
  VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                                                                                                1970       1980       1990        2000      2010                  1970    1980      1990     2000      2010
.75




                                                                                                                                                  Manufacturing                                                   Services




                                                                                                                                                                                         1.55
                                                                                                                  .65




                                                                                                                                                                                   1.4 1.45 1.5
                                                                                                                .6
                                                                                                      VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                      VAX Ratio
      .7




                                                                                                        .55
                        VAX




                                                                                                                  .5
                        VAX w/o ROW
      .65




                                                                                                                                                                                         1.35
                                                                                                                  .45
               1970   1975               1980          1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010                                  1970       1980       1990        2000      2010                  1970    1980      1990     2000      2010




                                                       (a) Aggregate                                                                                                     (b) By Sector




               Figure 2: Changes in Value Added to Export Ratios from 1970 to 2009, by Country
                                         .1        0
                               Change in VAX Ratio
                             −.2        −.1
                                         −.3

                                                       THA
                                                       HUN
                                                       VNM
                                                         IRL
                                                       MEX
                                                       ROM
                                                       TUR
                                                       CHN
                                                       AUT
                                                       DEU
                                                        IND
                                                       ESP
                                                       PRT
                                                        BEL
                                                       KOR
                                                       SWE
                                                       POL
                                                       FRA
                                                       NLD
                                                       CAN
                                                       CHL
                                                       USA
                                                         ITA
                                                         FIN
                                                       ARG
                                                       GRC
                                                        IDN
                                                       BRA
                                                        ZAF
                                                        ISR
                                                       DNK
                                                       AUS
                                                       CHE
                                                       GBR
                                                        JPN
                                                        NZL
                                                       NOR




                             Note: Czech Republic, Estonia, Russia, Slovakia, and Slovenia are excluded due to
                             missing data in 1970.




                                                                                                 38
Figure 3: Average Annual Change in Value Added to Export Ratio versus Average Annual
Real GDP Per Capita Growth, by Country
                                                       .005




                                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                0




                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                                  GBR JPN
                                             Ave. Annual Change




                                                                                                                                                                                              EST
                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                          CHE DNK    ISR
                                                                           RUS




                                                                          ZAF                       BRA
                                                                                                    GRC                                             IDN
                                                                                          ARG     USA FIN CHL
                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                  ROM




                                                                                                  NLD

                                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                               SWE BEL                                                                                           KOR



                                                                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                                     AUTPRT
                                                    −.005




                                                                                                  DEUESP                              IND
                                                                                                     TUR                                                                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                             MEX




                                                                                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                                                    HUN
                                                                                                                                                        THA
                                                                                                                                                  POL
                                                       −.01




                                                                                                                                                                                          VNM
                                                       −.015




                                                                    0                                        .02               .04             .06                                                                                                             .08
                                                                                                         Ave. Annual Growth in Real PPP GDP per Capita

                                             Note: Countries with vertical labels have less than 40 years of data.




Figure 4: Between and Within Decomposition of Changes in Value Added to Export Ratios
versus Average Annual Real GDP Per Capita Growth, by Country

                                                                          Between Term                                                                                                                                         Within Term
                                       ROM




                                                                                                                                                                           .01
            .005




                                     CHE   GBRFINNOR
                                                  CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SVK




                                         SWE  JPN
                               RUS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                   .005
                                                                           SVN




                                            BEL
                                           DEU
                                          AUS
                                         DNK
                                      NZL CAN
                                           USA
                                             GRC
     Ave. Annual Change




                                                                                                                                                                  Ave. Annual Change
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CZE




                                             BRA
                                           NLD                                                                                                                                                              MEX
                                              AUTPRT                                                                                                                                                                                                               KOR
                                                HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL
                                                                                                         EST




                                                   ITA ESP
                                                   FRA                     INDIRL                                                                                                             ZAF                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ISR
                                     ARG                                                                                                                                                                                                         THA
                                                       ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EST




                               ZAF
           −.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VNM




                                                                                      IDN                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ESP NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GRC         IND
                                                                    CZE




                                                                                                              KOR                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                            TUR                                                                                                                                                  NLD PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                RUS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 USA JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GBRAUT
                                                                                                                                                              −.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IRL
 −.01




                                                                                          THA                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SVN




                                           MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BELFIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                    POL




                                                                                                                                CHN
                                                                                                        VNM




                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWE   HUN CHL
                                                                                                SVK
            −.015




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROM
                                                                                                                                                                           −.01




                           0                      .02               .04             .06                                               .08                                                 0                       .02               .04             .06                        .08
                                              Ave. Annual Growth in Real PPP GDP per Capita                                                                                                                   Ave. Annual Growth in Real PPP GDP per Capita


                          Note: Countries with vertical labels have less than 40 years of data.




                                                                                                                                                        39
Figure 5: Aggregate Value Added to Export Ratios for China, Germany, Japan, and United
States
              1
              .9
         VAX Ratio
            .8.7




                              United States       Germany
                              Japan               China
              .6




                       1970        1980         1990        2000   2010
                                                year




   Figure 6: Aggregate Value Added to Export Ratios for Selected Emerging Markets
              1
              .9  .8
          VAX Ratio
         .7   .6




                              Mexico          Brazil
                              Thailand        Poland
              .5




                       1970        1980         1990        2000   2010
                                                year




                                                  40
                    Change in VAX Ratio                                                     Change in VAX Ratio
             −.5     0            .5              1                                   −.5            0                 .5

       IRL                                                                      IRL
     THA                                                                      THA
     KOR                                                                      MEX
      FIN                                                                     CAN
     AUT                                                                      KOR
      BEL                                                                     DEU
     NLD                                                                       ISR
     DEU                                                                      AUT




                                                                                                                  US imports
                                                                                                                  US exports
     CHL                                                                       IND
     FRA                                                                      SWE




                                             Japan imports
                                             Japan exports
      IDN                                                                       FIN
     SWE                                                                      CHL
     AUS                                                                       BEL
     MEX                                                                      FRA
     USA                                                                      ARG
      NZL                                                                     NLD
     CAN                                                                       IDN




                                                             Japan
     CHE                                                                      CHE
      ZAF                                                                      NZL
      ISR                                                                      ZAF




                                                                                                                                    United States
      IND                                                                     TUR
       ITA                                                                    BRA
     BRA                                                                      GBR
     ESP                                                                       JPN
     GBR                                                                      GRC
     NOR                                                                      DNK
     ARG                                                                        ITA
     TUR                                                                      ESP
     DNK                                                                      AUS
     PRT                                                                      PRT
     GRC                                                                      NOR
     ROM                                                                      ROM




41
                     Change in VAX Ratio                                                    Change in VAX Ratio
             −.4   −.2        0         .2             .4                             −.4     −.2           0                .2

     THA                                                                        IRL
       IRL                                                                    THA
     DEU                                                                      AUT
     TUR                                                                      MEX
     NLD                                                                      TUR
      BEL                                                                     KOR
     SWE                                                                      SWE
     FRA                                                                      ROM




                                             UK imports
                                             UK exports
     KOR                                                                      PRT
     ESP                                                                      ESP
      IDN                                                                      BEL
                                                                                                                  Germany imports
                                                                                                                  Germany exports




     CAN                                                                      NLD
      IND                                                                      IND
     USA                                                                      CHE
       ITA                                                                    GBR
      ZAF                                                                     FRA
      ISR                                                                       FIN
     AUS                                                                      DNK
                                                                                                                                    Germany




     DNK                                                                        ITA
     GRC                                                                       NZL
                                                             United Kingdom

       FIN                                                                    ARG
     NOR                                                                      USA
     PRT                                                                       ZAF
      NZL                                                                     GRC
     MEX                                                                      BRA
     BRA                                                                       ISR
     CHE                                                                       JPN
     CHL                                                                       IDN
      JPN                                                                     NOR
     ROM                                                                      CHL
     AUT                                                                      CAN
     ARG                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                                    Figure 7: Changes in Bilateral Value Added to Export Ratios for Selected Countries
Figure 8: Changes in Approximate Bilateral VAX Ratios and the Margins of Trade from
1975 to 2005 for Selected Countries
                                                                                             Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Italy




                                                                                                         Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Log Approx. VAX
                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
    −.5 −.4 −.3 −.2 −.1 0
     Change in Log VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in Log VAX Ratio
                                                                            IDNIND
                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                       NOR
                                                                             GRCAUS
                                                                              USA                                                                                                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                               ROM JPN
                                                                                                                                                       NOR                                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZAF                                                  JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR             ZAF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.4 −.3 −.2 −.1 0
                                                                           NZLZAF
                                                                            ARG                                                                   CHL                                                                                                                                                       JPN                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                JPN                                                                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IND                                                                      NOR




                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                        ISR GBR
                                                                        ITA CAN                                                                AUS ROM ZAF    IND USA                                                                                                                            AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AUSCAN        PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IND        BRA
                                                                       BRA                                                                  CAN   GRC          IDN              ARG                                                                                                              BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PRT                                                                       IDN
                                                                       FRA
                                                                     TUR                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                              NZL                                                                                                                                                  CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRC CAN                                                             FRANZLCHE NLD                                 ARG
                                                                  MEXPRT
                                                                      KOR                                                                     ITA                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NZL                                                                 BEL GRCDNK         HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM
                                                                  ESP
                                                                   DNK                                                                          FRA KOR
                                                                                                                                                          PRT       TUR
                                                                                                                                                                               BRA                                                                                                             NLD NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FRA                                                                   KORPOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ESPROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SWE ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DEU             TUR                                       CHN




                                                                                                         −.3 −.2 −.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −.3 −.2 −.1
                                                                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                                                                        DNK                                                                                                                                    ARG
                                                                    CHE                                                                        ESP               MEX FIN                                                                                                                                                                                             AUTMEX               FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          POL CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TUR
                                                              POL
                                                                FIN                                                                                        SWE                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                              SWE                                                                          BEL POL                 HUN                              CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROM HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BEL
                                                           NLD                                                                                        NLD                             VNM                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                                                 AUT                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FIN                                                                                                    IRL
                                                             BEL
                                                            CHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                     AUT    HUN                                                                                                         IRL
                                      THA
                                              IRL          VNM                                                                                                                                                                                                           IRL                                                                                                                            THA
                                                                                                                                                                                        THA                                                              THA


                                −.3            −.2       −.1        0                               .1                               −.1          −.08      −.06       −.04                              −.02                                     −.3            −.2       −.1        0                                .1                                −.06           −.04      −.02        0                                   .02
                                              Change in Log Approx. VAX                                                                           Change in Absorption Ratio                                                                                    Change in Log Approx. VAX                                                                               Change in Absorption Ratio
    Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                         Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Log Approx. VAX
                           .1




                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                       NOR                                                           NOR                                                                                                                                      ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GBR USAJPN                                                                 GBRZAFUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                  CHL                                                        CHL                                                                                                         NOR                                                                                             NOR
                                                                  JPN                                                                  JPN
                      0




                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                      AUS IND ROM                                                                                                                                                                                              CHL            PRT                                                                CHL       PRT
                                                  ZAF   USA         GRC
                                                                      IDNARG                    CAN                                      ZAFAUS
                                                                                                                                              GRCROM
                                                                                                                                            USA    IND
                                                                                                                                                    IDN CAN
                                                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRA     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN               CAN                                                          AUS     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IDN CAN
                                             GBR            NZL                                                                       GBR NZL                                                                                                                          ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NZL CHE FRA                                              NLD                                       NZLFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE     ARG NLD
                                                              ITA            ISR                                                                 ITA         ISR                                                                                            GRC    DNK                     HUN VNMBEL                                                             GRC   DNK        HUNVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                              BRA       FRA KOR                                                                                FRA BRA
                                                                                                                                                     KORPRT
                                                             TURPRT                                                                                       TUR                                                                                           ROM   KORTUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHN ISRPOL      SWE DEU                                                                            ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESPTURSWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL    DEU CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISR
    −.3 −.2 −.1




                                                                                                         −.3 −.2 −.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.3 −.2 −.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −.3 −.2 −.1
                                            CHE   DNK                                                                                           CHE DNK
                                                          ESP       MEX                                                                                ESP                                                                                                                     MEX AUT                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FINMEX
                                                 FIN                                                                                                        FIN MEX                                                                                     FIN
                                             POL      SWE                                                                                                POL SWE
                                CHN         HUN          BEL                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                               HUN  CHN
                                  VNM                  NLD                                                                                                        VNM
                                                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                    AUT                                                                                                                          AUT                                                                                                                                IRL                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                  IRL                                                                                                                   IRL

                                                              THA                                                                                                                                        THA                                                                      THA                                                                                                                                              THA



                                   .02    .04     .06     .08     .1    .12                                                             0            .1            .2          .3                                                                 0         .02      .04     .06     .08     .1                                                              0           .1            .2          .3
                                     Change in Indirect Exports Adjustment                                                            Change in Reflection/Redirection Adjustment                                                                        Change in Indirect Exports Adjustment                                                            Change in Reflection/Redirection Adjustment




                                                                                                    Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                             Australia
                                                                                                         Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Log Approx. VAX
                      1 1.5




                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUN
     Change in Log VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in Log VAX Ratio
                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                            AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                                                                        .5




                                                                          ROM                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUT
                  .5




                                                                    GBR                                                                                                                                  ROM                                                                       DEU                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FRA                                                                                       NORPOL
                                                                    CHE                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                                                                                                  CHEGBR                                                                                                       ESP                                                                                    AUT
                                                          DEU                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                       USA BEL                                                                                        BEL                                                                                                                      CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              JPN                                                                                        DEU FRA USA
                                                      FRA                                                                                                                     DEU                                                                                       TURNZL                                                                                        CHE    ITA
    −1 −.5 0




                                                      ESP
                                                       JPN
                                                     TUR
                                                     ITA                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BEL                                                                                              ESP
                                                    BRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF                                                                                          CAN GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHL             JPN                                           ARG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                            FRA USA
                                                                                                                                                              JPN ESP                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM
                                                                                                                 0




                                               SWE ARG                                                                                                          ITA            TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                BRA                                                                                 ROM IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BRAKOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DNK                                                                                             NZL     NLD KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BELZAF MEX
                                                 CAN
                                                MEX
                                                NLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CHN                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TUR            IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VNMIND SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −1 −.5




                                               DNK                                                                                              CAN NLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRA
                                               CHN
                                                KOR
                                                                                                                                               KOR           DNK MEX              SWE       CHN                                                                                                                                                                                 ROM        CHN
                                AUS                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRLISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           THA                                                                                                                              ISR
                                 NOR
                                 ZAFFIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IRL              THA
                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −.5
                                                                                                         −.5




                                                                                                                                                          NOR                   ZAF
                                                                                                                                     AUS                                                                                                          FIN                                                                                                                                             FIN

                                −.5                0            .5                                  1                                −.1          −.05       0       .05                            .1                                             −.5               0             .5                                   1                                −.06           −.04     −.02        0                                   .02
                                              Change in Log Approx. VAX                                                                           Change in Absorption Ratio                                                                                    Change in Log Approx. VAX                                                                               Change in Absorption Ratio
    Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                         Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Change in Log Approx. VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Log Approx. VAX
                           1




                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                              AUT                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HUN                                                                  HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GRC                                                     GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                   .5




                                                                                                                        .5




                                                                          ROM                                                                                       ROM                                                                                                                       PRT                                                                              PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NOR POL                                                                 NOR                    POL
                                                                   GBR
                                                                    CHE                                                                           GBR    CHE                                                                                                                              AUT                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA                                                                                             DEU
                                                                    BEL
                                                                   DEU                                                                                           BEL   DEU                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA                                                                                  ITACHE FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JPN ARGESP                                                                         CHL GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN              ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAN                                                                                            CAN ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                         USA
                                                         JPN
                                                           FRA
                                                            ESP                                                                                   JPNUSAFRAITA ESP
            0




                                                                                                                 0




                                                         TUR
                                                          ITA
                                                        ARG
                                                        BRA                                                                                                     TUR
                                                                                                                                                               ARG
                                                                                                                                                              BRA                                                                                                          NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAF    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MEX BEL                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAFKOR IDN   NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MEX    BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DNKIDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRA  VNM                                                                                           DNK   TURBRA VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IND
                                                       CAN
                                                        MEX SWE                                                                                     KOR CAN         MEX
                                                     KOR
                                                      NLD
                                                    DNK
                                                     CHN                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                                          DNK                     CHN                    SWE                                                        ROM CHNSWE                                                                                            ROM               CHN                  SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISR                                                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IRLTHA                                                                                                                                         IRL          THA
                                             FIN                                                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −.5
    −.5




                                                                                                         −.5




                                NOR
                                ZAF                                                                                                         NOR         ZAF
                                  AUS                                                                                                         AUS                                                                                                        FIN                                                                                                                                             FIN

                                −.5              0             .5           1                                                        −.1       0          .1         .2       .3                                                                  −.5               0             .5           1                                                         −.1       0          .1        .2        .3
                                      Change in Indirect Exports Adjustment                                                           Change in Reflection/Redirection Adjustment                                                                        Change in Indirect Exports Adjustment                                                            Change in Reflection/Redirection Adjustment




                                                           Figure 9: Bilateral Value Added to Export Ratios for the United States
                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .9
                .9
 VAX Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAX Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .7




                                                           Exports to Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                  Exports to Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6




                                                           Exports to France                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exports to Canada
                .7




                                1970                                    1980                             1990                                                 2000                                   2010                                         1970                                   1980                                1990                                                    2000                                         2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                42
                Figure 10: Coefficients on Proxies for Trade Costs from Panel Regressions




                                                                                                   −.6
  .25
                   Distance coefficient for VAX ratio
  .2




                                                                                                   −.8
  .15
  .1




                                                                                                   −1
  .05




                                                                                                                 Distance coefficient for value added exports
                                                                                                                 Distance coefficient for exports




                                                                                                   −1.2
  0




         1970            1980                 1990                 2000                2010               1970         1980                1990                 2000                 2010
  .15




                                                                                                   .6
                                                     Contiguity coefficient for VAX ratio




                                                                                                   .4
  .1




                                                                                                   .2
  .05




                                                                                                   0
  0




                                                                                                   −.2
  −.05




                                                                                                   −.4




                                                                                                                                     Contiguity coefficient for value added exports
                                                                                                                                     Contiguity coefficient for exports
  −.1




                                                                                                   −.6




         1970            1980                 1990                 2000                2010               1970         1980                1990                 2000                 2010
  .05




                                                                                                   .8




                                                                                                                                     Language coefficient for value added exports
                                                                                                                                     Language coefficient for exports
                                                                                                   .6
  0
  −.05




                                                                                                   .4
  −.1




                                                                                                   .2




                                                     Language coefficient for VAX ratio
  −.15




                                                                                                   0




         1970            1980                 1990                 2000                2010               1970         1980                1990                 2000                 2010
 0




                                                                                                   1




                                                        Colony coefficient for VAX ratio                                                Colony coefficient for value added exports
                                                                                                                                        Contiguity coefficient for exports
 −.05




                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                   .6
 −.1




                                                                                                   .4
 −.15




                                                                                                   .2
 −.2




        1970             1980                1990                 2000                2010              1970          1980                1990                  2000             2010




Note: See Equation (12) for regression specification. Regressions include time-varying source and
destination fixed effects. In each set of lines, the middle line indicates the point estimate, and
upper/lower lines denote 90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered by country pair.



                                                                                              43
Figure 11: Bilateral Value Added to Export Ratios around Adoption of Regional Trade
Agreements
         .9
         .85
         .8
         .75
         .7




                      Treatment
                      Control
         .65




               −20   −15    −10     −5         0         5        10   15   20
                               Normalized year of adoption of RTA




                                                 44
Figure 12: Approximate Bilateral VAX Ratios and the Margins of Trade around Adoption
of Regional Trade Agreements
                                 United States to Mexico                                                   Mexico to United States
     0




                                                                               0
     −.05




                                                                               −.05
     −.1




                                                                               −.1
                   Log Approx. VAX                                                           Log Approx. VAX
     −.15




                                                                               −.15
                   Absorption Ratio                                                          Absorption Ratio
                   Indirect Trade Adj.                                                       Indirect Trade Adj.
                   Neg. Reflection Adj.                                                      Neg. Reflection Adj.
                   Neg. Redirection Adj.                                                     Neg. Redirection Adj.
     −.2




                                                                               −.2
            1970          1980             1990            2000   2010                1970          1980             1990            2000   2010
                                           year                                                                      year


                                United States to Canada                                                   Canada to United States




                                                                               0
     0
     −.05




                                                                               −.05
     −.1




                                                                               −.1
     −.15




                   Log Approx. VAX                                                           Log Approx. VAX
                                                                               −.15




                   Absorption Ratio                                                          Absorption Ratio
     −.2




                   Indirect Trade Adj.                                                       Indirect Trade Adj.
                   Neg. Reflection Adj.                                                      Neg. Reflection Adj.
                   Neg. Redirection Adj.                                                     Neg. Redirection Adj.
     −.25




                                                                               −.2




            1970          1980             1990            2000   2010                1970          1980             1990            2000   2010
                                           year                                                                      year


                                   Brazil to Argentina                                                       Argentina to Brazil
     0




                                                                               0
     −.05




                                                                               −.05
     −.1




                                                                               −.1




                   Log Approx. VAX                                                           Log Approx. VAX
                   Absorption Ratio                                                          Absorption Ratio
                   Indirect Trade Adj.                                                       Indirect Trade Adj.
                   Neg. Reflection Adj.                                                      Neg. Reflection Adj.
                   Neg. Redirection Adj.                                                     Neg. Redirection Adj.
     −.15




                                                                               −.15




            1970          1980             1990            2000   2010                1970          1980             1990            2000   2010
                                           year                                                                      year


                                   Germany to Spain                                                          Spain to Germany
                                                                              .1
    .1




                                                                              0
    0




                                                                              −.1
    −.1




                   Log Approx. VAX                                                           Log Approx. VAX
                   Absorption Ratio                                                          Absorption Ratio
                   Indirect Trade Adj.                                                       Indirect Trade Adj.
                   Neg. Reflection Adj.                                                      Neg. Reflection Adj.
                                                                              −.2




                   Neg. Redirection Adj.                                                     Neg. Redirection Adj.
    −.2




          1970           1980              1990          2000     2010              1970           1980              1990          2000     2010
                                           year                                                                      year




   Note: Vertical lines indicate dates of trade liberalizations. US-Mexico lines indicate unilateral
   liberalization by Mexico in 1986 and NAFTA in 1994. US-Canada line indicates CUSFTA in 1989.
   Argentina-Brazil lines indicate Mercosur signing in 1991 and entry into force in 1995. Germany-Spain
   lines indicate Spanish EU entry in 1986 and Single Market in 1993.
                                                                         45
A       Data Appendix
A.1      Data Construction
This section describes the data sources and procedures that we use to construct the input-
output framework.

A.1.1     Production and National Accounts
To measure macroeconomic aggregates and sector-level production over time, we use the
United Nations National Accounts Main Aggregates Database and the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI).56 For all countries other than China, we take aggregate
GDP and the expenditure side breakdown of GDP (consumption, investment, government
spending, exports, and imports) from the UN data. We use data from the WDI for China.57
We also take sector-level GDP data from these sources for the four composite sectors, and we
include the sector definitions in Table 5. Finally, from the WDI, we also extract goods and
services trade shares in total exports and total imports. These are based on Balance of Pay-
ments statistics, and we use these shares to split exports and imports from the expenditure-
side GDP data into goods versus services.

A.1.2     Trade Data
We combine commodity trade statistics and the trade aggregates in the national accounts to
generate a database of bilateral trade flows that is consistent in level terms with the national
accounts. We discuss three issues in production of this data. First, we discuss bilateral
commodity trade data sources and correspondences to industry data. Second, we discuss
how we harmonize these with national accounts data. Third, we discuss how we deal with
missing bilateral services trade data.
    For bilateral goods trade, we draw on the NBER-UN Database for 1970-2000 and the
CEPII BACI Database for 1995-2009.58 The country coverage of the trade data is nearly
universal. We collapse the data to include the 42 countries and one composite rest-of-the-
world region, including all remaining countries.
    This data is reported on a commodity-basis, but can be translated from commodities to
industries (e.g., ISIC-based industries) using existing correspondences. To convert the UN-
NBER data from SITC Revision 2 to ISIC Revision 2, we use a correspondence developed by
Marc Muendler.59 To convert the BACI data from six-digit Harmonized System categories
to ISIC Revision 3, we use correspondences from the United Nations and the CEPII.60 We
then map ISIC sectors into our four composite sectors.
  56
     See http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama and http://databank.worldbank.org.
  57
     Comparing the WDI to the UN data, values for most countries are nearly identical. China is an exception.
Upon examination of other sources (e.g., Chinese national accounts), the WDI data appears more reliable.
  58
     See http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu and http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/baci.htm.
  59
     See http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/html/resource.html.
  60
     Priority is given to the official UN correspondence, available at http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/
registry/regdnld.asp. We use the correspondence from the CEPII for remaining unmatched categories.




                                                     46
    Using these correspondences, we are able to match upwards of 95% of trade to industries
in most country years. The match quality for the post-1995 BACI data is nearly perfect. For
most countries, the match quality is also quite good using the NBER-UN data. However,
this historical data is of lower quality overall.61 Further, there are some matching problems
in this data for particular countries in specific years. These are due to problems in the raw
source data, not in the correspondences. In the NBER-UN data, there are often fictional
aggregate categories ending in ’X’ (e.g., 04XX) that include trade that could not be disag-
gregated. Where possible, we map directly from higher levels of aggregation (e.g., SITC 2
digit codes) to composite sectors. In some cases, there is trade in remaining unallocated
SITC 1 digit residual categories, and we split this data across composite sectors using the
world-level allocation shares for matched categories to composite sectors within that SITC
1-digit classification.
    Having formed a complete bilateral goods trade dataset, we need to match this to ag-
gregate exports and imports in the national accounts. We take bilateral trade shares within
each composite sector from the bilateral goods trade data, and combine them with the levels
of goods exports and imports reported in the national accounts to form bilateral trade flows.
This procedure yields two conflicting estimates for each bilateral trade flow, one ‘exporter
report’ from multiplying the trade share times reported multilateral exports in a given source
country and a corresponding ‘importer report’ from multiplying the trade share times re-
ported multilateral imports in a given destination. To reconcile the flows, we average the
flows to form a single bilateral flow and then add or subtract the residual for each country
(e.g., the exporter report minus the reconciled trade flow) from trade flows with the rest of
the world. This operation preserves overall reported exports and imports (and hence the
trade balance) for each reporting country.
    Next, we turn to constructing bilateral services trade flows using multilateral data on
services trade and goods bilateral trade shares. The objective is for estimated bilateral
services trade flows to follow closely goods bilateral trade flows while satisfying adding up
constraints. Note that one cannot just apply the bilateral goods import shares to aggregate
imports of services, as it is not guaranteed that the exporting countries produce enough
services to export those volumes. To obtain a consistent dataset, we thus run an optimization
program that finds the bilateral services flows that minimize the weighted squared distance
from flows created with average bilateral goods exports for each bilateral pair, subject to the
constraint that the sum of the bilateral flows be equal to multilateral exports and imports.

A.1.3     Input-Output Tables
We start with the OECD Input-Output Database (1995 and 2011 editions) and the IDE-
JETRO Asian input-output tables (for 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000).62 We extract domestic
and imported input-output matrices, as well as sector-level data on gross production, value
added, domestic and imported final demand (encompassing household and government final
consumption expenditure and gross capital formation), and multilateral exports and imports.
Benchmark tables are available for various benchmark years, listed in Table 4. The original
  61
     For example, Russia is missing import data for 1992-1995, and we impute import shares for these years
using data for 1991 and 1996.
  62
     See http://www.oecd.org/sti/inputoutput/ and http://www.ide.go.jp/.


                                                   47
OECD data covers 35 sectors for years before 1990 and 48 sectors for years after 1995.
However, not all countries report data at this level of disaggregation, and therefore the raw
data contain rows and columns filled with zeros.63 Aggregation to the four composite sectors
for our main calculation resolves these problems. We provide the mapping between OECD
sectors and our four composite sectors in Table 5. We also include the mapping between 24
sectors in the IDE-JETRO data to our composite sectors.
    In the input-output tables, there are other accounting variables that we do not explicitly
provide for in our framework, such as statistical discrepancies, other adjustments, non-
comparable imports, and net taxes. In general, these tend to be small or exactly zero.64
To eliminate these entries, we distribute them across the variables in our framework by
minimizing the weighted squared distance between adjusted values and the raw uncleaned
data, subject to the constraint that input-output accounting identities hold. The algorithm
is very similar to the one used for the main estimation described below, so we omit details
here. In practice, the results of the full harmonization procedure are not very sensitive to
how we resolve these data issues. Finally, values in the input-output tables are reported in
national currency in the OECD input-output tables. We convert these to U.S. dollars using
end-of-year exchange rates from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (AE series) and
OECDStat. Values in the IDE-JETRO tables are reported in U.S. dollars.
    Because the input-output and national accounts data are taken from separate sources,
they are not internally consistent, even in given years in which they are all directly observed.
On top of this, input-output tables are available only for selected benchmark years, which
differ across countries. To track changes through time, we would need (at the very least)
data for all countries in a series of benchmark years. To track changes at higher frequencies
between benchmark years, or to extrapolate recent benchmark years into the past where
no benchmarks are available, we need to combine the benchmarks with information we can
measure at higher frequencies over longer time spans.
    In doing so, we give priority to matching the national accounts and commodity trade data
discussed above, which are available in all years and likely measured with less error. We then
adjust the input-output benchmarks to be consistent with these data using a constrained
least squares procedure. The objective is to minimize the weighted squared distance between
the estimates and the data for years in which we have input-output and final demand data
and interpolations of that data for years in which we do not, subject to a set of accounting
identities. We pause here to spell out this procedure.
    To start, for each country i and year t, we collect sector-level value added in a 1 × 4
vector vati , multilateral sector-level exports and imports in 4 × 1 vectors xti and mti , and
define aggregate final demand as scalar fit .65 These data are available for all countries and
years in the database.
               t          t
    Now let IDi    and IIi  be 4 × 4 matrices of domestic and imported inputs, with elements
  t              t
IDi (s, r) and IIi (s, r) representing domestic and imported inputs used in sector r supplied
                     t
by sector s, let fDi    and fIit be 4 × 1 vectors of domestic and imported final demand, and
  63
     For example, some countries include pharmaceuticals within chemical products rather than reporting
them separately.
  64
     Some entries are exactly zero due to how data is reported from national authorities to the OECD.
  65
     We construct xti and mti by multiplying exports and imports in the national accounts by sector trade
shares defined above.


                                                   48
let yit be a 4 × 1 vector of sector-level output. Define bti as a 44 × 1 vector containing the
                                    t    t
vectorized unknown elements of IDi    , IIi , ctDi , ctIi and yit , and let ι be a 4 × 1 vector of ones.
    Omitting country and year indices, for each country and year we solve the following
program:

                                              min (b − β)0 W −1 (b − β)
                                               b
                                       subject to
                                             y0 =   ι0 II + ι0 ID + va
                                            y =     fD + ID ι + x
                                            m=      fI + II ι
                                             f=     ι0 fI + ι0 fD
                                            b ≥     0,

where βit is a 44 × 1 vector containing initial values used in the computation, and Wit is a
44 × 44 weighting matrix with diagonal equal to βit .
    Initial values are chosen based on combining the input-output and national accounts data.
We set the initial values for input-output coefficients to those in the input-output tables for
benchmark years, and linear interpolations between benchmark years. For years outside
the range of years bracketed by benchmarks, we set the initial values equal to the closest
benchmark year.66 We construct sector output by dividing sector value added by sector
value added to output ratios from input-output tables for years in which we have them,
linear interpolations for years between benchmark years, and nearest benchmark years for
years outside the range of benchmarks. Following a similar procedure, we construct sector
final demand by multiplying aggregate final demand by sector shares in final demand from
input-output tables.
    The solution to this program provides annual domestic and imported intermediate input
use and final demand values for the 42 countries between 1970 and 2009. We emphasize
that trade and macro data are given priority here, so we match GDP, GDP expenditure
categories (including the trade balance), sector-level GDP, and sector-level trade exactly.
All the adjustment is borne by input-output coefficients and sector-level demand shares.
Upon inspection, these adjustments are reasonably small and generally plausible.
    The remaining step in constructing the global input-output framework is to disaggregate
input and final goods sourcing across bilateral partners in each year. That is, to take the
imported input use matrix AIi and imported final demand vector cIi for each country and
disaggregate them across trade partners. To do so, we apply the proportionality assumptions
discussed in the main text.

A.2         Benchmarking the Data
In this section, we benchmark our results and explore their robustness to variation in as-
sumptions. First, we compare our value added to export ratios against alternatives computed
  66
       This is likely a conservative assumption, as it minimizes changes in input-output tables over time.



                                                       49
from different data sources. Second, using the GTAP data, we examine how aggregation and
assumptions regarding the rest-of-the-world influence the results.

A.2.1     Benchmarking Value Added to Export Ratios
In Johnson and Noguera (2012a), we used data from the GTAP 7.1 Database for 2004 to
parameterize the global input-output framework and compute bilateral value added to export
ratios. This data is different than the data used in this paper in several dimensions. At the
most basic level, the raw data sources used and the harmonization procedures applied to the
data are different.67 One major difference is that GTAP data is available at the 57 sector
level of disaggregation, as opposed to our four sectors. Moreover, GTAP data is available
for many more countries, with direct data on 94 separate countries plus imputed data for 19
composite regions.
    To assess our data and procedures, we compare the VAX ratio estimates for 2004 in this
paper to those in Johnson and Noguera (2012a). We start by comparing aggregate value
added to export ratios for the 41 countries included in both data sets in Figure 13.68 The
data are evidently clustered tightly around the 45◦ line. Thus, the multilateral VAX ratio
lines up well to the data reported in Johnson and Noguera (2012a).
    Moving down to the sector level, we plot VAX ratios for non-manufacturing and manufac-
turing sectors in Figure 14. Here again the positive correlation between the two alternative
measures is strong. The match is noisier at the sector level than in the aggregate, which
is to be expected.69 Further, for manufacturing, we see that on average the value added to
export ratios in this paper tend to be somewhat lower than those reported in Johnson and
Noguera (2012a). For non-manufacturing, average levels are similar. Notwithstanding these
average differences, cross-country patterns are similar. Further, these level differences aggre-
gate away because the share of manufactures in trade in our data (taken from the national
accounts) is slightly lower than in the GTAP data.
    Moving further down to the bilateral level, we plot bilateral value added to export ratios
for the largest four exporters in Figure 15. The data matches up well for these four countries,
within reasonable tolerances. Looking at all pairs with exports greater than $1 million and
VAX ratios less than 10 (the core sample used in our regression results), the raw correlation
is about 0.85. Thus, our bilateral results also match up well to our previous work.
    This discussion implies that our data matches stylized facts that we have documented
previously using cross-sectional GTAP data. This good match is remarkable for several
reasons. First, given differences in sector detail across the two data sets, these results
demonstrate that sector aggregation appears to be relatively unimportant. Second, given
that the GTAP data contains detailed information for individual countries that we group
  67
     In terms of raw data, a major difference is that GTAP collects input-output tables contributed from
researchers in individual countries, often constructed directly from national sources. In contrast, we rely on
data compiled and processed by the OECD. The differences in harmonization procedures between our data
and GTAP are too numerous to list individually here.
  68
     Whereas we have separate data for Israel, GTAP includes Israel in a composite region. Therefore, we
drop Israel from all the analysis below.
  69
     The raw data is noisier at the sector level than in the aggregate. Further, if errors are concentrated in
relatively small sectors, then they will tend to have little influence on aggregates.



                                                     50
into a rest-of-the-world composite, these results also suggest that this data simplification
does not distort results. We return to discussion of these two issues below.
    In addition to these cross-sectional comparisons, we can also compare our data to existing
results on changes in the value added content of trade through time. Hummels, Ishii, and
Yi (2001) and Chen, Kondratowicz, and Yi (2005) compute the domestic content of exports
using benchmark tables from the OECD for one country at a time. These calculations differ
from ours in that they use the raw OECD data, and do not aggregate or harmonize the data
with other data sources as we do. Moreover, they use a different – though related – formula
to compute domestic content, which applies to a special case of our general framework.70
Lastly, they present data for merchandise trade in their published work, which we compare
to our statistics for total trade.
    We plot a comparison of our VAX ratios to the domestic content of exports over time in
Figure 16 and Figure 17.71 Figure 16 plots all benchmark years for each country in a single
figure, and therefore depicts how well the data matches level differences across countries
simultaneously with changes over time. Figure 17 plots benchmark years for each country
separately over time. Our VAX ratios match the cross-country variation in domestic content
well, which is the dominant source of variation in Figure 16. Our VAX ratios also match
the time series dynamics of domestic content for most countries, though levels are different
for some countries. Where there are divergences, these are generated almost entirely by
differences in the underlying data we use versus that used by Hummels et al. and Chen
et al., not differences in formulas used in computing VAX ratios versus domestic content.72
Further, some of these divergences may be explained by the fact that Hummels et al. and
Chen et al. construct domestic content ratios for merchandise trade only, whereas we include
all trade.

A.2.2     Sector Aggregation and Trade with the Rest-of-the-World
In computing VAX ratios in this paper, we aggregate sectors into four broad composite
sectors and assume that all exports from the 42 countries in our framework to the rest-of-
the-world are absorbed there (i.e., not used to produce imports from the rest of the world).
The similarity of the VAX ratios in this paper to those using GTAP data, presented above,
suggest that we do not lose much information in making these two simplifications.
    To reinforce this point, we now demonstrate the consequences of these two assumptions in
the GTAP data directly. This fixes the underlying data, and varies aggregation and rest-of-
the-world assumptions only. Specifically, we aggregate the GTAP data from 57 to 4 sectors
for 41 countries (as above) and a rest-of-the-world composite.73 We then compute value
added trade first using the input-output information for the rest-of-the-world contained in
the GTAP data. We plot the resulting VAX ratios by country in the left panel of Figure 18,
  70
     See Johnson and Noguera (2012a) for further discussion.
  71
     The data on domestic content comes from Table 2 in Chen, Kondratowicz, and Yi (2005).
  72
     We can compute the Hummels-Ishii-Yi measure of domestic content using our data and compare it to the
aggregate VAX ratio presented in the figures. We find these are very similar. Results available on request.
  73
     GTAP sectors 1 to 14 are included in agriculture and natural resources, sectors 15 to 18 and 43 to 46 are
included in non-manufacturing industrial production, sectors 19 to 42 are included in manufacturing, and
sectors 47 to 57 are included in services.



                                                     51
against VAX ratios computed using all 57 sectors. We then discard input-output information
for the rest-of-the-world, and recompute VAX ratios assuming that all exports to the rest
of the world are absorbed there. We then plot these VAX ratios by country against the 4
sector results in the right panel of Figure 18.
    As is evident in the figure, the numerical values of the VAX ratios and country-rankings
are not very sensitive to varying the level of aggregation or assumptions regarding the rest of
the world.74 Similar results hold for sector-level and bilateral VAX ratios. These results may
seem initially surprising, but are an outcome of a basic fact in the data. In building sectors in
input-output data, national accountants are guided in aggregation by the “principle of homo-
geneity.” The principle requires that each composite industry’s output is produced using a
unique set of inputs, roughly speaking. In our data, sectors within our composite sectors are
more similar among themselves than they are to other sectors.75 Further, extending this idea
from sectors to countries, aggregation among countries with similar production and trade
structures will also tend to minimize the loss of information in aggregation. Combined with
the fact the countries included separately in our framework account for the bulk of world
trade and GDP, it is then not so surprising that the results are fairly robust to changes in
assumptions regarding the rest-of-the-world.




  74
     One point to note is that assuming all trade with the rest-of-the-world is absorbed there tends to push
VAX ratios for the 41 countries down, which is related to the observation in figures above that our VAX
estimates in this paper appear slightly lower in several figures than VAX estimates in Johnson and Noguera
(2012a).
  75
     For example, if one looks at manufacturing as a whole, value added to output ratios are relatively similar
across sectors, as opposed to comparing manufacturing versus services. So this implies a minimal disaggre-
gation of the aggregate economy requires splitting the data into manufacturing versus non-manufacturing.
Further, within composite sectors, sub-sectors are also similar in the structure of their sectoral input linkages
as well as economic openness.


                                                       52
                              Table 4: Input-Output Data Coverage
 Country           Code   early 70s   mid 70s   early 80s   mid 80s   early 90s   mid 90s   early 00s   mid 00s
 Argentina         ARG        .          .          .          .           .       1997         .           .
 Australia         AUS      1968       1974         .        1986        1989    1994/95    2001/02     2004/05
 Austria           AUT        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000       2005
 Belgium           BEL        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000       2005
 Brazil            BRA        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Canada            CAN      1971       1976       1981       1986        1990      1995       2000        2005
 Chile             CHL        .          .          .          .           .       1996         .         2003
 China             CHN        .          .          .        1985        1990      1995      2000        2005
 Czech Republic    CZE        .          .          .          .           .         .        2000        2005
 Denmark           DNK      1972       1977       1980       1985        1990      1995       2000        2005
 Estonia           EST        .          .          .          .           .       1997       2000        2005
 Finland           FIN        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 France            FRA      1972       1977       1980       1985        1990      1995      2000         2005
 Germany           DEU        .          .        1978       1986     1988, 1990   1995      2000         2005
 Greece            GRC        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Hungary           HUN        .          .          .          .           .       1998       2000        2005
 India             IND        .          .          .          .           .     1993/94    1998/99     2003/04
 Indonesia         IDN        .          .          .        1985        1990      1995      2000        2005
 Ireland           IRL        .          .          .          .           .       1998      2000         2005
 Israel             ISR       .          .          .          .           .       1995         .         2004
 Italy             ITA        .          .          .        1985          .      1995        2000        2005
 Japan             JPN      1970       1975       1980       1985        1990      1995      2000         2005
 Korea             KOR        .          .          .        1985        1990     1995        2000        2005
 Mexico            MEX        .          .          .          .           .         .          .        2003
 Netherlands       NLD      1972       1977       1981       1986          .       1995       2000        2005
 New Zealand       NZL        .          .          .          .           .     1995/96    2002/03         .
 Norway            NOR        .          .          .          .           .      1995        2000        2005
 Poland            POL        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Portugal          PRT        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000       2005
 Romania           ROU        .          .          .          .           .         .        2000        2005
 Russia            RUS        .          .          .          .           .      1995        2000          .
 Slovak Republic   SVK        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Slovenia          SVN        .          .          .          .           .      1996        2000        2005
 South Africa      ZAF        .          .          .          .           .       1993       2000       2005
 Spain             ESP        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Sweden            SWE        .          .          .          .           .       1995       2000        2005
 Switzerland       CHE        .          .          .          .           .         .        2001          .
 Thailand          THA        .          .          .        1985        1990     1995       2000         2005
 Turkey            TUR        .          .          .          .           .       1996       1998       2002
 United Kingdom    GBR      1968         .        1979       1984        1990      1995      2000         2005
 United States     USA      1972       1977       1982       1985        1990      1995       2000        2005
 Vietnam           VNM        .          .          .          .           .         .       2000           .

Note: Regular font indicates table is from the OECD Input-Output Database. Italics indicate table is from
the IDE-JETRO Asian Input-Output Tables.




                                                      53
                                                                                     Table 5: Sector Aggregation and Definitions
Sector                         Name                                                                    ISIC Rev. 2        ISIC Rev. 3.1                               1995 OECD codes                 2011 OECD codes       Asian IO codes
                 1             Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing                                   1                   A,B                                           1                                 1                 1 to 5
                 2             Non-manufacturing industrial production                                    2,4,5                C,E,F                                       2,25,26                       2, 3, 26 to 30         6,7,20,21
                 3             Manufactures                                                                 3                    D                                       3 to 24, 35                         4 to 25             8 to 19
                 4             Services                                                                  6 to 9                G to Q                                     27 to 34                          31 to 48             23, 24




                                                                   Figure 13: Value Added to Export Ratios in 2004, by Country
                                                    .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                           ARGJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                                                                                                         IND
                                                                                                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                        ZAF NZL
                                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                 TUR GBR
                                                                                                                                                                   USA CHL
                                       VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                                                          CHN                          FRAESP ITA
                                                                                                                          ROU
                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                                    CHE  CANFIN
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                 .7




                                                                                                                     PRTPOL SWEDEU
                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                                   AUT

                                                                                                        SVN
                                      .6




                                                                                                THA                IRL
                                                                               EST                                       NLD
                                                                                             CZE
                                                                                            VNM
                                                                                HUNSVK
                                                                   BEL
                                                    .5




                                                                         .5                       .6                .7                                                        .8                                .9
                                                                                                         VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)

                                      Note: Black line denotes the 45◦ line.




                  Figure 14: Value Added to Export Ratios in 2004, by Country and Composite Sector

                                                                     Non−Manufacturing                                                                                                          Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                            .7
           4




                                                                                                                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                               RUS
VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                                                               VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                            CHN                                                                                           IDN
                   3




                                                                                                                                                                              ARG                         JPN
                                                                                                                                              .5




                                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                         ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                          KOR       GBR
                                                 POL
                                                                                DEU                                                                                                   NZL CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                            NOR USA          GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                           ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAF DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                           CHL ROU TUR
                                                                                      KOR                                                                                              CAN IRL
                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                  ITA                                                                                                                                 SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                    SWE                  DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA                MEX
    2




                                                                                                                                                                                       CHEPRT   AUT
                         MEX                   SVK
                                               FRA
                                          CZE BRA                                                                                                                       THA                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                        TUR                                                                                                                                                           POL
                                        CHE FIN                                                                                                                                      CZE
                                     HUNUSA  SVNINDSWE                                                                                                              VNM HUN
                                    PRT  CANZAF
                                                                                                                                            .3




                                            NZL THA
                                           ARG                                                                                                                             SVK
                              AUT
                                BELNLDCHL
                                     ESP       IDN                                                                                                                EST
                                  GBR
                              DNKAUS                                                                                                                                                NLD
                                      RUS                                                                                                                       BEL
                            EST
                          GRCNOR
           1




                               VNM
                                 IRL
                                                                                                                                            .2




                               1                                      2                     3                  4                                           .3                 .4                   .5                .6           .7
                                                                     VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)                                                                                                  VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)


                         Note: Black line denotes the 45◦ line.



                                                                                                                          54
Figure 15: Bilateral Value Added to Export Ratios in 2004 for China, Germany, Japan, and
United States
                                                                        China                                                                                                                      Germany




                                                                                                                                               1.2
                                                                                                        PRT
                1.4     1.2




                                                                                                                                                          1
    VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                                                                   VAX Ratio (this paper)
                                                                                                SVN                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GRC
                 1




                                                                                                  GRC                                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                          CHE                                               .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GBRNOR     IDN
                                                                                   ROU                                                                                                           PRTMEXBRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZAF   TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHL
                                                                                SWE      GBR  ESP AUT                                                                                             ESP
       .8




                                                                                   FRA     TUR                    NOR                                                                     FRA
                                                                              USA INDITA
                                                                                BRA
                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ITA RUS
                                                                                   NZL            POL                                                                                            CHN
                                                      FIN                     DNKARGZAF   RUSSVK                                                                                   KOR POL
                                                                                                                                                                                         FIN
                                                                   IDN JPN
                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                         DEUCAN                                                                                                        DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                                                                                                                     SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                      SWE                  VNM
                                                                              CHL                                                                                                            THA
                                                                                                                                                                                 IRL
                .6




                                                       ESTBEL                                                                                                       CHE
                                    HUN  IRL                          CZE                                                                                          SVK       AUT
                                         KOR
                                       VNM
                                     THA                             NLD                                                                                             HUN                  NLD
                                                                                                                                                                      CZE
                                                                                                                                                                   BEL
                .4




                                                                                                                                               .4




                              .4                            .6                    .8                          1                                               .4                  .6                .8                    1                     1.2
                                                                 VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)                                                                                                       VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)




                                                                        Japan                                                                                                                   United States
                                                                                                                                           1.4
            2




                                                                                  SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SVN
                                                                                                                                                    1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL
 VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                                                             VAX Ratio (this paper)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROU
                  1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRC               ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                                  ROU
                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                            DNK                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUS    NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         DNK       IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                 HUNFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                SWE     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AUS
                                                                GRC PRT                                                                                                                             NZLZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                              EST JPN
                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                      POL                                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                           BRA          FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CZE
                                                                  GBRITA
                                                                 ARG
                                                                 ESP
                                                                       TUR
                                                                       IND
                                                                                                                                                                                 CHE           DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                              CHN
   1




                                              CHE               FRA                                                                                                                       CHL
                                                       ZAF USABRANOR                                                                                                                                   VNM
                                                         AUS RUS AUT
                                                            CHL
                                                            SWE
                                                       MEX
                                                       CAN    SVK                                                                                                             MEX
                                                       NZL
                                                      DEU                                                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                                                                           .6




                                                  IDN   FIN                                                                                                                 CAN BEL
                                                                                                                                                                             THA             NLD
                                            HUNEST
                                          CHN   CZE
                                          IRL VNM
                                              BEL                 NLD                                                                                              IRL
                              KOR
                              THA
            .5




                                                                                                                                           .4




                              .5                             1                      1.5                           2                                           .4            .6              .8            1                   1.2               1.4
                                                                 VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)                                                                                                      VAX Ratio (JN GTAP)


                          Note: Black line denotes the 45◦ line.




                                                                                                                        55
Figure 16: Value Added to Export Ratios Across Countries and Over Time

                                                                                                                    USA72

                                                                                                         USA77
                                                                                                          USA82 AUS70
                                                                                                      USA85    JPN95
            .9




                                                                                                             AUS74
                                                                                                           JPN96
                                                                                                      USA90JPN90
                                                                                                        AUS89
                                                                                                         JPN97
                                                                                                        AUS86
                                                                                       USA97
                                                                                                  JPN85     JPN70
                                                                                                  AUS95
                                                                                               JPN75FRA72
  CKY Domestic Content




                                                                                      DEU78
                                                                                   DEU88 JPN80
                                                                                 DEU90
                   .8




                                                                                  DEU86 GBR70 CAN71

                                                                      DEU95             CAN76
                                                                                     ITA92
                                                                                 CAN81 FRA77
                                                                                   GBR84FRA90
                                                                                  GBR79
                                                                                      GBR90
                                                                                      FRA80
                                                                                  FRA85
                                                                          ITA85 GBR98
                                                                                  CAN90
                                                                                FRA95
                                                           DNK97                CAN86
                                                                       DNK72
                                                           DNK90
        .7




                                                                   DNK77
                                                    DNK85
                                                  NLD72DNK80

                                      NLD86
                                          NLD77
                              NLD95
            .6




                             NLD96
                          NLD98
                           NLD97

                         NLD81
            .5




                                 .6                   .7                          .8                         .9
                                                               VAX Ratio
  Note: Black line denotes the 45◦ line. The measure of Domestic Content is taken
  from Chen, Kondratowicz, and Yi (2005). Country and benchmark year for each
  data point are indicated by country abbreviation and last two digits of benchmark
  year.




                                                                    56
                                                                        Figure 17: Value Added to Export Ratios Over Time, by Country

                                                                                          AUS                                                                       CAN                                                                                                              DNK                                                     FRA
                                             .92




                                                                                                                       .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .9
                                                                                                                                                 VAX                                                                            VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .66 .68 .7 .72 .74 .76
                                                                        VAX
                                                                      DCDC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VAX
                                                                              VAX                                                                             VAX                                                                             VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .85
                                             .9




                                                                              DC




                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                  DC                   VAX                     VAX
                                                                                                 VAXVAX                                                                            VAX                                                                                                       VAX        VAX                  DC                            VAX
                                                                                                 DC DC                                                                                                                                                                                                  DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAX VAX
                                             .88




                                                                                                                                                               DC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DC                                                                                                                 VAX            VAX
                                                                                                                                                                        DC                                                                                             VAX                   DC




                                                                                                                       .75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VAX                                             DC
                                                                                                           VAX                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DC
                                             .86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DC
                                                                                                                                                                                               DC                                                                                                                                          DC      DC
                                                                                                                                                                                    DC                                                                                                                                                                               DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DC
                                             .84




                                                                                                            DC                                                                                                                                                             DC




                                                                                                                       .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .7
                                                                       1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995                                            1970        1975      1980        1985     1990                               1970                                1980                       1990         2000             1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
                                                                                   year                                                                               year                                                                                                            year                                              year


                                                                                          DEU                                                                         ITA                                                                                                            JPN                                                     NLD
                                             .82




                                                                                                                       .72 .74 .76 .78 .8 .82




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .82 .84 .86 .88 .9 .92




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .7
                                                                             DC
                                                                             VAX                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VAX                         VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                               VAX                                                                                               DC
                                                                                               DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VAX                                                            VAX VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DC                         DC
                                                                                           DCVAXDC                                                                                                                                                                                           DC    VAX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .65
                                                                                           VAX                                                                                                                                                                                                     DC
                                             .8




                                                                                                  VAX                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VAX
                                                                                                                                                       VAX                                     DC                                                                                                                                               DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DC                                                      VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DC                                                        VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DC
                                             .78




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAX                                                                                                                      DC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6
                                                                                                            DC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VAX DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VAX                                                                                     VAX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAX
                                                                                                                                                       DC                                                                             DC                                                                                                 VAX
                                             .76




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .55
                                                                                                           VAX                                                                                                                                                             DC                                                            DC

                                                                      1975     1980       1985    1990     1995                                 1984        1986      1988        1990     1992                               1970                                1980                       1990         2000             1970       1980            1990        2000
                                                                                          year                                                                        year                                                                                                            year                                                     year


                                                                                          GBR                                                                       USA
                                                                                                                       .95
                                             .72 .74 .76 .78 .8 .82




                                                                        VAX
                                                                                                 VAX                                              DC
                                                                                          VAX                                                     VAX
                                                                      DCDC          VAX                   VAX                                               DC DC
                                                                                                                                                                    DC
                                                                                                                       .9




                                                                                                                                                            VAX VAX    DC
                                                                                                                                                                   VAX VAX               DC
                                                                                          DC
                                                                                                                       .85




                                                                                    DC
                                                                                                 DC
                                                                                                                                                                                         VAX
                                                                                                          DC
                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                       1970         1980    1990           2000                                 1970           1980          1990          2000
                                                                                       year                                                                           year


                                             Note: The measure of Domestic Content is taken from Chen, Kondratowicz, and
                                             Yi (2005). Marker label DC denotes domestic content, while marker label VAX
                                             denotes the value added to export ratio in this paper.




Figure 18: Value Added to Export Ratios in 2004 Computed using GTAP Data under
Alternative Assumptions

                                                                        VAX Ratios with 57 versus 4 Sectors                                                                                                                                                                                        VAX Ratios With and Without ROW Input−Output Data
            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VAX Ratio (4 sectors without ROW IO data)




                                                                                                                                                                                         rus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .9
            .9




                                                                                                                                                                    bra
                                                                                                                                                                 indzaf ausjpn
                                                                                                                                                 grc         arg idn
 VAX Ratio (4 sectors)




                                                                                                                                                             nzl
                                                                                                                                                               nor                                                                                                                                                                                                              bra
                                                                                                                        turgbr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                jpn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nor grc aus      rus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .8
               .8




                                                                                                                      usa chl
                                                                                                                      ita                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nzl arg ind
                                                                                                                esp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gbr           zaf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           usa           idn
                                                                                                          fra
                                                                                                        chn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                chl tur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         esp
                                                                                                  rou deu dnk
                                                                                                pol   fin
                                                                                                     swe                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        deufra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dnk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  chn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .7




                                                                                        mexche   can
      .7




                                                                                              prt
                                                                                               nld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mex   finrou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           swe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      prt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nld
                                                                                      svnaut
                                                                                         kor
                                                                                          irl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        che
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              irlaut
                                                                                    tha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       svn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                kor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .6
            .6




                                                                 czevnm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cze        tha
                                    hunsvk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              svk vnm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hun
                                    est
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  est
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
            .5




                         bel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bel

                               .5                                        .6                  .7              .8                                                              .9                                                                                                       .5                      .6              .7              .8          .9                                1
                                                                                      VAX Ratio (57 sectors)                                                                                                                                                                                                       VAX Ratio (4 sectors with ROW IO data)


                         Note: Black line denotes the 45◦ line.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              57
B      Supplemental Results
This appendix includes supplemental results mentioned in the text, but omitted from the
main set of figures for brevity. Tables 6 and 7 include data underlying discussion in Sections
4.1 and 4.2. Table 6 includes VAX ratios by sector for the world as a whole, along with the
share of each sector in world trade. Using this information, one can compute the world VAX
ratio in the last column. Further, this information underlies the Between-Within decompo-
sition at the world level. Figure 19 includes elements of the Between-Within decomposition
of bilateral VAX ratios discussed in Section 4.3. Table 8 reports results for the main RTA
regressions including distance interacted with year indicators as additional controls. This
table is a robustness check corresponding to Table 2 in the main text.

                     Table 6: World Value Added to Export Ratio and Components
                 Agriculture            Non-Manufacturing           Manufacturing                  Services
     Year   VAX Ratio   Trade Share   VAX Ratio   Trade Share   VAX Ratio   Trade Share   VAX Ratio    Trade Share   Agg. VAX Ratio
     1970     1.20         0.09         1.10         0.07         0.65         0.64         1.35              0.21        0.87
     1971     1.21         0.08         1.10         0.07         0.64         0.63         1.35              0.21        0.87
     1972     1.21         0.09         1.12         0.07         0.64         0.64         1.37              0.21        0.87
     1973     1.19         0.09         1.11         0.07         0.64         0.64         1.37              0.20        0.86
     1974     1.16         0.08         1.00         0.12         0.62         0.62         1.37              0.18        0.84
     1975     1.17         0.08         1.01         0.12         0.61         0.61         1.39              0.19        0.85
     1976     1.15         0.08         1.01         0.12         0.61         0.61         1.38              0.19        0.85
     1977     1.16         0.07         1.01         0.12         0.61         0.61         1.38              0.19        0.85
     1978     1.15         0.07         1.03         0.11         0.61         0.63         1.40              0.19        0.85
     1979     1.15         0.07         1.02         0.12         0.60         0.62         1.40              0.19        0.84
     1980     1.12         0.06         0.99         0.15         0.59         0.61         1.40              0.18        0.83
     1981     1.12         0.06         0.98         0.15         0.59         0.60         1.41              0.19        0.83
     1982     1.15         0.06         0.98         0.14         0.59         0.61         1.42              0.20        0.84
     1983     1.13         0.06         1.01         0.12         0.59         0.63         1.44              0.19        0.84
     1984     1.14         0.06         0.97         0.13         0.59         0.63         1.46              0.19        0.83
     1985     1.16         0.06         0.98         0.11         0.59         0.64         1.48              0.19        0.84
     1986     1.22         0.05         1.07         0.08         0.60         0.67         1.50              0.20        0.84
     1987     1.22         0.05         1.10         0.07         0.60         0.68         1.50              0.20        0.84
     1988     1.22         0.05         1.14         0.06         0.60         0.69         1.52              0.20        0.84
     1989     1.26         0.05         1.10         0.07         0.59         0.69         1.51              0.20        0.84
     1990     1.33         0.04         1.05         0.07         0.59         0.68         1.49              0.21        0.84
     1991     1.30         0.04         1.08         0.07         0.55         0.67         1.53              0.21        0.83
     1992     1.28         0.04         0.94         0.08         0.54         0.66         1.52              0.22        0.82
     1993     1.31         0.04         1.06         0.07         0.54         0.67         1.52              0.22        0.82
     1994     1.32         0.04         1.14         0.06         0.54         0.69         1.53              0.21        0.82
     1995     1.30         0.04         1.16         0.06         0.53         0.70         1.55              0.21        0.80
     1996     1.30         0.04         1.12         0.06         0.52         0.69         1.54              0.21        0.80
     1997     1.30         0.04         1.11         0.06         0.52         0.69         1.55              0.21        0.79
     1998     1.40         0.03         1.25         0.05         0.51         0.71         1.54              0.21        0.79
     1999     1.38         0.03         1.19         0.05         0.50         0.71         1.55              0.21        0.78
     2000     1.40         0.03         1.07         0.07         0.49         0.70         1.54              0.20        0.77
     2001     1.53         0.02         1.13         0.06         0.49         0.70         1.54              0.21        0.77
     2002     1.53         0.02         1.15         0.06         0.49         0.70         1.55              0.21        0.77
     2003     1.53         0.02         1.12         0.07         0.48         0.70         1.55              0.21        0.77
     2004     1.61         0.02         1.11         0.07         0.48         0.70         1.53              0.21        0.76
     2005     1.58         0.02         1.06         0.09         0.47         0.69         1.52              0.20        0.76
     2006     1.56         0.02         1.06         0.09         0.46         0.69         1.52              0.20        0.75
     2007     1.55         0.02         1.07         0.09         0.46         0.69         1.50              0.20        0.75
     2008     1.46         0.02         1.00         0.11         0.45         0.67         1.50              0.20        0.74
     2009     1.43         0.02         1.07         0.09         0.46         0.67         1.49              0.22        0.77


    Note: Data includes trade with the rest-of-the-world. Column 10 can be constructed as an export
    share weighted average of columns 2 through 9.




                                                                  58
     Table 7: Changes in Value Added to Export Ratio and Components, by Country
                                                   VAX Changes                           Decomposition
 Country           Abbrev.     Years     Aggregate   Non-Manuf. Manuf. ∆ Manuf. Share   Within Between
 Argentina          ARG      1970-2009     -0.10        0.46     -0.35       0.16       0.01     -0.11
 Australia          AUS      1970-2009     -0.05       -0.00     -0.23      -0.07       -0.10     0.04
 Austria            AUT      1970-2009     -0.17        0.06     -0.26       0.03       -0.15    -0.03
 Belgium            BEL      1970-2009     -0.15        0.01     -0.29      -0.07       -0.21     0.06
 Brazil             BRA      1970-2009     -0.07        0.45     -0.39       0.24       -0.06    -0.01
 Canada             CAN      1970-2009     -0.12       -0.16     -0.15      -0.04       -0.14     0.02
 Chile              CHL      1970-2009     -0.12       -0.43     -0.14      -0.10       -0.24     0.12
 China              CHN      1970-2009     -0.19        1.98     -0.21       0.34        0.23    -0.41
 Czech Republic     CZE      1993-2009     -0.06        0.37     -0.03       0.12        0.05    -0.12
 Denmark            DNK      1970-2009     -0.06       -0.08     -0.10      -0.05       -0.09     0.03
 Estonia            EST      1993-2009     -0.03        0.19     -0.11       0.05        0.00    -0.03
 Finland            FIN      1970-2009     -0.11       -0.54     -0.12      -0.11       -0.22     0.11
 France             FRA      1970-2009     -0.14        0.35     -0.22       0.07       -0.05    -0.08
 Germany            DEU      1970-2009     -0.17       -0.09     -0.24      -0.03       -0.22     0.05
 Greece             GRC      1970-2009     -0.08       -0.05     -0.13       0.01       -0.08     0.00
 Hungary            HUN      1970-2009     -0.29       -0.14     -0.25       0.08       -0.25    -0.04
 India              IND      1970-2009     -0.17       -0.07     -0.10       0.08       -0.09    -0.08
 Indonesia          IDN      1970-2009     -0.07        0.27      0.14       0.45        0.15    -0.23
 Ireland            IRL      1970-2009     -0.25       -0.57     -0.08      -0.08       -0.16    -0.08
 Israel              ISR     1970-2009     -0.06        0.42     -0.35       0.34        0.07    -0.13
 Italy              ITA      1970-2009     -0.11        0.45     -0.18       0.07       -0.03    -0.08
 Japan              JPN      1970-2009     -0.04       -0.37     -0.07      -0.05       -0.13     0.09
 Korea              KOR      1970-2009     -0.15        0.44      0.03       0.20        0.13    -0.28
 Mexico             MEX      1970-2009     -0.23        0.77     -0.19       0.43        0.15    -0.38
 Netherlands        NLD      1970-2009     -0.13        0.13     -0.22       0.01       -0.12    -0.02
 New Zealand        NZL      1970-2009     -0.02       -0.06     -0.06      -0.03       -0.05     0.03
 Norway             NOR      1970-2009      0.07       -0.05     -0.09      -0.22       -0.06     0.12
 Poland             POL      1970-2009     -0.14        0.90     -0.26       0.19        0.10    -0.24
 Portugal           PRT      1970-2009     -0.16       -0.20     -0.10       0.03       -0.13    -0.03
 Romania            ROM      1970-2009     -0.22        0.38     -0.37       0.04       -0.25     0.03
 Russia             RUS      1990-2009     -0.04        0.00     -0.15      -0.07       -0.07     0.03
 Slovak Republic    SVK      1993-2009     -0.11        0.90     -0.07       0.17        0.10    -0.21
 Slovenia           SVN      1993-2009     -0.07       -0.15     -0.08      -0.02       -0.09     0.02
 South Africa       ZAF      1970-2009     -0.07        0.42     -0.21       0.17        0.08    -0.15
 Spain              ESP      1970-2009     -0.16        0.24     -0.34       0.18       -0.07    -0.09
 Sweden             SWE      1970-2009     -0.15       -0.26     -0.23      -0.09       -0.25     0.10
 Switzerland        CHE      1970-2009     -0.05       -0.48     -0.09      -0.10       -0.18     0.13
 Thailand           THA      1970-2009     -0.31        0.38     -0.12       0.46        0.05    -0.36
 Turkey             TUR      1970-2009     -0.20        0.80     -0.56       0.58        0.09    -0.29
 United Kingdom     GBR      1970-2009     -0.04       -0.07     -0.18      -0.12       -0.15     0.11
 United States      USA      1970-2009     -0.11        0.04     -0.21      -0.00       -0.12     0.01
 Vietnam            VNM      1970-2009     -0.28        0.15     -0.19       0.40       -0.05    -0.23

Note: VAX changes are cumulative changes in value added to export ratios over the period recorded in
column 3. ∆ Manuf. Share is the change in the manufacturing share of total exports over the period.
The Between and Within columns decompose the overall VAX change into between-sector and within-sector
components. See the text for the exact definition.




                                                      59
Figure 19: Between and Within Decomposition of Changes in Bilateral Value Added to
Export Ratios for Country Pairs
                                                  1.0




                                                                                                                                                      1.0
     Change in Bilateral VAX Ratio from 1970−2009




                                                                                                         Change in Bilateral VAX Ratio from 1970−2009
                                       0.5




                                                                                                                                           0.5
                           0.0




                                                                                                                               0.0
            −0.5




                                                                                                                −0.5
 −1.0




                                                                                                     −1.0




                                                        −1.0   −0.5       0.0       0.5   1.0                                                               −1.0   −0.5        0.0       0.5   1.0
                                                                      Within Term                                                                                         Between Term




                                                                                                60
Table 8: Panel Regressions with Regional Trade Agreements and Time-Varying Distance
Elasticity
                                              Panel A: log of VAX Ratio
                                  In Levels                                   In First Differences
                   (A1)       (A2)         (A3)        (A4)         (A5)       (A6)        (A7)       (A8)
    RTA          -0.037**   -0.068***                             -0.043*** -0.049***
                  (0.015)    (0.017)                               (0.014)   (0.016)
    PTA                                     -0.007   -0.007                                0.001     0.001
                                           (0.013)  (0.016)                               (0.013)   (0.015)
    FTA                                   -0.033** -0.069***                             -0.042*** -0.048***
                                           (0.016)  (0.019)                               (0.015)   (0.017)
    CUCMEU                               -0.090*** -0.097***                             -0.061*** -0.058***
                                           (0.019)  (0.023)                               (0.017)   (0.021)
    R2             0.77       0.86         0.77        0.86         0.22        0.33       0.22        0.33

                                        Panel B: log of Value Added Exports
                                  In Levels                                   In First Differences
                   (B1)       (B2)         (B3)        (B4)         (B5)       (B6)        (B7)       (B8)
    RTA          0.233***   0.219***                              0.167***    0.163***
                  (0.030)    (0.034)                               (0.022)     (0.026)
    PTA                                    0.029       0.013                               -0.001      -0.007
                                          (0.033)     (0.032)                             (0.028)     (0.033)
    FTA                                  0.223***    0.218***                            0.161***    0.158***
                                          (0.034)     (0.036)                             (0.025)     (0.030)
    CUCMEU                               0.400***    0.321***                            0.262***    0.231***
                                          (0.044)     (0.046)                             (0.032)     (0.041)
    R2             0.97       0.99         0.97        0.99         0.62        0.67       0.62        0.67

                                           Panel C: log of Gross Exports
                                  In Levels                                   In First Differences
                   (C1)       (C2)         (C3)        (C4)         (C5)       (C6)        (C7)       (C8)
    RTA          0.271***   0.287***                              0.206***    0.211***
                  (0.041)    (0.046)                               (0.033)     (0.039)
    PTA                                    0.036       0.020                               0.006       -0.002
                                          (0.041)     (0.044)                             (0.039)     (0.046)
    FTA                                  0.257***    0.287***                            0.201***    0.207***
                                          (0.045)     (0.050)                             (0.036)     (0.043)
    CUCMEU                               0.490***    0.418***                            0.321***    0.287***
                                          (0.057)     (0.064)                             (0.046)     (0.058)
    R2             0.96       0.98         0.96        0.98         0.47        0.53       0.47        0.53


    Pair Trend                 X                         X                      X                      X
    Obs.          11184      11184        11184        11184        9362       9362        9362       9362

   Note: All regressions include exporter-year and importer-year fixed effects, plus log distance with
   a year-specific coefficient (coefficients not included in the table). Columns 1 to 4 include pair fixed
   effects, and columns 2 and 4 include a linear pair-specific trend. Columns 6 and 8 include pair fixed
   effects, capturing pair-specific trends. Standard errors, clustered by country pair, are in parentheses.
   Significance levels: * p < .1 , ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Sample excludes pair-year observations with
   bilateral exports smaller than $1 million or VAX ratios larger than ten.


                                                         61
