                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TRADE WEDGES, INVENTORIES, AND INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CYCLES

                                        George Alessandria
                                          Joseph Kaboski
                                         Virgiliu Midrigan

                                       Working Paper 18191
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18191


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




Nils Gornemann and David Richards provided excellent research assistance. We thank Sam Kortum,
Jonathan Heathcote, Paolo Pesenti, Mario Crucini and seminar participants at Wharton, Yale, Wisconsin,
Notre Dame, and Duke for their comments and suggestions. The views expressed here are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-NYU-Rochester conference series.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by George Alessandria, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Wedges, Inventories, and International Business Cycles
George Alessandria, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 18191
June 2012
JEL No. F41,F44

                                              ABSTRACT

The large, persistent fluctuations in international trade that can not be explained in standard models
by changes in expenditures and relative prices are often attributed to trade wedges. We show that these
trade wedges can reflect the decisions of importers to change their inventory holdings. We find that
a two-country model of international business cycles with an inventory management decision can generate
trade flows and wedges consistent with the data. Moreover, matching trade flows alters the international
transmission of business cycles. Specifically, real net exports become countercyclical and consumption
is less correlated across countries than in standard models. We also show that ignoring inventories
as a source of trade wedges substantially overstates the role of trade wedges in business cycle fluctuations.


George Alessandria                                    Virgiliu Midrigan
Research Department                                   Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia                  New York University
Ten Independence                                      19 W. 4th St.
Philadelphia, PA 19106                                New York, NY 10012
George.Alessandria@phil.frb.org                       and NBER
                                                      virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
Joseph Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18191
1. Introduction
        The recent global collapse and rebound of international trade has renewed interest in
understanding both the determinants of the cyclical fluctuations of international trade and the
role of international trade in transmitting business cycles across integrated economies. Our
understanding of international business cycles is limited, however, by the failure of standard
models to account for the dynamics of international trade. As Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar
(2010) forcefully document, international trade tends to fluctuate much more than can be
explained in standard models by the changes in expenditures on traded goods and relative
prices. This is true even once one carefully controls for the diﬀerent composition of the goods
that are traded or consumed.1 Since nearly all models of international business cycles fail
to generate the magnitude of trade fluctuations observed in the data, these models lack a
potentially important channel in the international propagation of business cycles.
        In this paper, we consider a model of international trade and inventory management
that can generate sizable fluctuations in international trade flows, similar to those observed in
the data. We then use our model to re-examine the role of trade in propagating business cycles
internationally. We find that the model predicts that real net exports are countercyclical and
there is relatively less comovement of consumption across countries. Hence, adding inventory
frictions allows us to make progress on two dimensions along which standard models fair
poorly: the cyclicality of real net exports and the consumption-output anomaly.
        We focus on inventories in a business cycle setting because inventory management
decisions have been shown to be an important feature in international trade. Since interna-
tional trade takes time and is relatively costly, firms that engage in international trade tend to
hold much larger stocks of inventories. Our previous work, Alessandria, Kaboski and Midri-
gan (2010a, 2010b, hereafter AKM), documents the role of inventories in international trade
empirically. We document, using various sources of data, that importers hold much larger
inventory stocks than non-importers do and order goods much less frequently. Moreover,
we also show that inventories account for a sizable fraction of the import collapses following
large devaluations or in the recent global recession. For example, AKM 2010b show that at

   1
    Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2010) also study the recent trade collapse. They focus on the
changes in the ratio of trade to GDP and attribute a large fraction of these movements to trade being
relatively intensive in durables. Engel and Wang (2011) also focus on the role of durables in the volatility of
trade. In our analysis, we focus on the movements of trade that cannot be accounted for by composition.


                                                      1
the height of the trade collapse, US imports of automobiles fell more dramatically than final
sales of imported autos in the US. Similarly, during the rebound of US trade, US imports of
autos grew much faster than final sales of imported autos. US inventories of imported cars
followed suit, falling during the collapse and being restocked during the trade recovery.
        Motivated by these observations, we develop a model with domestic and foreign in-
ventories that allows us to quantify the role of inventories in trade movements. In doing so,
we introduce a dynamic component into the interpretation of trade wedges garnered from
static (within-period) optimality conditions. We take a standard two-country real business
cycle model and introduce a retail sector that has a stockout avoidance motivation for holding
inventories.2 Our model is quite tractable as it introduces a small number of additional equi-
librium conditions with analytical solutions. The additional parameters are disciplined by the
salient facts on the inventory holdings of imported and domestically-produced goods in the
data. Since we find that inventories are important, we emphasize that, given its simplicity,
our approach can be easily applied to other work on international business cycles.
        Our first goal is to see whether a plausibly calibrated model of inventory manage-
ment and international trade can generate volatile and persistent fluctuations in international
trade that are largely attributed to movements in a trade wedge of the type documented by
Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010). We find that with the inventory mechanism we pro-
pose and international business cycles driven by productivity shocks, our model generates
sizable fluctuations in inventories. These movements in inventories generate, in turn, large
fluctuations in international trade and the trade wedge. Moreover, we find that the sources
of these wedges matter a great deal. Our inventory-generated wedges imply fluctuations in
consumption and output that are in line with the data. With wedges from “exogenous” taste
or trade cost shocks, consumption becomes three times as volatile as in the data and these
shocks account for an unreasonably high one-third of all aggregate fluctuations in output.
        Our second goal is to explore whether a model with the appropriate fluctuations in
international trade can generate international business cycles that match the data along

   2
    Our earlier quantitative work on the recent recession (AKM, 2010b) applied a model without capital
investment. It therefore lacked an important element for a quantitative analysis of international business
cycle properties. The option of investing in capital and inventories, and their relationship with interest rates,
has been shown to be important in analyzing the role of inventories in business cycles (Khan and Thomas,
2007a).



                                                       2
other dimensions. Specifically, we consider two well-known failures of standard international
business cycle models. First, as Raﬀo (2008) points out, standard models do not generate
countercyclical real net exports, when the movements in investment in the model are con-
strained to match the data. With this constraint, exports expand more than imports and
real net exports are procyclical. Second, Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994, BKK hereafter)
show that standard trade models predict consumption to be more correlated across countries
than output, the opposite of what is observed in the data. This anomaly is now referred to
as the consumption-output anomaly.3
       We find that our model with inventories can make substantial progress regarding
both of these failures of the standard model. Our model generates net exports that are
countercyclical despite the fact that it accounts well for the variability of investment in the
data. With inventories, following a good shock, imports expand more strongly and exports
are dampened as domestic firms build their inventories of both goods. These dynamics reflect
the diﬀerent dynamics of net inventory investment and investment in equipment. In both the
data and the model, net inventory investment movements are sharp but not very persistent,
while investment in equipment has smaller and more persistent fluctuations.
       In terms of the consumption-output anomaly, we find that inventories reduce the
correlation of consumption across countries. The idea is simple. It is cheaper to consume
from the stock of goods held locally than from goods that must be shipped internationally.
Thus, consumption will depend on both the shocks and the stock of goods available. Since the
stocks can move diﬀerently across countries, consumption becomes less correlated. For the
same reasons, we also find that inventories tend to reduce the synchronization of production
across countries, but the eﬀect on consumption is much stronger.
       Our paper is related to many papers that study trade dynamics and business cycles em-
pirically and theoretically.4 In terms of quantitative work, our paper is closely related to the
work by Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992, BKK hereafter) and Stockman and Tesar (1995).
BKK show that standard trade models imply a very tight link between relative quantities
and relative prices and that, given this tight link, it is impossible for equilibrium business

   3
     See Baxter and Crucini (1995) who propose one resolution to this puzzle, namely, incomplete markets
and adding permanent productivity shocks.
   4
     Husted and Kollintzas (1984) study import dynamics in the presence of inventory dynamics in a partial
equilibrium model.


                                                    3
cycle models to generate relative prices and quantities that match the data. Stockman and
Tesar show that shocks to tastes can break the link between relative quantities and prices and
create a trade wedge. They consider the role of these shocks in the propagation of business
cycles. Unlike their work, which takes the wedge as exogenous, we focus on understanding
the source of the wedge. In our analysis, we show that the transmission of business cycles
looks markedly diﬀerent with endogenous wedges arising from inventories than with exoge-
nous wedges arising from taste shocks or trade costs. Indeed, with only exogenous wedges,
these taste shocks become an important driver of aggregate fluctuations. Lastly, this paper is
related to our own work on inventories and trade. Similar to AKM (2010b), we also develop
a general equilibrium model of international trade and inventory adjustment. That paper
studies the fluctuations in trade in the global downturn in 2008-09 using a model that lacks
capital and only considers transition dynamics following aggregate shocks. In contrast, here
we work with a slightly simpler two-country general equilibrium model of inventory holdings
and trade with capital accumulation. This model is linearizable, making it quite tractable
for considering business cycle fluctuations.
       The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss some evidence on the
cyclical behavior of international trade. We also present some evidence about the relationship
between the adjustment of inventories and the synchronization of production in the motor
vehicle industry in the US, Europe and Japan. In Section 3 we build a model of international
trade and inventory management. In Section 4 we calibrate the model. In Section 5 we discuss
the main properties of the model and in Section 6 we consider alternative paramaterizations.
Section 7 concludes.

2. Theory and Evidence
       In this section, we provide clear evidence of the important role of inventory adjustment
for import dynamics, define the trade wedge, and summarize the key cyclical properties of
trade for the US. We also examine the role of inventories for the synchronization of global
production of autos from 2008 to 2011. Specifically, we quantify empirically the contribution
of changes in the stock of Japanese-produced autos held overseas on production in Japan.




                                               4
A. Evidence from Japanese Autos
       First, to clearly show that inventory investment decisions influence import dynamics,
we consider the dynamics of US imports of autos from Japan from January 2007 to December
2011. The data are normalized relative to the 2007 average. These data are useful because we
can separately measure imports, sales, and inventory of imported Japanese autos (as opposed
to transplant production). This period is interesting since it includes two major events: the
collapse and rebound of trade in the global recession from 2008 to 2010 and the tsunami in
Japan in March 2011.
       The top panel of Figure 1 shows these dynamics clearly. The two big trade collapses
in autos are clear. In the depths of both trade collapses, imports fall substantially below
sales of cars from Japan, and inventories fall precipitously. There are also three periods of
rising inventories, however: (1) the period preceding and continuing into the early stages
of the trade collapse of 2008-2009, (2) the build-up during the trade recovery but after the
“cash-for-clunkers” program in July 2009, and (3) the period during the post-tsnumani trade
recovery. During each of these periods, imports were rising and tended to exceed sales. These
dynamics in trade and inventories are associated with large movements in measured trade
wedges, as we discuss below.

B. Trade Wedges and Cyclical Properties of Trade
       Trade wedges measure the departures in trade flows from those predicted by theory.
This approach involves deriving a simplified aggregate import demand equation, calibrating
its parameters, and then measuring deviations of actual imports from those predicted from
fundamentals. Using this approach, Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) document large
deviations in trade flows from the predictions of the theory for the US and other countries.
These deviations, or wedges, in import demand can be interpreted as changes in tastes (as in
Stockman and Tesar, 1995), trade barriers, export participation by producers (Alessandria
and Choi, 2007, and Ghironi and Melitz, 2005), or the inventory adjustment decision of
exporters and importers (Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan, 2011). We show, however,
that inventory adjustments are important for the magnitude and interpretation of these
wedges because they imply that trade flows and consumption of traded goods may diﬀer
substantially in the short run.


                                             5
         To motivate our analysis, consider the following accounting identity:

(1)                                        =  +  − −1 

where  is imports,  is sales of imported goods, and  is the inventory stock of
imported goods at the end of period t so that  − −1 is net inventory investment. We
also assume a constant elasticity demand for imported goods:

(2)                                         =  (  )−  

where  is the price of imported goods,  is the price of the composite bundle,  denotes
total sales (or absorption) and  is a demand shifter that we call the trade wedge.5 Equation
(1) is an accounting identity, while (2) characterizes a large class of models of international
trade in which preferences or production is Armington (CES) over imported and local goods.
         We assume that in the long run, sales of foreign goods equals imports, ̄ = ̄, so
that inventory investment is zero.6 Then we have:

                                 − ̄    − ̄ ̄  − −1
                                        =          +                
                                  ̄        ̄      ̄    
where ̄ is the long-run stock of imported inventories and ̄ ̄ is the inventory-to-sales
ratio of imports. Combining (1) and (2), using a log approximation for small deviations, and
letting lower-case variables denote log-deviations, yields what we call the “actual” import
wedge:

                                         
(3)                           =  −       ( − −1 ) −  +  ( −  ) 
                                         ̄

Setting inventory adjustment to zero yields the traditional measure of the import, which we
call the “naive” import wedge, ̂  

(4)                                     ̂  =  −  +  ( −  ) 

         To get a sense of the magnitude of these two wedges, we plot the wedges for Japanese
motor vehicles in the US in the bottom panel of Figure 1. We measure the wedges using an

   5
     An alternative interpretation of   is as an international trade cost that pushes the retail price of imported
goods up above   In such a case the movements in the trade cost would equal   
   6
     This assumes that physical depreciation of inventories is neglible relative to sales.

                                                         6
elasticity of substitution7 of  = 3 and proxying for the relative price of Japanese- produced
cars with the ratio of the US import price index of Japanese goods to the new vehicle CPI.
The wedges are clearly strongly associated with the fluctuations in trade. Here, from the
actual wedge we clearly see that Japanese autos actually gained market share in the early
part of the crisis and then only lost market share in the second half of the downturn. Similarly,
following the tsunami the import wedge is substantially smaller than the naive wedge. In
general, movements in the actual import wedge are quite minor compared to the naive wedge
that ignores inventory movements. Indeed, the variance of the actual import wedge is about
20 percent of the naive import wedge in this period.
        The top panel of Table 1 reports some properties of fluctuations in wedges, imports,
sales, and relative prices of Japanese motor vehicles in the US from 2007m1 to 2011m12. In
general, we see that imports are twice as volatile as final sales of all autos, while sales of
Japanese autos are only 40 percent more volatile than final sales. The naive wedge is almost
50 percent more volatile than sales, while the actual wedge is 40 percent less volatile. The
naive import wedge is quite correlated with imports (0.83), while the actual wedge is not very
correlated at all (0.25).
        We next turn our focus away from just cars to measure the naive import wedge for
overall US imports. For this calculation, we assume a conventional value of the Armington
elasticity of  = 15 and measure the relative price of imports, ( −  )  as the ratio of the
non-petroleum import price index relative to a price index on final expenditures of goods.
Specifically, we measure the price of goods as

                                         =  + (1 − )  

where  is the price of consumer goods and  is the price of investment in equipment
and software (from the BEA). We let  = 075 to match the importance of the consumption
of goods in goods expenditure Our measure of aggregate expenditure,  , is real domestic
consumption of goods plus investment in equipment and software. We focus on the period
1995q1 to 2010q4.

   7
    We actually estimate the elasticity of demand for Japanese cars over this period and find it is close to
3. When looking at more disaggregated data, it is common to find that imported goods tend to be more
substitutable than they are with the aggregate data.



                                                     7
       Figure 2 plots the deviations from an HP-filtered trend (with a smoothing parameter
of 1600) of US imports, the naive import wedge, and the actual import wedge. While imports
are more volatile than the wedge, clearly, a substantial fraction of the fluctuations of imports
is explained by the fluctuations in the naive wedge. The bottom panel of Table 1 summarizes
the fluctuations in trade variables over the business cycle. Imports are about 1.4 times as
volatile as US manufacturing industrial production (IP). Imports are strongly procyclical,
with a correlation with IP of 0.92. The import wedge is slightly more volatile than IP
and is also procyclical, with a correlation with IP of 0.86. Imports and the import wedge
are persistent, with an autocorrelation of 0.86 and 0.78, respectively. The price of imports
relative to final goods is about one-third as volatile as production and is not very correlated
with either the import wedge or imports.
       To measure the actual import wedge requires a measure of the inventory-to-sales ratio
of imported goods as well as the changes in imported inventory. Unlike with autos, we lack
direct measures of imported inventories and thus use the entire stock of US inventories as
a proxy. Consistent with the micro evidence in AKM (2010a) that importers hold about
double the inventory of non-importers, we set   ̄ equal to 2.25, about twice the average
inventory-to-sales ratio since 1997. We assume that fluctuations in imported inventories are
perfectly correlated with fluctuations in aggregate inventories and then use equation (3) to
calculate the actual import wedge.
       Fluctuations in the actual import wedge,    are generally smaller than fluctuations
in the naive wedge that ignores inventory adjustments, ̂  . Indeed, in the current recession,
nearly one-third of the decline and all of the increase in the import wedge disappears and
the size of the actual import wedge appears less unusual. Thus, inventory adjustments made
a sizable contribution to recent trade fluctuations. In the last line of Table 1 we report the
cyclical properties of the actual import wedge. With this adjustment, the actual wedge is
30 percent less volatile, 10 percentage points less persistent and 10 percentage points less
correlated with imports than the import wedge.
       This evidence clearly suggests that trade wedges are big and that the inventory man-
agement decisions of importers are an important source of these wedges. However, a key
shortcoming of our approach to estimating the role of inventory adjustment in fluctuations
in trade at the aggregate level is that it requires a very strong assumption that imported


                                               8
inventories move one for one with total inventories. This is likely to not be the case in the
data; it certainly is not the case for autos. Thus, we require a model of optimal inventory
adjustment to accurately estimate the role of inventory adjustments in trade flows. That is
what we do in Section 3.

C. Global Motor Vehicle Production and Sales
       To shed light on production and the global propagation of shocks, we turn again to the
motor vehicle industry, a large and globally integrated industry. Figure 3 plots the quarterly
production and sales of motor vehicles since 2007 in the US, Europe (the 27 countries in the
EU), and Japan, the three largest markets prior to the Great Recession.
       There are three key things to notice. First, production is quite synchronized. There
was a synchronized global collapse and rebound in production in 2008 and 2009 and a smaller
reduction in production in the US and EU around the tsunami in 2011. Indeed, the decline
in production in 2008Q4 to 2009Q1 was very sharp and severe, with production falling 70 log
points in Japan and 42 log points in the EU and 49 log points in the US. The bounceback was
quite sharp in all three countries, although US production took longer to recover. Second,
sales fell less than production in each market. Peak-to-trough, relative to the decline in
production, US sales fell 60 percent, Japanese sales fell 30 percent, and EU sales fell 40
percent. From the dynamics of US imports of Japanese autos, we know this reflects in part
the drawing down of inventories. The relatively sharp decline in production relative to sales
in Japan and Europe compared to the US could partly reflect a reliance on sales in the US
market as well as a relatively large inventory adjustment of Japanese and EU cars in the US.
Third, sales are less correlated across countries than production. These very diﬀerent sales
dynamics in part reflect large diﬀerences in the size and timing of diﬀerent national motor
vehicle scrappage programs.8
       To shed light on the role of inventories and trade in the international propagation of
shocks, we consider the dynamics of production and absorption of Japanese-produced autos
in a bit more detail. As we have already seen from Figure 1, Japanese auto exports to
the US fell much more than sales in the US Table 2 reports the change in average exports,

  8
    The US allocated $3 billion and the program ran from July 1, 2009 to August 24, 2009. The German
program spent about $7 billion and ran from January 2009 to the end of the year. The Japanese program
allocated $3.7 billion and ran from April 2009 to September 2010.


                                                 9
production, sales in Japan and outside of Japan. The first column reports the change in
the average activity in the collapse period (November 2008 to August 2009) versus average
activity prior to the collapse (May 2008 to October 2008). The second column reports the
change in the average activity in the rebound (September 2009 to August 2010) against the
collapse. During the collapse, production was on average 42 percent lower while sales fell 12
percent and exports fell 63 percent. To get a sense of the role of domestic inventories in the
decline in production, we see that the decline in production is 3 percentage points greater than
the decline in domestic sales plus exports, which fell 39 percent. Thus, 3 percentage points
of the decline in production were a result of reducing inventories in Japan. In terms of the
export margin, we can examine the role of inventories by comparing the changes in exports
with sales of exported Japanese autos in the US. Here we see that sales were on average 26
percent lower, while exports to the US were about 65 percent lower. Thus, a substantial share
of the collapse in exports reflects a reduction in inventories in the US. If the US inventory
adjustment is typical of Japanese export markets, and this is likely since the US accounts for
about 40 percent of exports,9 then the decline in production would have been only 20 percent
if there had been no inventory adjustment. Thus, the adjustment of inventories held overseas
nearly doubled the size of the downturn in Japanese auto production. Focusing next on the
rebound, we see that production rose 25 percent, exports rose 27 percent, and domestic sales
rose 21 percent. However, US sales were actually 11 percent lower in the latter period, while
exports where 28 percent higher. Again, if the US market is typical, then global sales only
rose 5 percent. Thus, potentially 80 percent of the change in production in this latter period
reflected inventory accumulation in foreign markets.
        The last thing we consider is the dynamics of Japanese net exports in this period.
Here we scale real exports by total trade flows, so  = 2 ( − )  ( + ). Figure 4
plots the dynamics of real and nominal net exports as well as net exports of passenger cars
(scaled by aggregate trade). Clearly, we see that in the 2008-09 period, real net exports
dramatically moved from surplus to deficit and then back to surplus. The adjustment was
large and sudden. Real net exports fell 30 percentage points from 2008Q3 to 2009Q1. The

   9
    Indeed, one may actually expect that the inventory adjustment in the US market might understate the
role of inventory adjustment in other countries as the US is a large, well-integrated market with relatively
small frictions. Also, as such, in a large market the incentive to build an eﬃcient distribution system is
magnified.


                                                    10
recovery was as large and almost as sudden, with net exports increasing 25 percentage points
from 2009Q1 to 2009Q4. The movements in nominal net exports are more gradual and reflect
in part the movements in energy prices. Net exports of autos show similar dynamics that
are not as large, given autos’ share in trade. Given our evidence from the auto industry, it is
clear that the inventory adjustment overseas contributed to these net export dynamics.
       In sum, the motor vehicle industry shows substantial synchronization of production
in the recent recession. It also shows that production tends to fluctuate more than sales so
that inventory stocks play an important role in the decline in production. Focusing on Japan,
we see that the decline in exports drove the collapse and recovery in production and that
overseas inventory dynamics strongly influenced the movements in exports. Indeed, based on
the US, overseas inventory dynamics may have doubled the decline in production in Japan
and lead to a rebound that was 5 times stronger.

3. Model
       We now extend the two-country general equilibrium model of international trade of
Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) to include a monopolistic retail sector that holds in-
ventories of both domestic and imported intermediates. Inventories are introduced through
a friction, and orders must be placed before idiosyncratic demand is realized. This gives
retailers a stockout avoidance motive for holding inventories and allows for straightforward
linearization. Specifically, in each country, a continuum of local retailers buy imported and
domestic goods from a competitive intermediate goods sector in each country, and each re-
tailer acts as a monopolist supplier in selling its particular variety of the good. Consumers
purchase these varieties and then use an aggregation technology to transform home and for-
eign varieties into a final good used for consumption and investment.

A. Environment
       Formally, consider an economy with two countries, Home and Foreign. In each period,
, the economy experiences one of finitely many states    Let  = ( 0    ) be the history
of events up to date , with the initial state  0 given. Denote the probability of any particular
history  as ( ).
       The commodities in the economy are labor, a continuum of intermediate goods (in-
dexed by  ∈ [0 1]) produced in Home, and a continuum of intermediate goods produced in

                                                 11
Foreign. These intermediate goods are purchased and sold as retail goods to consumers. Fi-
nally, consumers combine intermediate goods to form final goods (consumption and capital),
which are country-specific because of a bias for domestic intermediates. We denote goods
produced in Home with a subscript  and goods produced in Foreign with a subscript  .
(Foreign allocations and prices are denoted with an asterisk.) In addition, there are a full set
of Arrow securities.

Consumers
        The consumer’s preferences over final consumption  (  ) and leisure  (  ) are
                       XX           ¡ ¢ £ ¡ ¢        ¡     ¢ ¡ ¢¤
(5)                                    −  −1    
                           =0       

The consumer chooses his consumption but utility can also depend on past aggregate con-
sumption ( −1 ) for  6= 0, which allows for habit formation. Habit formation is external in
that the consumer does not take into account how its current consumption decision aﬀects
its future habit. Habit helps generate persistent fluctuations in consumption as in the data.
        Using Home consumers as an example, the final consumption, (  ), and investment,
 ( ), good is produced by aggregating purchases of a continuum of domestic retail goods
 
 (  ) and a continuum of imported retail goods  (   ) (where  ∈ [0 1] indexes the
good in the continuum).
                                          µZ                                           ¶ (−1)
                  ¡ ¢ −1                      1     ¡     ¢1            −1
                                                                                         (−1)

(6)                 =                               (   )  
                                           0
                                                            µZ                                         ¶ (−1)
                                                        1
                                                                    1     ¡     ¢1             −1
                                                                                                         (−1)

                                                   +                       (  )  
                                                                0
                                                           
        The weights  (  ) and  (  ) are subject to idiosyncratic shocks that are iid
across  and . We assume that these shocks are distributed Pareto, with domestic taste
shocks drawn from  () = 1 − − and the taste shocks on imported goods from
 () = 1 −  −  These stochastic idiosyncratic demand shocks lead to the precautionary
stockout avoidance motive for holding inventories. Allowing  and  to diﬀer allows
incentives to carry inventory to diﬀer across imported and domestic goods.10

  10
    In AKM (2010a) the diﬀerent inventory holdings of retailers of domestic and imported goods arise from
diﬀerences in the transaction costs (fixed order costs and delivery lags) between international and domestic
orders. We find that the dynamic properties of our stockout-avoidance inventory model are quite similar to
those of the micro-founded transaction cost model in a variation where both models lack capital accumulation.

                                                                 12
        The parameter  ∈ [0 1] captures the lower weight on Foreign goods (i.e., a Home
bias). For simplicity, we make the innocuous assumption that the shocks to retail varieties
are identical across consumption and investment.11 The Foreign consumer uses analogous
technologies except that the lower weights  multiply the Home goods.
        The final composite good is used for consumption, investment, and investment adjust-
ment costs so that
                                    Ã     µ           ¶2 !
                          ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢         ( )           ¡ ¢
                           +     1+        −1
                                                    −1     =   
                                        2  ( )
The left-hand side of the resource constraint shows that investment is subject to quadratic
adjustment costs on the change in investment, parameterized by . This type of adjustment
cost is useful to get investment to be hump-shaped as in the data.
        The law of motion for country-specific capital, which depreciates at rate  is:

(7)                                       ( +1 ) = (1 − ) (  ) + ( )

The consumer purchases domestic and imported retail goods at prices  (   ) and  (   ),
respectively, supplies labor at a wage  ( ), and earns capital income at the rental rate (  )
and profits Π (  ) (from retailers). In addition, it trades Arrow securities  (+1 ) that are
purchased at time  and pay oﬀ one unit next period in state  +1 . We denote the price
of the security in state  that pays one unit in state  +1 as  (+1 | ). Suppressing the
dependence of all variables on  for brevity the consumer’s period  budget constraint is
therefore expressed:12


                X Z          1                        X                ¡     ¢
(8)                               ()  ()  +           (+1 )  +1 =   +  + Π + 
              ={ }   0                             +1

        The foreign consumers is analogous except that prices and profits are those in the
Foreign country. The prices of Arrow securities ( +1 | ) are the same in both countries,
since they can be traded internationally at no cost. The consumer takes prices and profits as
given and maximizes (5) by choosing a series for labor supply, retail purchases, investment,
and Arrow securities subject to (6), (7), and (8).

  11
     It is straightforward to introduce diﬀerent inventory holdings for investment and consumption goods as
well as diﬀerent levels of tradability in consumption and investment.
  12
     We also need to set a borrowing limit in order to rule out Ponzi schemes, (  )  , but this borrowing
limit can be set arbitrarily large, i.e.,   0.

                                                                13
Producers
       For each country, we model a single representative producer that supplies both the
Home and Foreign markets. Intermediate goods in the Home country are produced by com-
petitive firms using the following technology:
                                 ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢1−
(9)                               =      

where  ( ) is output of intermediates,  ( ) is aggregate capital and  (  ) is aggregate
labor used for production of intermediates
       Aggregate productivity in Home evolves according to
                                     ¡ ¢           ¡    ¢   ¡ ¢
                                log    =  log  −1 +   

Finally, we assume an analogous production function for Foreign-produced intermediates
with a country-specific aggregate productivity shock. Producers are competitive, maximizing
static profit-taking prices as given.

Retailers
       In Home there is a unit mass of retailers selling goods that were produced in Home,
and another unit mass of retailers selling goods that were produced in Foreign. Retailers
purchase intermediates from producers and sell them to consumers. For a Home retailer of
good  produced in Home, retail sales are denoted  (   ), while purchases from intermedi-
ate goods producers are denoted  (  )  We focus on Home retailers operating in Home;
retailers operating in Foreign face an identical problem, as do Foreign retailers operating in
Home. (The subscript  continues to distinguish goods produced in Foreign, while an asterisk
continues to denote the corresponding arguments for the retailers in the Foreign market.)
       The key friction motivating the holding of inventories is that a retailer must choose the
amount of goods to have in its store at time  before learning  (   )  We denote this stock
             ¡      ¢
on hand as   ̃ , where ̃ signifies the history up to date  excluding the retailer’s demand
realization at  However, the retailer chooses its price  (   ) after learning  (   ) We
also allow the retailer to return the unsold stock, but only at  + 1 so the retailer will be
able to sell it at next period’s price  (+1 ) after incurring the inventory carrying costs of
depreciation. Allowing the resale of unsold goods in the following period at the market price
means we do not need to keep track of the distribution of inventory holdings.

                                                 14
          The profit maximization problem of a Home retailer selling home goods is:
                                 X
                                 ∞ X
                                              ¡ ¢£ ¡       ¢ ¡      ¢   ¡ ¢£ ¡       ¢    ¡        ¢¤¤
              max                                     −     ̃ −   −1
        (̃ )  ( )   =0    
                                                       ¡     ¢    ¡        ¢
                                                    ≤   ̃ 
                                         ¡     ¢ ¡       ¡ ¢¢ £ ¡  ¢        ¡     ¢¤
(10)                                      = 1 −        ̃ −   

where  (  ) =  ( |−1 )  ( −1 | −2 )  ( 1 |0 ) is the date 0 Arrow-Debreu price of 1
unit of the numeraire to be delivered in state   and   (   ) is the demand the retailer
                                            ¡ ¢
faces at price    
                 ( ). Unsold inventory   ̃   −  (  ) can be carried forward, but
this entails a cost from physical depreciation, captured by   (  ). The end-of- stock of
inventories of undepreciated inventories is denoted  (  )  Thus the retailer will optimally
choose inventories to trade oﬀ being able to satisfy demand when demand is high with the
costs of carrying unsold inventories into the next period when demand is low.
          The Home retailer that sells Foreign goods faces a similar problem, except for its
wholesale cost is  ∗ ( ). Foreign retailers also face analogous problems.

B. Equilibrium
          We first define and then show some preliminary characterization of the equilibrium,
which will be solved numerically.

Definition
          In this economy, an equilibrium is defined as (i) an allocation of aggregate and individ-
ual quantities { (  )  ( )  ( )   (  )  (  ) ( )  ( )  (  )  ( )  Π (  )}∞
                                                                                                               =0  and
                                                       ¡     ¢
disaggregate goods { (  )   (  )    ̃  = } }∞   =0 for both Home and Foreign, and
                     n                                     o
                                                                                                         ∞
(ii) prices of goods { (   )}=   (  )  and factors in { ( )   (  )}=0 for both
                                                                                  ∞
Home and Foreign, and (iii) Arrow security prices { ( +1 | )}=0  such that:

    • Given prices, the allocations satisfy the consumers’ problems, the intermediate produc-
          ers’ problems, and retailers’ problems in Home and Foreign;
    • Individual consumption (  ) equals aggregate consumption,  ( ); and
    • The retail goods, labor, and capital markets clear in each country, and the intermediate
          goods markets and Arrow security markets clear for the world economy.


                                                              15
       We briefly describe the market clearing conditions. First, Arrow securities are in zero
net supply, so the bond market clearing condition requires  (  ) +  ∗ (  ) = 0. Second, all
capital and labor is used in intermediate goods production.
                                         ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
                                          =  
                                         ¡ ¢
                                           = (  )

The resource constraint for intermediate goods requires that production equal orders:
                  Z 1                               Z 1
           ¡ ¢       £ ¡ ¢          ¡ −1 ¢¤          £ ∗ ¡ ¢       ¡       ¢¤
(11)      =            ̃ −          +        ̃ − ∗  −1 
                     0                                  0

Notice that intermediate goods produced in Home,  ( )  have two uses: they go to domestic
                                                                                   ∗
retailers of Home goods,  () and to foreign retailers of exported Home goods,  ()  The
resource constraint for individual retail goods  (  ) involves those sold as consumption
goods  (  ) and investment goods  (   ) :
                                  ¡     ¢    ¡     ¢    ¡      ¢
                                   =    +   

A parallel set of market clearing constraints holds for foreign goods.

Preliminary Characterization
       We briefly oﬀer a preliminary characterization of the features of the equilibrium. No-
tationally, expressions are simplified by dropping the   dependence where it does not cause
confusion (e.g., static conditions). Perfectly competitive producers simply pay factors their
marginal products and price at marginal cost,  =  1− 
       The consumer’s maximization can be solved step-wise, with the consumer choosing
                                   
an allocation of retail purchases  () and  () to minimize the expenditure necessary to
deliver  units of the final composite good. With respect to aggregates, the consumer’s
optimization conditions are standard. The zero net supply condition on Arrow securities
                                                        (  ) (  )
leads to the following pricing  (  ) =    (  )  (0 ) (0 ) .
       The cost-minimizing first-order conditions define the demand for the retail varieties:
                                          µ        ¶− µ ¶−
                                            ()       
                         () =  ()                         
                                                        
                                            µ        ¶− µ ¶−
                                              ()      
(12)                     () =  ()                         
                                                         

                                                 16
where we have defined the following aggregate price indexes for Home-produced output,
Foreign-produced output, and output overall:
                                  µZ 1                  ¶ 1−
                                                           1

                                                    1−
(13)                       =          ()  () 
                                                  0
                                            µZ        1                             ¶ 1−
                                                                                       1

                                                                         1−
(14)                              =                      ()  ()        
                                                  0
                                            £ 1−        ¤ 1
(15)                                =        +  1− 1−

        We characterize the optimal decisions for retailers of Home goods in Home, but the
other retailers are analogous. Given the ex ante symmetry of the problem, all  retailers have
the same desired stock-on-hand,  () =  . The retailers’ pricing decision rule depends on
its idiosyncratic demand shock relative to a threshold value, ̂  and is:
                    ⎧            P                           ( +1 )
                    ⎪
                    ⎪  ̂  =  
                                           (1 −    ( 
                                                         ))             ( +1 ) if  () ≤ ̂
                    ⎨       −1     +1                    (  )
                       Ã                         !− 1
(16)        () =
                    ⎪
                    ⎪             
                                                       if  ()  ̂
                    ⎩        
                                −     1
                                            −
                               ()        
                                                           

        For a low demand shock, it sets the price, ̂  as a  ( − 1) markup over its mar-
ginal shadow cost, the expected discounted value of carrying the inventories forward. For a
suﬃciently high demand shock, the retailer sells at the price to just sell its entire inventory.
        Given this pricing policy, our assumption of Pareto-distributed taste shocks leads to an
analytical solution for optimal stock-on-hand,  . Equating the two branches of the pricing
function yields the stockout threshold of demand, ̂ :
                                                        
                                           ̂ = ¡ ¢ ³ ´−
                                                   −   ̂
                                                                   
                                                                           
                                                                                                    1
Notice that the price of firms that stock out is now equal to  () = ̂ [ ()̂ ]  , and so
the price index for home goods sold in Home equals:
                       ∙          µ                     ¶            ¸ 1−
                                                                        1
                             1−                     
               = ̂ (̂ )                − 1          −
                                    1 −    
                                                 −      1 − 
The prices are all functions of the threshold values and can be substituted into the expressions
for optimal stock on hand. Continuity of the prices at ̂ (i.e., again equating both branches
of (16)) yields the threshold value:
                      µ     1     ¶1 Ã                             !−1
                                                       
                ̂ =                                                 −1
                         − 1            (1 −   ) +1  +1
                                                             



                                                               17
We can substitute this to solve for the  , which is the product of three terms:
                            µ        ¶− µ          ¶−
                                            ̂
(17)                 =                                  
                                             
                                µ                    ¶1
                                   1
                            ×
                                 − 1
                              Ã                                                      !−1
                                                              
                                                       ( )
                            ×    P                                +1               −1
                                      +1   (1 −   (  )) (
                                                               ( )
                                                                      )
                                                                         (+1 )

 Desired stock-on-hand is increasing in the average level of demand (first term) and the
stockout avoidance motive (second term) but decreasing in the price today relative to the
expected price tomorrow (third term). This last term gives insight into inventory investment
motives in response to transitory productivity shocks; there is an incentive to invest when
goods are cheap or interest rates are low.
          The aggregate stock of inventories held in Home is given by
                                            Z 1             Z 1
(18)                        =  +  =         ()  +      () 
                                                      0                   0

          Additionally, inventory depreciation is assumed to depend on the stock of local inven-
tories:
                                               = 0 +  1 (̄−1)

where ̄ is the steady-state level of inventories. If  1  0 there are economies of scale to
holding inventories, while with  1  0 there are congestion costs.
          We stress here that the equilibrium equations are a minimum departure from the
standard international business cycle literature. The retailers’ problem and the taste shocks
introduced into the consumer’s demand problem result in only two changes in equilibrium con-
ditions. The pricing formula in (16) replaces the simple markup over marginal cost. Second,
we have the additional equations that track inventories: the optimal stock-on-hand equation
(17), and the definitions of retailer and aggregate end-of-period inventories (equations (10)
and (18), respectively.) Finally, since the model has no fixed costs or occasionally-binding
constraints complicating the decision rules or laws of motion of aggregates, the aggregate
equilibrium is linearizable.




                                                          18
4. Calibration
       We now describe the functional forms and parameter values considered for our bench-
mark economy. The parameter values used in the simulation exercises are reported in Table
3. Similar to Raﬀo (2008) we use a GHH instantaneous utility function. Unlike Raﬀo, we
allow for habit persistence in consumption.
                                        µ                        ¶
                                                            1+
                           ( ) = log ( − −1 ) −            
                                                          1+

With external habit the household takes the path of −1 as given.
       For several parameters, we assign typical values that are relatively standard in the
international real business cycle literature. These parameters include the preference parame-
ters {   } and technology parameters { }. Our period is a quarter so  = 099 We
set the depreciation rate of capital to  = 0025 and the capital share to  = 033 We choose
, the relative weight on leisure in the utility function in order to match a labor supply of
one-third. We set  so that the Frisch elasticity is 2. We assign the elasticity of substitution
between domestic and imported goods  = 15, a standard value.
       The remaining parameters {  0   1        } are particular to our inven-
tory/retailing set-up. We start by assigning  = 3 which implies that the ratio of manu-
facturing to total sales is 40 percent, as in the US. Although all four moments are jointly
determined by all parameters, the parameter  is the main determinant of trade flows, while
   ,   primarily determine the trade share, stock of inventories, and premium of
imported inventories relative to domestic inventories. We target three moments for the US
from 1997 to 2010. First, imports are 26.5 percent of manufacturing sales. Second, inventory
holdings are equal to 1.5 times final quarterly expenditures on consumption plus investment.
The third target is that importing firms hold twice the inventory (relative to sales) as firms
that source domestically. This ratio is consistent with inventory-to-sales ratios for importers
vs. domestic firms that we observe for Chilean plants and for US manufacturing industries
(AKM 2010b). We set depreciation to be  0 = 0016 This implies inventory holding costs,
including interest costs, of about 2.6 percent per quarter. This is quite low relative to esti-
mates in the literature. Of course, our model misses out on some key channels that lead to
inventory holdings. We undertake sensitivity to   , however.
       The technology shock process follows much of the literature. The persistence of na-

                                                19
tional productivity shocks is 0.95 and the correlation of innovations across countries is 0.25.
The size of the shocks is set to match the volatility of industrial production.
       The investment adjustment costs and cyclicality of inventory holding costs are chosen
to target the volatility of investment in equipment and overall investment.                Matching the
cyclicality of inventory investment requires  1 = −000445, which implies that, in booms, the
costs of managing inventories fall and this encourages additional investment in inventories.13
Finally, we set our habit parameter to match the autocorrelation of consumption in our
benchmark model. This requires a habit parameter  of 0.30.
       To clarify the role of inventories, we also consider the properties of a model with no
inventories. This is a version of the BKK model with retailers charging a constant markup
over marginal cost. In the model with no inventories, we set the investment adjustment cost
so that total investment, which includes net inventory investment, is 2.89 times as volatile as
production, as in the data.

5. Results
       We now discuss the properties of our benchmark model economy and compare the
results to the benchmark model without inventories and the data. Tables 4 and 5 report some
key cyclical properties of the model. Figures 5 plots the impulse response to a positive (one
standard deviation) productivity shock of key variables in the benchmark inventory model
and the no inventory model, respectively. In short, we find that our benchmark model can
capture some key features of trade dynamics without doing too badly on the new inventory
dimensions.
       Specifically, in Table 4, we find that imports and exports are now about 7 percent more
volatile than production (compared to 40-49 percent in the data and 11 percent less volatile
than production with no inventories). These fluctuations in trade generate a sizable import
wedge, with relative volatility of 0.79 (compared to 1.08 in the data). The large increase in
wedge volatility despite the moderate increase in trade volatility arises because the inventory
model generates smaller relative price fluctuations. For instance, the relative volatility of the
terms of trade is 0.4 in the benchmark model against 0.57 in the no inventory model (and

  13
    An alternative approach to aﬀect the cyclicality of net inventory investment is to introduce a physical
cost of managing inventories and let this cost vary over the cycle.



                                                    20
0.27 in the data).
       With inventories, imports are substantially more procyclical in the benchmark model
(0.85) than in the model without inventories (0.69) as shown in Table 5. Neither is as
procyclical as in the data, however, where the correlation with production is 0.92. The wedge
is procyclical in the benchmark model (0.68) but less so than in the data (0.86). However,
the model matches the correlation of the wedge with imports (0.86, model, 0.88, data).
       In terms of real net exports, the inventory model generates somewhat larger fluctu-
ations in net exports compared to the no inventory model (0.33 vs 0.21 in Table 4), but
both are similar to the data (0.28). With inventories, however, net exports (normalized by
sales) are countercyclical (-0.25). This is in strong contrast to the model without inventories,
where they are procyclical (0.33), and substantially closer to the data (-0.42). Net exports
are procyclical primarily because inventories make exports considerably less procyclical. The
correlation of exports with production is 0.63, as compared to 0.90 with no inventories.
       In both models there is a consumption-output anomaly, in that consumption is more
correlated across countries than output. However, we find that the anomaly, measured by the
diﬀerence between the consumption and output cross-correlation, is smaller in the inventory
model (0.21) than in the no inventory model (0.33). In terms of the comovement of business
cycles, whose correlations are presented in the bottom panel of Table 5, we find that there is
actually less synchronization of business cycles in the inventory model than in the no inven-
tory model. For instance, the cross-correlation of production is 0.35 in the inventory model
and 0.43 in the no inventory model. Similarly, the cross-correlation of consumption in the
inventory model is 0.56 and 0.71 in the no inventory model. One reason for the weaker co-
movement is that inventories provide another way to smooth production (and consumption).
We explore this in greater detail in our sensitivity analysis.
       A key problem with both models, however, is that the fluctuations in trade they
generate are not persistent enough. For instance, the autocorrelation of imports in Table 6
is 0.67 with and without inventories and 0.86 in the data. The model with inventories does
generate wedges, but these are also not persistent enough, with an autocorrelation of 0.57
that is lower than the 0.78 in the data. Nevertheless, movements in net exports are relatively
persistent, with an autocorrelation of 0.71, similar to the 0.76 in the data. Again, the model
without inventories cannot match the persistence of net exports.


                                               21
       The source of these transitory fluctuations is clear from Figure 5. Following a produc-
tivity shock at home, the need to build up inventory in the more productive location leads to
an initial jump in imports but a much weaker export response in the model with inventories
relative to the model without inventories. Consequently, initially net exports go into a deficit
and that deficit is reversed in later periods when imports fall sharply and exports expand.

6. Sensitivity
       In this section, we perform further analysis to examine the role of inventories for
the cyclicality of trade and the propagation of business cycles. First, we consider how the
cyclicality of real net exports aﬀects the transmission of business cycles in these models.
Second, we evaluate the model’s response to a global productivity shock that hits both
countries symmetrically. Third, we introduce exogenous taste shocks to imports that yield
exogenous trade wedges and evaluate the relationship between these exogenous wedges and
the endogenous wedges driven by inventories. Finally, we change the correlation of shocks in
the model of inventories in order to more closely examine the role of inventories in alleviating
the comovement puzzle.

A. Balanced Real Net Exports
       We consider how the cyclicality of real net exports influences the propagation of shocks
by constraining real trade flows to be balanced each period. In order to better understand
propagation, we do not recalibrate the adjustment costs on investment or inventories. The
results are reported in the columns Balanced Real Trade for the inventory and no inventory
models.
       The first thing to notice is that, with balanced real trade, consumption is more cor-
related across countries than production in the inventory model (0.47 vs. 0.40) and less
correlated in the no inventory model (0.39 vs. 0.40). The higher comovement of consump-
tion in the inventory model reflects the use of inventories to smooth out consumption. By
comparing the balanced trade to our benchmark models, we can more easily see the role
of the cyclical movements in net exports. In the inventory model, where net exports are
countercyclical, the consumption-output anomaly only increases 14 percentage points, while
it increases 34 percentage points in the no inventory model, where net exports are procycli-
cal. Thus, the procyclical net exports in the inventory model clearly generate substantially

                                              22
less synchronization in consumption across countries. Viewed diﬀerently: given a particular
consumption correlation across models, we would expect output to be more correlated in the
inventory model than in the no inventory model.

B. Global Shocks
        Figure 6 shows the impulse response to a global positive productivity shock. That
is, we shock both countries with a symmetric and synchronized positive productivity shock.
The model with inventories leads to a large increase in trade, with imports and exports, of
course, increasing symmetrically. This boom in trade exceeds the boom in production, and
the increase in production is partially used for inventory investment. Hence, the increase in
production exceeds the increase in absorption (consumption plus capital investment). The
wedge is consequently sizable, but these inventory-driven dynamics are short-lived. In con-
trast, the model without inventories yields no wedge, and the increases in trade, production,
and absorption are equally sized and follow the identical pattern.
        Although the figures evaluate the response to a positive productivity shock and global
boom, similar, but opposite, dynamics would arise in a global recession like that described
in Section 2. They also demonstrate how correlated shocks can lead to greater volatility in
trade than in production observed in the data (Table 5).

C. Exogenous Wedge Shocks
        To show that the source of the trade wedge matters, we introduce exogenous shocks
that lead to trade wedges. Specifically, we allow the home bias parameter  to be subject to
a stochastic shock ̂  as follows
                                                             
                                              ( ) = ̂ ( ) 

These wedges are similar to the taste shocks introduced by Stockman and Tesar (1995), but
here the shocks are only on foreign goods, which more closely approximates a shock to trade
costs, where decreased trade costs resemble import-specific productivity shocks. Indeed the
results we discuss below from this simple formulation are essentially the same as those from
a more involved model with explicit shocks to iceberg trade costs.14

  14
    This assumes the trade costs are not included in the export price. Details of this model and the results
are available upon request.



                                                     23
       We assume the shock ̂ (  ) follows a first-order autoregressive process
                                     ¡ ¢        ¡     ¢       ¡ ¢
                                   ̂   = ̂  −1 +    
                                     ¡ ¢         ¡     ¢       ¡ ¢
                                 ̂ ∗   = ̂ ∗  −1 +  ∗ 

where   governs the variance of the wedge shocks relative to the shock to productivity  (  ).
       We calibrate the shock to match the volatility of the trade wedge in the inventory
and no inventory models. For the inventory model,  = 028, while the no inventory model
requires  = 27, nearly ten times the size of shocks needed in the model with inventories.
The results of this exercise are in the columns denoted “Trade Shocks” in Tables 4 and 5.
       In the inventory model, these trade shocks bring trade more in line with the data
without doing much harm to the business cycle properties of the model.15 Specifically, output
is only slightly more volatile (3.53 vs. 3.33), while trade is substantially more volatile (1.30
vs. 1.07) and quite close to the data (1.30 vs. 1.4). The real exchange rate and terms of trade
become more volatile as well. Net exports become slightly less countercyclical (-0.23 vs. 0.25),
while output comovement increases slightly (0.35 to 0.37), and consumption comovement falls
slightly (0.56 to 0.53).
       In the no inventory model, these trade shocks bring trade more in line with the data
but substantially alter the business cycle properties of the model. Specifically, output is much
more volatile (5.12 vs. 3.40), trade is substantially more volatile (1.63 vs. 0.89), and the terms
of trade are substantially more volatile (1.03 vs. 0.57 and 0.27 in the data). Consumption
becomes 1.34 times more volatile than IP compared to 0.46 in the data. Net exports become
slightly less procyclical (0.29 vs. 0.33), while output and consumption comovement both fall
8 percentage points. Given the movements in output and consumption, these trade shocks
become a major driver of international business cycles. In short, we find that the trade
dynamics from endogenous wedges reflecting inventory adjustment lead to a substantially
better fit than those reflecting exogenous shocks to trade.

  15
    Impulse response functions in the model verify this. Other than the movements in trade wedges and
trade, they are nearly identical to the model without wedges (see our earlier working paper, Alessandria,
Kaboski, and Midrigan, 2012).




                                                   24
D. Equalized Comovement
        The final columns in Tables 4 and 5 present the results for the model with no invento-
ries, where the correlation of productivity shocks across the two countries has been set in order
to match the comovement in production across countries in the model with inventories. This
facilitates an easier comparison of the impact of inventories on the relative comovement of
production and consumption. Clearly, even after the comovement in production is equalized,
the model with inventories is yielding much less comovement in consumption. Again, this is
because the presence of inventories impacts the cost of consumption. Thus, consumption will
depend on both productivity shocks and the stock of available inventories. While produc-
tivity shocks hit the costs of goods symmetrically, inventory stocks move diﬀerently across
countries, especially since inventory motives diﬀer across imported and domestic goods. This
allows consumption to be less correlated across countries.16

E. Additional Sensitivity
        We consider a variety of alternative calibrations. Specifically, we consider how the
imported inventory premium, depreciation rate of inventories, and asymmetries in inventory
holdings aﬀect our results.17 The results of these alternative calibrations are also reported in
Tables 4 and 5.
        We first consider the impact of eliminating the inventory premium on imported goods.
The results are reported in the column No Import Premium. As one should expect, eliminating
the import premium reduces the volatility of trade flows from 1.07 to 0.92. The lower volatility
of trade arises primarily from a smaller wedge as this is reduced from 0.79 to 0.61. Real net
exports are now more countercyclical than in the benchmark (-0.31 vs. -0.25) as exports
become slightly less procyclical and imports slightly more procyclical.
        We next consider how our choice of inventory depreciation aﬀects our results. In
the column titled Low Inventory Depreciation we consider the case with  0 = 0008 With
this lower depreciation rate, we must reduce the idiosyncratic uncertainty to hit the same

  16
     With the presence of retailers and inventories there are issues with measuring the shocks hitting the
economy that make the measured correlation of shocks in the inventory model lower than the actual shocks.
In the no inventory model the bias goes the other way. Thus, in this experiment the correlation of measured
Solow residuals in the two models is about the same.
  17
     We also consider the role of the elasticity of substitution and assets trade for propagation in our working
paper. These generally have a moderate impact in our framework.



                                                      25
inventory targets as before. The low depreciation rate lowers the volatility of the inventory
stock from 0.54 to 0.49. The volatility of trade flows falls slightly from 1.07 to 1.04. The
wedge also becomes slightly less volatile. Net exports become slightly less countercyclical.
       Lastly, we consider the properties of the model when there are asymmetric inventory
holdings across countries. Specifically, we consider the case where the Foreign country pro-
duces and exports a good that requires more inventory holdings than the Home country.
An example of this might be Japan intensively producing and exporting autos while the US
intensively produces and exports less inventory-intensive services. Specifically, we calibrate
the model so that the retailers of Home goods in the foreign country face the same idiosyn-
cratic uncertainty as retailers of locally produced goods in the Foreign country. The last two
columns of the table report the statistics from the Asymmetric Countries (High denotes the
country with high final good inventories and Low denotes the country with low final good
inventories). With the asymmetric inventory holdings, import and export volatility are no
longer equal as the incentive to adjust inventories diﬀers across destinations. Indeed, Home
imports are more volatile than Home exports and the wedge is larger in the Home country
than in the Foreign country. Business cycle correlations do not change dramatically, although
the High inventory country now has real net exports that are more countercyclical, while the
Low inventory country has slightly less countercyclical net exports.

7. Conclusions
       Over the business cycle, fluctuations in international trade involve substantial, per-
sistent departures from theory in that the movements in trade generally cannot be fully
explained by movements in final expenditures and relative prices. We show empirically and
theoretically that an important reason for the failure of standard models to explain these
trade flows is that they ignore the inventory management decisions of importers. We show
a two-country GE model with an inventory management decision,business cycles driven by
productivity shocks can generate some of the explained and unexplained movements in inter-
national trade over the business cycle.
       In terms of the propagation of business cycles, we find that bringing trade flows more
in line with the data alters some key features of international business cycles. Specifically,
with inventories, real net exports are countercyclical as in the data. Following a positive


                                             26
productivity shock in the home country, inventory investment motives give the home country
a stronger desire to import and a weaker desire to export than in a standard model without
inventories. Moreover, with countercyclical net exports, inventories lead consumption to
become less correlated across countries for a given amount of comovement in production.
This occurs because the stock of inventories is local and influences the consumption decision.
Lastly, we find that introducing shocks to preferences for foreign goods, a natural stand-in
for changes in trade costs and alternative sources of the trade wedge, into our benchmark
inventory model can generate all of the movements in the trade wedge without dramatically
altering international business cycles. Introducing these same shocks in a model without
inventories requires much larger shocks to trade costs and implies that fluctuations in trade
costs are a major driver of aggregate fluctuations.
       The importance of inventories in the international transmission of business cycles sug-
gests several avenues for further investigation. Our model of inventories has an explicit supply
chain, but it would be interesting to introduce a more involved input-output structure, where
manufacturing production involves intermediates. The diﬀering importance of inventories
across sectors may also have implications for how shocks filter through the input-output
structure. Such an analysis would require disaggregate data on industry-level holdings of
imported and domestic inventories that are more broadly representative than our automobile
case study. Assembly and analysis of informative disaggregate data on sales and inventory of
imported goods would be helpful.
       Finally, our analysis only considers business cycles arising from supply shocks. In
practice, monetary, government, and financial shocks are likely to matter as well. To the
extent that these shocks aﬀect inventory investment, they will generate trade wedges as well,
though. The framework we have developed is tractable enough to consider these types of
shocks as well.




                                              27
References
 [1] Alessandria, George and Horag Choi, 2007. “Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net
     Export Dynamics?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289-336.

 [2] Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010a. “Inventories,
     Lumpy Trade, and Large Devaluations,” American Economic Review, 100(5): 2304—39.

 [3] Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010b. “The Great Trade
     Collapse of 2008—09: An Inventory Adjustment?” IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 254-94.

 [4] Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2011. “US Trade and
     Inventory Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 101(3).

 [5] Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2012. “Trade Wedges,
     Inventories, and the International Business Cycles." Working Paper.

 [6] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland. 1992 “International Real
     Business Cycles.”, Journal of Political Economy, 100 (4): 745—775

 [7] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland.1994. “Dynamics of the Trade
     Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review, 84(1):
     84—103

 [8] Baxter, Marianne and Mario J. Crucini. 1995. “Business Cycles and the Asset Structure
     of Foreign Trade.” International Economic Review, 36(4): 821—854.

 [9] Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2002. “Can Sticky Price Models
     Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of Economic Studies,
     69(3): 533-63

[10] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2010. “Trade and
     the Global Recession.” Working Paper.

[11] Engel, Charles, and Jian Wang. 2011. “International Trade in Durable Goods: Under-
     standing Volatility, Cyclicality, and Elasticities.” Journal of International Economics,
     83(1): 37-52.

[12] Ghironi, Fabio and Marc Melitz, 2005. “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dy-
     namics with Heterogenous Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865-915.

[13] Khan, Aubhik and Julia Thomas, 2007a. “Inventories and the Business Cycle: An Equi-
     librium Analysis of (S,s) Policies.” American Economic Review, 97(4), 1165-88.

[14] Khan, Aubhik and Julia Thomas, 2007b. “Explaining Inventories: A Business Cycle
     Assessment of the Stockout Avoidance and (S,s) Motives,” Macroeconomic Dynamics,
     11(5), 638-64.

[15] Husted, Steven and Tryphon Kollintzas. 1984 “Distributed Lags and Intermediate Good
     Imports,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 8(3), 303-27.

                                             28
[16] Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis and Linda L. Tesar. 2010. “The Collapse of
     International Trade During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun,” IMF
     Economic Review, 58(2): 214-53.

[17] Raﬀo, Andrea. 2008. “Net Exports, Consumption Volatility and International Business
     Cycle Models.” Journal of International Economics, 75 (1), 14-29.

[18] Stockman, Alan C. and Linda L. Tesar. 1995 “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country
     Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements.”, American Eco-
     nomic Review 85 (1): 168—185




                                          29
                                      Sales, Imports, and Inventory
                             .5
Log Change from 2007 average
     -1      -.5-1.5  0




                      2007m1      2008m1      2009m1            2010m1       2011m1        2012m1
                                                         Date

                                        Imports (Census)                 Sales (Wards)
                                        Inventory (Wards)




                                                   Wedges
                             .2
Log Change from 2007 average
   -.6   -.4    -.2
                -.8    0




                      2007m1      2008m1      2009m1            2010m1       2011m1        2012m1
                                                         Date

                                    Naive Import Wedge               Actual Import Wedge


Figure 1: US Car Sales, Imports, and Inventory of Japanese cars


                                                    30
                         Detrended US Real Imports and Import Wedges
          .1
          .05
     Log Change
     -.05 -.1 0




                            Real Imports
                            Naive Import Wedge
          -.15




                            Actual Import Wedge

                  1995                2000                  2005   2010
                                                  Quarter




Figure 2: Deviations from Trend of US Imports, Wedge, and Import Price




                                                  31
                                                                   US


                           0
Log Change from 2007 avg
                           -.2
                           -.4
                           -.6




                                      P r o d u c tio n
                           -.8




                                      S a le s

                           2007q1      2008q1             2009q1            2010q1   2011q1   2012q1
                                                                   D a te




                                                                   EU
                           0
Log Change from 2007 avg
                           -.1
                           -.2
                           -.3
                           -.4




                                      P r o d u c tio n
                                      S a le s
                           -.5




                           2007q1      2008q1             2009q1            2010q1   2011q1   2012q1
                                                                   D a te




                                                               Japan
                           .2
Log Change from 2007 avg
                           0
                           -.2
                           -.4




                                      P r o d u c tio n
                                      S a le s
                           -.6




                           2007q1      2008q1             2009q1            2010q1   2011q1   2012q1
                                                                   D a te



                                    Figure 3: Production and Sales by Market

                                                               32
                                      Japan Net Exports
          .1
Change from 2007 avg
    -.1          0                      2*NX/(EX+M)




                         Real
                         Motor Vehicles
          -.2




                         Nominal

                2007q1    2008q1          2009q1          2010q1   2011q1   2012q1
                                                   Date


                         Figure 4: Real Net Exports in Japan




                                               33
          Industrial Production                          Exports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0      Inventory Model                    0
           No Inventories Model
 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
              Quarters                                   Quarters
          Domestic Absorption                            Imports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
                Quarters                                 Quarters
                 Labor                                  Net Exports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
              Quarters                               Quarters
            Terms of Trade                          Naive Wedge
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
                Quarters                                 Quarters




Figure 5: Impulse Response of Positive Home Productivity Shock




                                       34
          Industrial Production                          Exports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0      Inventory Model                    0
           No Inventories Model
 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
              Quarters                                   Quarters
          Domestic Absorption                            Imports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
                Quarters                                 Quarters
                 Labor                                  Net Exports
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
              Quarters                               Quarters
            Terms of Trade                          Naive Wedge
  0.04                                      0.04

  0.02                                      0.02

    0                                         0

 −0.02                                  −0.02
      0    10      20      30     40         0     10       20        30   40
                Quarters                                 Quarters




Figure 6: Impulse Response to Positive Global Productivity Shock




                                       35
Appendix to Trade Wedges, Inventories, and the Inter-
national Business Cycles

May 2012


Not for Publication

George Alessandria
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
George.Alessandria@phil.frb.org

Joseph Kaboski
University of Notre Dame and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Virgiliu Midrigan
NYU, NBER, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Virgiliu.Midrigan@nyu.edu



1. Summary
       The appendix describes the data used in the paper, the equations of the model, some
additional sensitivity, and presents impulse response functions for the models with wedge
shocks.

A. Data Appendix
Source: US Data

  1. Output: Industrial Production: Manufacturing [SIC] (SA, 2007=100)
  2. Investment = NII + I
      (a) NII = Real Change in Private Inventories (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$)
      (b) I =Real Private Nonresidential Investment: Equipment & Software (SAAR,
          Bil.Chn.2005$)
  3. Real Exports of Goods (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$)
  4. Real Imports of Goods (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$)
  5. Aggregate Hours: Nonfarm Payrolls, Manufacturing (SAAR, Bil.Hrs)
  6. PCEG = Real Personal Consumption Expenditures: Goods (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005.$)
  7. Real Expenditures on Tradeable Goods = Investment + PCEG
  8. Real Manufacturing & Trade Inventories: All Industries (EOP, SA, Mil.Chn.2005$)
  9. Real Manufacturing & Trade Sales: All Industries (SA, Mil.Chn.2005$)
 10. Real Broad Trade-Weighted Exchange Value of the US$ (Mar-73=100)

                                            0
 11. Terms of Trade: Price of Exports of nonagricultural goods/Price of Imports of nonpe-
     troleum goods from the BEA
 12. Price of Goods = PCE075 P025
                                
      (a) Personal Consumption Expenditures: Goods: Price Index (SA, 2005=100)
      (b) Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment: Chain Price Index (SA, 2005=100)

Source Data: Motor Vehicles.

  1. Japan
      (a) Exports of Passenger Cars. JAMA: Active Matrix Database System. Seasonally
          adjusted using X-12.
      (b) Production of Passenger Cars. JAMA: Active Matrix Database System. Season-
          ally adjusted using X-12.
      (c) New Car Registrations Sales. JAMA: Active Matrix Database System. Seasonally
          adjusted using X-12.
      (d) Real and Nominal Exports and Imports:
            i. http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/sna/sokuhou/qe/gdemenu_ea.html
      (e) Nominal Motor Vehicle Imports and Exports (Ministry of Finance/Japan Tariﬀ
          Association)
  2. US
      (a) Production: IP: Motor Vehicles (SA, 2007=100) from Federal Reserve (IPG61@IP)
      (b) Sales: US: Light Vehicle Sales (NSA, Units) - Seasonal Adjustment, All from
          WARDS (sa(UV@WARDS))
      (c) Japanese Exports of Passenger Cars to the U.S. (NSA, Number), JAMA: Active
          Matrix Database System. Seasonally adjusted using X-12.
      (d) U.S. Light Vehicle Sales Imported from Japan (NSA, Units), Wards Automotive
          Group/Haver Analytics (UVJP@WARDS). Seasonally adjusted using X-12.
      (e) U.S.: Light Vehicle Inventory Imported from Japan (NSA, Units), Wards Automo-
          tive Group/Haver Analytics (UZJP@WARDS). Seasonally adjusted using X-12.
      (f) US CPI New Vehicles: CPI-U: New Cars (SA, 1982-84=100) (UTWC@CPIDATA))
      (g) US Import Price Deflators of Japanese cars proxied for by Japan: All Goods: US
          Import Price Index (NSA, 2000=100) (sa(PMOJAP@USINT))
  3. EU
      (a) EU 27: IP: Motor Vehicles (SA, 2005=100) Eurostat (S997Q291@EUDATA)
      (b) EU 27: New Car Registrations (SA, 2006=100) Eurostat (S997CVRI@EUDATA)




                                           1
2. Sensitivity
       We describe the eﬀect of having habit in preferences, restricting asset trade to a non-
contingent bond, and the elasticity of substitution on the quantitative properties of the model.
The results are in Tables 6 and 7.

A. Role of Habit
        Focusing on Table 6, introducing habit persistence allows consumption to be as per-
sistent as in the data. The persistence of consumption leads to more persistent movements
in international trade in the model with inventories. With habit the volatility of imports
falls from 1.13 to 1.07 in our benchmark inventory formulation and the autocorrelation rises
from 0.55 to 0.67. The less volatile imports lead to less volatile and less countercyclical real
net exports. Without inventories, adding habit has little eﬀect, except to lower both the
cyclicality (Table 5) and persistence (Table 6) of net exports slightly. Overall the impact of
habit is relatively minor.

B. Incomplete Markets
        In the next three columns we consider a model with incomplete asset markets. Specif-
ically, we assume that the only asset traded across countries is a non-contingent bond that is
in zero net supply. To keep the economy stationary, we introduce a small quadratic adjust-
ment cost on the bond position relative to the steady-state bond position,  which is set to
zero. The home country budget constraint then becomes
         X Z 1                                     µ         ¶
                                                     +1
                   ()  () + +1 +1 +         − 1 =   +  + Π +  
       ={ } 0                                     

For simplicity we assume that the retailers are owned by the agents in the country whose good
they sell. With this convention, profits here are equal to retailers’ profits plus intermediate
producer profits.
           Z 1                   Z 1
      Π=        ()  () +     ∗ () 
                                              ∗
                                                () −   + 
            0                    0

       From the column titled Bond we see that introducing the non-contingent bond has a
very small impact on our quantitative results. This is not surprising as it is well known that
incomplete asset markets tend to have a small impact when shocks are not permanent so that
wealth eﬀects are fairly minor.
       To allow for more substantial wealth eﬀects, we next examine the properties of the
bond economy when shocks are close to permanent ( = 0995)  The final two columns report
the statistics of the Benchmark economy with permanent shocks and the Bond economy with
permanent shocks. Once again the role of market incompleteness is fairly moderate. The
largest impact is on the cyclicality of net exports, which is about 10 percentage points more
countercyclical with incomplete markets. This diﬀerence arises because in the bond economy
consumption is substantially less correlated than in the complete markets economy (0.56 vs.
0.70).



                                               2
C. Elasticity of Substitution
        We next consider how the elasticity of substitution aﬀects our results. There is a wide
range of estimates for this parameter. Lowering the elasticity to 0.5 leads to less substitution
following a shock and this increases the volatility of trade from 1.07 to 1.14 and the wedge from
0.79 to 0.81. Net exports become less countercyclical as comovement increases substantially
(the correlation of output rises from 0.35 to 0.47). Increasing the elasticity of substitution to
2.5 actually lowers the volatility of trade flows slightly to 1.04 and makes the wedge slightly
less volatile. Real net exports are slightly more countercyclical as business cycles become less
correlated (the correlation of output drops to 0.31).

3. Full set of equilibrium conditions
Home Consumer Optimality:
            
          = −
            
                             ∙           µ           ³        ´     ³     ´2 ¶¸
                                 +1                  +1         +1
                                 +1
                                        + (1 − ) +   −  + 2  − 
                    +1
        1 =                                         ³         ´
                                                      
                                                  1 +  −1 − 
         = [ − (1 − ) −1 ]

Foreign Consumer Optimality
                ∗
       ∗     
           = −
       ∗      ∗
               
                             ∙              µ          ³ ∗       ´    ³ ∗   ´2 ¶¸
                                  ∗
                                 +1                    +1         +1
                     ∗             ∗      + (1 − ) +  ∗ −  + 2 ∗ − 
                    +1       +1                                    
         1 =        ∗
                                                         ³ ∗       ´
                                                         
                                                    1 +  ∗  − 
                                                             −1
                £ ∗                        ¤
        ∗ =     − (1 − ) −1      ∗


Home Producer’s Optimality:

                   =   1−
                 
                  = 
                −1
                  
       (1 − )     = 
                  
                        1−
                   =  
                          




                                                     3
Foreign Producer’s Optimality:

                  ∗ = ∗ ∗ ∗1−
                  ∗
             ∗ ∗  = ∗
                 −1
                  ∗
       (1 − ) ∗ ∗ = ∗
                   
                          ∗ ∗1−
                    ∗ =  ∗
                              
Home Pricing:
                               ∙                       ¸
                                           +1
       ̂ =               (1 −   )        +1
                     −1                     
                                         ∗+1 ∗
        ̂ =              (1 −   ) ∗  +1
                     −1                    
                          ∙          µ                            ¶             ¸ 1−
                                                                                   1

                             1−                             
        =        ̂ ̂                     − 1            −
                                         1 −         
                                                           −      1 − 
                          ∙         µ                           ¶            ¸ 1−
                                                                                1

                             1−                           
        =        ̂ ̂                   − 1            −
                                       1 −         
                                                         −      1 − 
                     £ 1−             ¤
                                  1− 1−
                                          1
          =           +  

                µ      1             ¶1 Ã                               !−1
                                                         
(1)   ̂ =                    1                                        −1
                     −                    (1 −   ) +1
                                                                 
                                                                     +1
                                           ⎛                                ⎞−1 
                µ      1         ¶1                  ∗
                                           ⎝           
(2)   ̂ =          
                             1                              ∗
                                                                         − 1⎠
                     −                   (1 −   ) +1
                                                               ∗    ∗
                                                                     +1
                                                              


Foreign Pricing:
                          ¡           ¢ +1
       ̂∗ =               1 − ∗          +1
                     −1                       
                          ¡        ∗
                                       ¢ ∗+1 ∗
        ̂∗ =              1 −   ∗  +1
                     −1                      
                          ∙            µ                          ¶            ¸ 1−
                                                                                  1

        ∗              ∗     ∗1−                            
        =        ̂ ̂                      − 1           −
                                         1 −        
                                                           −      1 − 
                          ∙            µ                           ¶              ¸ 1−
                                                                                     1

        ∗              ∗     ∗1−                             
        =        ̂ ̂                       − 1           −
                                         1 −          
                                                            −      1 − 
                     £ ∗1−          ∗1− ¤ 1−
                                              1
        ∗ =            + 



                                                          4
                   µ         1             ¶1 Ã                               !−1
         ∗                                                     
(3)    ̂ =                         1                                        −1
                        −                       (1 −   ) +1
                                                                       
                                                                           +1
                                                 ⎛                                ⎞−1 
                   µ         1         ¶1                  ∗
                                                 ⎝           
(4)      ∗
       ̂   =             
                                   1                              ∗+1 ∗
                                                                               − 1⎠
                        −                      (1 −   ) ∗  +1
                                                                    


Home Inventory Stocks:
                         µ   ¶− "µ        ¶− #
                       ̂         
        = ̂                           
                                  
                    µ       ¶− " µ        ¶− #
                      ̂           
        = ̂                           
                                   
                            ∙             ∙                                ¸¸
                                            1       1−     
(5)     = (1 −   )  −                    ̂        −
                                    ̂ 1 −             1 − 
                            ∙            ∙                              ¸¸
                                          1      1−      
(6)     = (1 −   )  −                 ̂         −
                                   ̂ 1 −            1 − 
(7)     =  + 
(8)     =  +  ( ̄−1)
                0       1

Foreign Inventory Stocks:
                   Ã         !− " µ                 #
                        ∗                  ∗ ¶−
       ∗        ∗
                      ̂              
       = ̂       ∗
                                           ∗
                                                 ∗
                                     
                   Ã       !− "µ                 #
                       ∗               ∗ ¶−
       ∗       ∗
                     ̂           
       = ̂      ∗
                                              ∗
                                 ∗
                            "                                                 ¸#
              ¡           ¢            ∗ ∙
                                            1                      
       ∗
(9)    = 1 −  ∗   ∗
                                 − ∗                    ̂ ∗1− −
                                     ̂ 1 −                1 − 
                            "                                                  ¸#
              ¡          ¢            ∗ ∙
                                           1                        
       ∗
(10)   = 1 −  ∗   ∗
                                 − ∗                   ̂∗1− −
                                    ̂ 1 −                 1 − 
(11) ∗ = 
            ∗      ∗
                + 
(12)  ∗ =  0 +  1 ( ̄−1)
                               ∗




Good Market Clearing:

                    ∗               ∗
        =  +  − −1 − −1
       ∗ =  + 
                     ∗               ∗
                         − −1 − −1

Asset Market Clearing:

                                                                5
               
         =
                
               ∗
       ∗   =
               ∗
           = ∗

The numbered equations represent the additional equations from a standard model of BKK
                                                              ∗       ∗
with monopolistic retailers. The variables (̂  ̂  ̂  ̂ ) described in equations (1 to
4) are useful to describe both the distribution of prices and the inventory sales ratio. The
next two groups of 4 equations (equations 5 to 12) summarize the law of motion for retail
stocks of domestic and imported goods in each country (equations 5, 6, 9, and 10) and the
influence of inventories on the holding costs of inventories (equations 7, 8, 11, and 12).

4. Impulse Responses to Productivity in Model with Wedge Shocks




                                                   6
         Industrial Production                             Exports
 0.08                                        0.08
 0.06       Inventory Model                  0.06
            No Inventories Model
 0.04                                        0.04
 0.02                                        0.02
   0                                           0
−0.02                                       −0.02
     0    10      20      30       40            0   10       20        30   40
             Quarters                                      Quarters
         Domestic Absorption                               Imports
 0.08                                        0.08
 0.06                                        0.06
 0.04                                        0.04
 0.02                                        0.02
   0                                           0
−0.02                                       −0.02
     0    10      20      30       40            0   10       20        30   40
               Quarters                                    Quarters
                Labor                                     Net Exports
 0.08                                        0.08
 0.06                                        0.06
 0.04                                        0.04
 0.02                                        0.02
   0                                           0
−0.02                                       −0.02
     0    10      20      30       40            0   10       20        30   40
             Quarters                                  Quarters
           Terms of Trade                             Naive Wedge
 0.08                                        0.08
 0.06                                        0.06
 0.04                                        0.04
 0.02                                        0.02
   0                                           0
−0.02                                       −0.02
     0    10      20      30       40            0   10       20        30   40
               Quarters                                    Quarters




                                 Figure 1:



                                        7
                           Table 1: US Business Cycle Statistics on Imports


               US Imports and Sales of Japanese Motor Vehicles (2007m1 to 2011m12)

                                    Volatility rel.                  Correlation with     Correlation with
                                                      Autocorrel.
                                      to Sales                            Sales               Imports

Sales (all cars)*                        16.4            0.81                1
Imports (Census)                         2.06            0.78              0.71                   1
US Sales Japan cars'                     1.38            0.85              0.90                 0.72
Import Price                             0.09            0.94              -0.54                -0.47
Naïve Import Wedge                       1.47            0.49              0.22                 0.83
Actual Import Wedge                      0.60            0.79              0.15                 0.25

                              US Aggregate Imports (1995Q1 to 2010q4)

                                    Volatility rel.                  Correlation with     Correlation with
                                                      Autocorrel.
                                        to IP                            IPMFR                Imports

Industrial Production (IP)*              3.44            0.91              1.00
Imports Goods                            1.40            0.86              0.92                 1.00
Import Price                             0.36            0.83              0.08                 0.21

Naïve Import Wedge                       1.08            0.78              0.86                 0.94
Import Ratio                             0.84            0.73              0.78                 0.93
Actual Import Wedge                      0.80            0.67              0.81                 0.85
* Sales and IP volatility are absolute, not relative. Import Price measured relative to price of final
basket.
     Table 2: Change in Japan Passenger Car Production, Sales, and Exports


                                Nov. 08 to Aug. 09 vs    Sep. 09 to Aug 10 vs Nov.
                 Change from
                                 May 08 to Oct. 08             08 to Aug. 09
Export share of production in
                                        0.59                       0.48
previous period
Production                              -0.42                      0.25
Domestic Sales                          -0.12                      0.21
Exports                                 -0.63                      0.27
Exports plus Domestic sales             -0.39                      0.23
Global Sales*                           -0.20                      0.05
US Sales                                -0.26                      -0.11
US Exports                              -0.65                      0.28

* Global Sales measures the change in Domestic Sales + Foreign Sales where US Sales
is a proxy for sales outside of Japan
                                 Table 3: Parameter Values
                                                                           No
                                             Benchmark       No Habit
                                                                        Inventory
           Assigned Parameters
     discount factor                            0.99          0.99       0.99
     Armington elasticity of H vs. F             1.5           1.5        1.5
     elasticity across varieties in H & F         3             3          3
s   inventory depreciation                    0.016         0.016
s   Elasticity of inventory depreciation     -0.0044       -0.0045
     Elasticity of inventory costs                0             0
     Frisch Elasticity                           0.5           0.5         0.5
h     Habit                                      0.30            0          0.3
     Capital Depreciation                      0.025         0.025       0.025
     Capital Share                              0.33          0.33        0.33

          Calibrated Parameters
ad    home taste shocks                           1.3           1.3        1.3
af    foreign taste shocks                      1.0001        1.0001       1.3
     foreign weight                             0.335         0.335      0.36
                                                                           Table 4: Business cycle statistics model and data


                                                                            Inventory Model ‐ Endogenous Costs                                                      No Inventory

                                                            Balanced       Trade      No Import                  Asymmetry ‐ Asymmetry ‐                                       Trade      Comove
Standard Deviations:                 Data     Benchmark                                         Low Depreciation                                 Benchmark Balanced RNX
                                                              RNX          shocks     Premium                       High        Low                                            shocks      fixed
 Production                           3.44        3.33        3.27          3.53        3.34         3.33           3.33        3.35                 3.4           3.45         5.12        3.39
 NX, NX/(EX+M)                        2.67        3.08          0           2.98        2.79         2.51           3.01        3.01                 1.96           0           6.45        2.44
 NX/sales                             0.28        0.33          0           0.32        0.29         0.26           0.32        0.29                 0.21           0           0.68        0.26
 NII/sales                            0.45        0.82        0.62          0.88        0.80         0.77           0.86        0.72

Standard Deviations (rel. to IP):
  Consumption, C                      0.46        0.53         0.56         0.61         0.53            0.54            0.55         0.52           0.63          0.69         1.34        0.62
  Employment, L                       0.82        0.62         0.61         0.68         0.62            0.62            0.62         0.62           0.62          0.62         0.96        0.61
  Total investment, X + Delta S       2.89        2.89          2.3         2.89         2.89            2.88            2.89         2.89           2.9           2.69         2.88        2.89
  Investment, X                       1.62        1.62         1.31         1.62         1.62            1.62            1.62         1.62           2.9           2.69         2.87        2.89
  Inventory Stock                     0.63        0.54         0.44         0.55         0.51            0.49            0.56         0.47
  Exports                             1.49        1.07         0.99          1.3         0.92            1.04            0.95         1.08           0.89          0.84         1.63        0.9
  Imports                              1.4        1.07         0.99          1.3         0.92            1.04            1.09         0.94           0.89          0.84         1.63        0.9
  RER                                 0.89         0.2         0.24         0.32         0.18            0.19            0.19         0.19           0.27          0.23         1.18        0.29
  TOT                                 0.27         0.4         0.54         0.45         0.37            0.40            0.38         0.38           0.57          0.49         1.03        0.61
  Inventory Sales Ratio               0.82        0.52         0.52         0.53         0.53            0.53            0.48         0.56
  Sales (incl Mfr)                    0.72        0.78         0.76         0.81         0.78            0.78            0.78         0.77           0.97            1          1.29        0.97
  Wedge                               1.08        0.79         0.66         1.09         0.61            0.74            0.85         0.58                                      1.07

AutoCorrelations:
 Production, IP                       0.91         0.7         0.69         0.69         0.70            0.69            0.69         0.70           0.72          0.72          0.7        0.73
 NX, NX/(EX+M)                        0.78        0.71                      0.56         0.70            0.71            0.61         0.61            0.4                       0.47        0.32
 NX, NX/sales                         0.76        0.71                      0.56         0.70            0.71            0.61         0.61            0.4                       0.47        0.32
 NII/salesM                           0.61        0.55         0.52         0.58         0.53            0.54            0.49         0.60
 Consumption, C                       0.82        0.82         0.82         0.82         0.82            0.82            0.82         0.82           0.63          0.72         0.64        0.74
 Employment, L                        0.91        0.69         0.69         0.69         0.69            0.69            0.69         0.69           0.73          0.72         0.71        0.74
 Total investment, X + Delta S        0.79        0.64         0.63         0.65         0.64            0.63            0.58         0.71           0.86          0.73         0.92        0.81
 Investment, X                         0.9        0.95         0.95         0.95         0.95            0.95            0.95         0.95
 Inventory Stock                      0.92        0.92         0.93         0.93         0.92            0.92            0.91         0.93
 Exports                              0.85        0.67         0.66         0.51         0.69            0.66            0.76         0.55           0.68          0.72         0.67        0.66
 Imports                              0.86        0.67         0.66         0.51         0.69            0.66            0.55         0.76           0.68          0.72         0.67        0.66
 RER                                  0.76        0.78         0.75         0.75         0.78            0.76            0.77         0.77           0.65          0.72         0.67        0.61
 TOT                                  0.71        0.74         0.74         0.74         0.75            0.74            0.74         0.74           0.65          0.72         0.62        0.61
 Inventory Sales Ratio                0.78        0.73         0.71         0.71         0.73            0.72            0.70         0.76
 Sales (incl Mfr)                     0.91        0.79         0.78         0.79         0.79            0.79            0.79         0.80           0.74          0.72         0.72        0.75
 Wedge                                0.78        0.57         0.56         0.43         0.55            0.56            0.48         0.59                                      0.72


Balanced RNX denotes a case where real exports = real imports. Trade shocks denotes a shock to trade weight that matches the volatility of the trade wedge in the inventory and no inventory models.
Asymmetry High and Low denote countries with high and low retail inventory levels. Comove fixed means choosing the international correlation of productivity shocks to achieve the same cross‐
correlation of output as in our benchmark inventory model.
                                                             Table 5: Business cycle statistics model and data: Cross Correlations


                                                                        Inventory Model ‐ Endogenous Costs                                                  No Inventory

                                                         Balanced      Trade      No Import                  Asymmetry ‐ Asymmetry ‐                                  Trade    Comove
                                    Data    Benchmark                                       Low Depreciation                                 Benchmark Balanced RNX
Correlation with IP:                                       RNX         shocks     Premium                       High        Low                                       shocks    fixed
 NX, NX/(EX+M)                      ‐0.04      ‐0.25                    ‐0.23       ‐0.31        ‐0.18          ‐0.32       ‐0.19              0.33                    0.25      0.29
 NX/sales                           ‐0.42      ‐0.25                    ‐0.23       ‐0.31        ‐0.18          ‐0.32       ‐0.19              0.33                    0.25      0.29
 NII/sales                           0.56       0.71        0.82         0.73        0.73        0.71            0.69        0.74
 Consumption, C                       0.8       0.96        0.96         0.96        0.96        0.96            0.96        0.95              0.97          1         0.97     0.97
 Employment, L                       0.91        1          0.99          1          1.00        1.00            1.00        1.00              0.99         0.99       0.99     0.99
 Total investment, X + NII           0.86       0.94        0.99         0.95        0.95        0.95            0.94        0.95              0.95         0.99       0.81     0.95
 Investment, X                       0.92       0.67         0.6         0.62        0.70        0.66            0.66        0.70              0.95         0.99       0.82     0.95
 Inventory Stock                     0.81       0.71        0.64         0.69        0.70        0.74            0.77        0.64                          ‐0.31
 Exports                             0.85       0.63        0.83         0.68        0.59        0.70            0.67        0.57              0.9          0.84       0.91     0.87
 Imports                             0.92       0.85        0.83         0.83        0.87        0.83            0.85        0.83              0.69         0.84       0.72     0.64
 RER                                ‐0.38       0.55        0.54         0.56        0.54        0.56            0.61        0.49              0.53         0.55       0.45     0.55
 TOT                                 0.69       0.56        0.55         0.55        0.56        0.56            0.60        0.52              0.53         0.55       0.44     0.55
 Inventory‐Sales Ratio (IS)         ‐0.03      ‐0.96       ‐0.98        ‐0.96       ‐0.95        ‐0.97          ‐0.95       ‐0.96                          ‐0.33
 Sales (incl Mfr)                    0.97       0.97        0.97         0.97        0.98        0.97            0.97        0.97                1           1         0.99     0.99
 Wedge                               0.86       0.68        0.83         0.74        0.65        0.67            0.65        0.66                          ‐0.01       0.97
Correlations:
 IP and IPs*                          0.6       0.35        0.4         0.37          0.34           0.35             0.35            0.35     0.42        0.4         0.57     0.35
 L and Ls*                           0.39       0.49        0.61        0.51          0.47           0.50             0.35            0.35     0.65        0.61        0.72      0.6
 C and Cs*                           0.38       0.56        0.47        0.53          0.55           0.58             0.48            0.48     0.75        0.39        0.71     0.67
 X and Xs*                           0.33       0.09        0.73        0.16          0.20           0.26             0.23            0.23     0.22        0.42        0.25     0.17
 IS and Sales                       ‐0.13      ‐0.91       ‐0.93        ‐0.9         ‐0.90           ‐0.92           ‐0.89           ‐0.92
 Total Investment and NII            0.87       0.56        0.58        0.54          0.60           0.56             0.52            0.65
 Exports and Imports                 0.85       0.63         1          0.79          0.59           0.74             0.61            0.61     0.79         1          0.7      0.68
 TOT and RER                        ‐0.16        1           1           1            1.00           1.00             1.00            1.00      1           1          0.99      1
 NIIY AND X                          0.47       0.04        0.05        0.02          0.10           0.01            ‐0.01            0.15
 Wedge and TOT                       0.09       0.24        0.41        0.27          0.29           0.20             0.29            0.25                             0.6
 Wedge and Imports                   0.88       0.86        0.78        0.91          0.79           0.84             0.87            0.77                             0.57

*Taken from Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) based on the US and Europe
                                              Table 6: Business cycle statistics model and data




                                                                           Low elasticity   High elasticity                Benchmark:      Bond
Standard Deviations:                 Data   Benchmark        No Habit                                         Bond Model
                                                                             (  = 0.5)        (  = 2.5)                  Permanent    Permanent
      Production                     3.44     3.33             3.32             3.19              3.38           3.33         3.23         3.25
      NX, NX/(EX+M)                  2.67     3.08             3.91             3.35              2.99           3.25         4.23         4.35
      NX/sales                       0.28     0.33             0.41             0.35              0.32           0.34         0.45         0.46
      NII/sales                      0.45     0.82              0.8             0.75              0.84           0.82         0.80         0.83

Standard Deviations (rel. to IP):
     Consumption, C                  0.46     0.53             0.51             0.53              0.54           0.54         0.62        0.65
     Employment, L                   0.82     0.62             0.62             0.59              0.63           0.62         0.60        0.60
     Total investment, X + Delta S   2.89     2.89             2.87             2.89              2.88           2.89         2.89        2.89
     Investment, X                   1.62     1.62             1.62             1.62              1.62           1.62         1.62        1.62
     Inventory Stock                 0.63     0.54             0.49             0.47              0.55           0.53         0.56        0.55
     Exports,                        1.49     1.07             1.13             1.14              1.04           1.08         1.13        1.13
     Imports,                        1.40     1.07             1.13             1.14              1.04           1.08         1.13        1.13
     RER                             0.89     0.20              0.2             0.42              0.13           0.20         0.27        0.26
     TOT                             0.27     0.40             0.42             0.87              0.26           0.40         0.55        0.53
     Inventory Sales Ratio           0.82     0.52             0.56             0.59              0.50           0.53         0.62        0.64
     Sales (incl Mfr)                0.72     0.78             0.76             0.78              0.77           0.78         0.82        0.84
     Wedge                           1.08     0.79             0.82             0.81              0.77           0.80         0.94        0.96
AutoCorrelations:
     Production, IP                  0.91     0.70             0.70             0.70              0.69           0.70         0.70        0.70
     NX, NX/(EX+M)                   0.78     0.71             0.13             0.72              0.67           0.68         0.34        0.67
     NX, NX/sales                    0.76     0.71             0.13             0.72              0.67           0.68         0.34        0.67
     NII/salesM                      0.61     0.55             0.33             0.51              0.54           0.53         0.62        0.60
     Consumption, C                  0.82     0.82             0.71             0.82              0.82           0.82         0.82        0.82
     Employment, L                   0.91     0.69             0.70             0.69              0.69           0.69         0.70        0.70
     Total investment, X + Delta S   0.79     0.64             0.51             0.63              0.62           0.62         0.69        0.65
     Investment, X                   0.90     0.95             0.95             0.94              0.95           0.95         0.95        0.95
     Inventory Stock                 0.92     0.92             0.91             0.91              0.92           0.92         0.94        0.93
     Exports,                        0.85     0.67             0.55             0.66              0.67           0.66         0.56        0.66
     Imports,                        0.86     0.67             0.55             0.66              0.67           0.66         0.56        0.66
     RER                             0.76     0.78             0.77             0.75              0.79           0.78         0.77        0.76
     TOT                             0.71     0.74             0.74             0.74              0.75           0.75         0.72        0.73
     Inventory‐Sales Ratio           0.78     0.73             0.67             0.78              0.71           0.73         0.77        0.77
     Sales (incl Mfr)                0.91     0.79             0.76             0.80              0.79           0.79         0.80        0.80
     Wedge                           0.78     0.57             0.31             0.55              0.56           0.55         0.57        0.62
                                              Table 7: Business cycle statistics model and data: Cross Correlations




                                                                                     Low elasticity   High elasticity                Benchmark:      Bond
                                      Data           Benchmark        No Habit                                          Bond Model
Correlation with IP:                                                                   (  = 0.5)        (  = 2.5)                  Permanent    Permanent
      NX/sales                        ‐0.42             ‐0.25            ‐0.11            ‐0.14             ‐0.28          ‐0.25        ‐0.22        ‐0.32
      NII/sales                        0.56              0.71             0.68             0.66              0.72           0.69         0.61         0.59
      Consumption, C                   0.80              0.96             0.98             0.96              0.96           0.96         0.96         0.97
      Employment, L                   0.91              1.00               1              0.98              1.00           1.00         0.99         0.99
      Total investment, X + Delta S    0.86              0.94             0.91             0.92              0.94           0.93         0.86         0.87
      Investment, X                    0.92              0.67             0.66             0.76              0.63           0.69         0.66         0.68
      Inventory Stock                  0.81              0.71             0.68             0.71              0.71           0.73         0.59         0.67
      Exports,                         0.85              0.63             0.64             0.69              0.61           0.61         0.55         0.48
      Imports,                         0.92              0.85             0.75             0.82              0.85           0.84         0.81         0.86
      RER                             ‐0.38              0.55             0.55             0.50              0.56           0.56         0.54         0.55
      TOT                              0.69              0.56             0.56             0.50              0.57           0.56         0.55         0.55
      Inventory‐Sales Ratio           ‐0.03             ‐0.96            ‐0.94            ‐0.93             ‐0.96          ‐0.97        ‐0.98        ‐0.98
      Sales (incl Mfr)                 0.97              0.97             0.98             0.98              0.97           0.98         0.97         0.98
      Wedge                            0.86              0.68             0.61             0.59              0.70           0.67         0.59         0.59

Correlations:
      IP and IPs*                      0.60             0.35             0.35            0.47              0.31            0.35         0.40         0.40
      L and Ls*                        0.39             0.49             0.49            0.78              0.39            0.49         0.60         0.39
      C and Cs*                        0.38             0.56             0.62            0.65              0.53            0.51         0.70         0.57
      X and Xs*                        0.33              0.09             0.15            0.63             ‐0.06           0.16         0.16         0.21
      IS and Sales                    ‐0.13             ‐0.91            ‐0.89           ‐0.91             ‐0.90           ‐0.92        ‐0.98       ‐0.98
      Total Investment and NII         0.87             0.56             0.58            0.61              0.54            0.56         0.55        0.50
      Exports and Imports             0.85              0.63             0.45            0.58              0.64            0.59         0.33        0.30
      TOT and RER                     ‐0.16             1.00               1             1.00              1.00            1.00         0.99        1.00
      NIIY AND I_eqpt                  0.47             0.04             0.06            0.11              0.02            0.04         0.02        ‐0.03
      Wedge and TOT                    0.09             0.24             0.16            0.12              0.24            0.23         0.52         0.53
      Wedge and Imports                0.88             0.86             0.89            0.86              0.87            0.86         0.80         0.81
