NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE FHA CREATING SUSTAINABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP?
Andrew Caplin
Anna Cororaton
Joseph Tracy
Working Paper 18190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18190

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

We thank Damien Weldon and CoreLogic for providing us with access to crucial data. We also thank
Diego Aragon, Gunnar Blix, Scott Frame, Charles Freeman, Ahu Gemici, Joseph Gyourko, Andy Haughwout,
Steven Laufer, John Leahy, Roy Lowrance, Daniel Martin, and Ruth Wyatt for their invaluable input.
Joshua Abel provided capable research assistance. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors
alone, not of New York University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
CoreLogic, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Andrew Caplin, Anna Cororaton, and Joseph Tracy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is the FHA Creating Sustainable Homeownership?
Andrew Caplin, Anna Cororaton, and Joseph Tracy
NBER Working Paper No. 18190
June 2012
JEL No. H81
ABSTRACT
We produce first results on the sustainability of homeownership for recent (2007-2009) FHA-insured
borrowers. More than 15 percent of these borrowers have already been 90 days or more delinquent,
while less than 7 percent have completed their graduation to sustainable homeownership by finally
paying off all FHA mortgages. We project that the proportion who have been 90 days or more delinquent
will rise above 30 percent within five years, while fewer than 15 percent will have completed their
graduation to sustainable homeownership. We show that the FHA uses an outmoded econometric model
that leads it to underestimate delinquency risk to borrowers and financial risks to taxpayers. Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac use this same outmoded model. More accurate estimates would serve the cause
of transparency and help policy-makers to determine these organizations' appropriate roles in the U.S.
housing finance markets of the future.

Andrew Caplin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu
Anna Cororaton
Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
cororaton@gmail.com

Joseph Tracy
Executive Vice President
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
joseph.tracy@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
Following the collapse of the private mortgage market, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) has
become the only major issuer of low down-payment mortgages. In 2012 the FHA had an estimated $1 trillion
dollars of insurance in force – roughly three times the 2005 level (IFE [2011], HUD [2005]). A key question is
how many of these loans will produce delinquency and default as opposed to sustainable homeownership.
In this paper we use a new data set to provide first answers on sustainability for recent (2007-2009) FHAinsured borrowers. We find that more than 15 percent of these borrowers have already been 90 days or more
delinquent. By way of contrast, less than 7% have completed their graduation to sustainable homeownership
by finally paying off all FHA mortgages. We project that the proportion who have been 90 days or more
delinquent will rise above 30 percent within five years while fewer than 15 percent will have completed their
graduation to sustainable homeownership.
When homeownership is not sustainable, the human consequences can be tragic. Most borrowers who
become 90 days or more delinquent will eventually lose their homes. They will also lose access to credit (see
Brevoort and Cooper [2010]), may suffer health setbacks (see Currie and Tekin [2012]), and find it difficult it
to move to other parts of the country to find jobs (see Ferreira et. al. [2010, 2011]).
The high delinquency rates that we identify are easy to understand. Most recent FHA loans have been for
98% of the home value (96.5% LTV plus the 1.5% fixed insurance fee). Many of the homes bought with
these loans have fallen in value since first purchased. Hence many borrowers are underwater. This makes it
difficult for them to exit the FHA system either by selling their homes or by refinancing with non-FHA
insured mortgages. In the meantime, the continuing weakness in the real economy leaves many exposed to
unemployment risk. They will likely remain locked in with the FHA for years to come, all the while remaining
one bad shock away from default.
Non-sustainable lending is costly not only for borrowers, but also for taxpayers, since FHA insurance is
fully backed by the U.S. government. Unfortunately the FHA has not provided an accurate risk assessment.
Losses from eventual claims have been consistently underestimated in the last several Annual Reports to

1
Congress (Gyourko [2011]). Outmoded methodology is largely responsible for this underestimation of risk
(Aragon et al. [2010], Caplin ([2010], [2011]). The FHA counts as successful any mortgage that is paid off
without an insurance claim, even if this is just an internal refinance of one FHA mortgage into another. So a
borrower who defaults after internally refinancing is treated by the FHA as creating one success (termination
of the first mortgage) and one failure (default of the second mortgage). In fact, the borrower has nothing to
show for their “success” in refinancing, and taxpayers face a large bill.1 The situation with the GSE’s (Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac) is the same. They treat as successful any agency mortgage that refinances into another
agency mortgage.
The overcounting of success makes FHA’s risk assessment overly optimistic. We show below that the
over-counting of success is important in the recent period not only in qualitative but also in quantitative
terms. Of those mortgages paid off by FHA borrowers in the 2007-2009 cohorts, more than two-thirds have
been internally refinanced. These neither represent successful transitions to homeownership, nor resolutions
of credit risk to the FHA.
Opening up FHA and GSE data to researchers is important if U.S. housing finance markets are to be
rebuilt on more stable foundations. We obtained our data from a mortgage data and analytics provider,
CoreLogic, because internal data on FHA-insured mortgages is not publicly available. We were also unable to
obtain data on GSE mortgages. Hence some of the borrowers we count in our data as successfully exiting
FHA may in reality have been refinanced with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac so that the taxpayer remains
exposed to the remaining credit risk. To this date, no one knows the full risks to which borrowers and
taxpayers are being exposed by FHA and the GSE’s.
Even without making their data publicly available, the FHA and the GSE’s could readily adopt the
borrower-based data structure developed herein. Doing so may lead to higher loss estimates. Yet it would

We are not criticizing the FHA’s internal refinance programs. In fact, reducing the frictions for high LTV mortgages to refinance has
been shown to have important macroeconomic benefits (Caplin et. al. 1997). Rather, our criticism is with how these programs are
treated in measuring FHA default rates and projected default losses.

1

2
serve the cause of transparency and help policy-makers to determine these organizations' roles in the U.S.
housing finance markets of the future.
We describe the CoreLogic data in Section 2. We develop and estimate our model of borrower
performance in Sections 3 and 4. We forecast default and prepayment rates in Section 5. In section 6 we show
that the Actuarial Reports understate the risks that FHA-insured mortgages pose to borrowers and taxpayers
alike. Section 7 concludes.

II. The FHA Sample
A. The FHA and the Borrower Experience
The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) was set up in 1934 to improve the functioning of mortgage
markets. Since then it has become an important institution for implementing housing policy, providing strong
support for housing affordability and homeownership. As a result of the recent financial crisis, the FHA has
moved into the unprecedented position of being the low down-payment “lender of last resort.” The FHA
must ensure that alongside its increased market share of mortgage originations it still achieves its key goal of
creating sustainable homeownership.
What little is known about recent FHA performance with regard to sustainable homeownership is
contained in the FHA’s mandated annual actuarial reviews and its contemporaneous reports to Congress (see
for example IFE [2009, 2010, 2011]). As pointed out by Aragon et. al., one problem with the analyses in the
actuarial review is that the data used does not link together FHA mortgages involved in an internal refinance.
FHA mortgages that undergo an internal refinance are treated no differently than FHA mortgages that finally
pay off thereby removing any further credit risk to the FHA.
The current mortgage-based approach is inappropriate for the study of sustainability. Instead, one must
focus on the borrower. Specifically, one must construct the borrower experiences by linking together strings
of consecutive mortgages taken out by the same borrower and secured on the same property. A borrower

3
experience begins with the initial exposure of the FHA fund through a purchase mortgage or a refinance
from a non-FHA mortgage and ends either through prepayment outside of the FHA or through default.
Internal FHA refinances carry over the credit risk from one loan to another. Linking together mortgages is
especially relevant for streamline refinance loans with high LTVs because they face a high default risk.

B. Sampling Method
Using borrower experiences to measure sustainability in homeownership requires data in which
contiguous FHA mortgages on the same home and with the same borrower are linked together.2 In
particular, to follow a borrower experience we need to match FHA mortgages that are the two sides of
an internal FHA refinance. To execute this we specified an FHA borrower data set to CoreLogic, which
made available anonymized data from two of its largest databases: (i) the mortgage servicing database
containing monthly FHA mortgage performance history data from servicers, and (ii) the property
record database containing property record information sourced from county assessors and recorders.
Use of the latter data enables us to identify mortgages from the servicing database that are tied to the
same property, enabling us to link the data. The CoreLogic servicing database includes monthly
performance information for a large percent of the FHA’s outstanding insured mortgage portfolio.
More recent vintages have a higher coverage of FHA loans, due in part to large servicers becoming
more involved in FHA servicing. This database covers more than 7.5 million FHA loans insured
between 2003 and 2011. CoreLogic’s property record database contains information for real estate sales
and mortgage transactions covering 97 percent of the US population.3

Gerardi et al (2007) is the only other example we are aware of in which the frame of reference is the borrower rather than the
mortgage. They examine the sustainability of borrower experiences that begin with a subprime mortgage.
2

CoreLogic’s coverage is 99.9 percent (3,120 counties) of the US population for county assessor-sourced data such as tax valuations
and 97 percent (1,800 counties) of the US population for title and mortgage recordings sourced from county recorders.
3

4
CoreLogic was able to identify 282,000 FHA to FHA refinance pairs. CoreLogic also provided FHA
loans that were not internally refinanced – either purchase or external refinance mortgages. To construct a 5
percent representative sample for estimation, we worked backwards in time. In each year, we aligned the
composition of originations across the purchase, external FHA refinance, and internal FHA refinance
categories to published data on the composition of FHA originations. To standardize the sample, we only
selected first-lien, owner-occupied mortgages. Starting in 2010, we randomly selected purchase and refinance
loans to match the published FHA data scaled down to a 5 percent sample. For the internal FHA refinances
that were randomly selected we pulled in the full chain of linked prior FHA mortgages as well. We then
adjusted the required number of mortgages of each type for prior years up to but not including 2010 based on
any linked mortgages that were already selected into the sample by virtue of being part of a borrower
experience linked to the sampled mortgage for 2010. We then repeated the exercise for 2009 and proceeded
in this manner back to 2007.4 Our final sample is a 5 percent random sample of FHA originations from 2007
through mid-2010. These loans have performance data up to September 2011.5
The random sample generated from the CoreLogic linked data set closely matches published FHA data in
key respects. Appendix Tables A1 to A3 provide comparisons between the published FHA data and our
random sample for average FICO scores, origination loan-to-value (LTV) levels, and early delinquency rates.
These show that the random sample tracks published values of key risk measures quite closely. Since the
origination balance reported in the CoreLogic data incorporates any up-front mortgage premium that was
financed by the borrower, we back out estimates of these origination fees from the initial loan balance in

4

These refer to FHA fiscal years (which run from Q4 of the prior year through Q3 of the stated year) so that the last loan for any
borrower must be originated no earlier than calendar year 2006 Q4. However, prior loans in a chain for any borrower can have earlier
origination dates.
We include in the hazard estimation all of the data including the borrower experiences that begin in 2010, but we censor all monthly
observations prior to January 2007. In addition, we restrict our cohort level analysis to FHA borrowers from calendar years 2007 to
2009 for whom a longer history of performance is available.
5

5
order to make our origination LTV measures comparable to the published FHA data.6 We track the
measured LTV trends quite closely up to the third quarter of 2010. On average however, our early
delinquency rates by year tend to be slightly lower than the published rates.

C. Internal Refinancing
The data from CoreLogic confirm the significance of the distinction between the borrower experience
and the mortgage experience – our sample shows a high rate of internal refinancing in recent years. Our
sample implies that FHA-to-FHA refinancing in 2009 has been 44 percent as large as the number of purchase
originations, similar to the HUD estimate of 42 percent.
The FHA’s internal streamline refinance program, in particular, has had a high take-up rate in recent
years. This program is directed towards FHA borrowers with high LTVs that exceed the maximum allowed
for new FHA mortgages. Without necessarily requiring a new appraisal, the program allows these borrowers
to refinance into new FHA mortgages even in cases in which borrowers no longer have enough equity to
meet the standard down payment amount.7 While the FHA has put in place several requirements – for
example, the new balance cannot exceed the prior balance and that the borrower must have a sufficiently
clean payment history – the program allows high-LTV borrowers to lower their monthly payments without
being re-underwritten. Since many of the FHA borrowers refinancing are underwater, it will be difficult for
them to exit the FHA system by either selling the house or refinancing into a non-FHA mortgage. As such,
these borrowers may remain at risk of default for many years.

The upfront premium charged for the 2009 fiscal year through March 2010 was 1.75% for fully underwritten loans and 1.5% for
streamline refinance loans. The premium rose to 2.25% in April 2010, for all loans. For loans originated prior to the 2009 fiscal year,
the rule of thumb for fully underwritten loans from 2009-2010 (1.75%) was applied. Upfront premiums can be refunded according to
the following schedule: http://portal.hud.gov/FHA-Handbooks/collections/current/print/4155-2_7.pdf. We adjust the upfront
premiums subtracted from the LTV accordingly.
6

7

Since no new underwriting is required for a streamline refinance, the origination loan-to-value, debt-to-income, and borrower credit
score is not reported. Since no new underwriting is required for a streamline refinance, the origination loan-to-value ratios, debt-toincome ratios, and borrower credit scores are not reported.

6
D. Delinquency
Whether an FHA borrower experience generates a claim against the FHA is not definitively known until
the borrower experience finally terminates. This claim represents the last stage of a process that begins with
an initial delinquency, is followed by serious delinquency, the onset of the foreclosure process, the conclusion
of the foreclosure process, and finally the sale of the property and settlement of the FHA claim.
The time between the events that precipitated the borrower’s delinquency and the claim is highly variable.
Table 1 illustrates these time lags for various default triggers, where the time lag is defined as the number of
months in an unbroken string of delinquencies from 30-days delinquency until the onset of the specified
trigger. On average it takes 3.9 months, with a standard deviation of 2.4 months, to reach the 90-days
delinquency trigger from an initial delinquency. Pushing back to the beginning of a foreclosure process, the
time lag increases to a mean of 9.6 months with a standard deviation of 6.0 months. Lastly, looking at the
start of the REO process as the trigger, the time lag is 15.8 months with a standard deviation of 7.2 months.
The increase in the variability of the gap between the initial delinquency and the trigger poses a challenge for
specifying an empirical model of the default event.8
Our assessment of FHA performance requires estimating sustainability for FHA borrower experiences
that are still ongoing. Using 90-plus day delinquency as a measure of sustainability allows us to gain early
insight into what fraction of recent FHA vintages are likely to generate final claims on the FHA, even if these
claims may not materialize until much later. Table 2 shows the fraction of FHA mortgages in our data that
terminate in a claim conditional on the loan reaching a given stage of delinquency. The table shows that in
our data, some 13 percent of loans that reach 90-days delinquency have terminated by the end of our sample,
61 percent of which have generated a claim. We can estimate the “cure” rate for each default trigger by
adding the number of terminated borrower experiences that fully pay off to the number of active borrower
experiences that are no longer delinquent, and then dividing by the number of borrower experiences that ever
reach the default trigger. The estimated cure rate declines from 24.8 percent for the 60-plus default trigger, to
8

The increase in the mean time lag is not as serious a problem since the time-varying control variables can be lagged appropriately.

7
21.2 percent for the 90-plus trigger, and down to 16.4 percent for the foreclosure start trigger. The choice of
the appropriate default trigger needs to balance the aims of a low variability of time since the initial
delinquency with a low cure rate. We define the default event to be the first time the mortgage reaches 90days delinquent.

III. The Proportional Hazard Model
A. Econometric Specification
We use a standard competing-risk model to analyze the impact of borrower risk characteristics, mortgage
and property characteristics, and economic factors on prepayment and default outcomes. We use a
proportional hazard framework assuming independent risks. The prepayment (p) and default (d) hazard rates
since origination at duration t are given by:

(1a)
(1b)

where g(t) is the baseline hazard function of the time since the mortgage was originated. We approximate the
baseline hazard using a monthly step-function.9 The key assumption is that the explanatory variables Xt shift
the baseline hazard proportionally.10
As detailed above, we define the default event as the borrower experience first reaching 90-days
delinquent and censor any remaining payment history on the borrower experience.11 We use borrower
experiences as the frame of reference, hence prepayment only occurs when the borrower pays off the FHA

9

See Meyer (1990) for an early example of using step-function approximations to the baseline hazard.

10

See Kalbfleisch and Prentice (2002) for details.

That is, we do not model whether a seriously delinquent mortgage cures or the time it takes to work through the various stages of
foreclosure to a final claim.

11

8
mortgage by either selling the house or refinancing into a non-FHA mortgage. We follow each borrower
experience starting in the third month after its origination date up until either the borrower prepays, the
default event occurs, or the sample ends.12 Our data are at a monthly frequency.
With the estimated prepayment and default hazards we can estimate the probability that any active FHA
borrower will default over a specified horizon and consequently, the probability that the borrower experience
survives this horizon. Let S denote the estimated joint survivor function, given by:
(2)
where t indexes the number of months into the forecast period and S(0) equals one.
For forecasting default and prepayment probabilities, we need to specify the path of the dynamic
variables over the forecast horizon. The estimated probability that an active FHA borrower experience with
current duration t will default and prepay over the next T months is given by:
(3a)

(3b)
We compute these default and prepayment projections for all active FHA borrower experiences starting
at the end of our sample to generate an overall prepayment and default rate.
While the default and prepayment hazards condition on a large list of observable factors that could affect
default, there may still be unobservable factors that are important for determining default rates. For example,
these unobservable factors may be correlated with the “vintage” of the mortgage when it was underwritten.

12

The third month is the first time period that the borrower is at risk of going 90 days delinquent.

9
We test for the presence of unobserved determinants by estimating the model allowing for a parametric
distribution of the unobserved heterogeneity. The data indicate that this distribution was degenerate.13

B. Variables in the Specification
The CoreLogic data provide information on a variety of borrower, loan, and property risk characteristics.
We supplement these with data on economic factors and state legal requirements that may impact underlying
mortgage performance. For a borrower with more than one FHA mortgage, we use reported characteristics
of the refinances as opposed to carrying over characteristics from the previous loan. In the case of streamline
refinances however, where data are often missing, we carry over loan characteristics from the previous loan.
Summary statistics of the variables in the estimation are given in Table 3. The first panel presents summary
statistics of static variables for underwritten loans (not streamline refinances) whose values do not change
over the life of the underlying mortgage. The second panel presents dynamic variables whose values are timevarying. For the categorical variables, the left-out group is selected to be the high-quality or relatively more
common mortgage type characterized.
A borrower’s current LTV likely impacts the probability of default and prepayment. We calculate this
using the current mortgage balance – reflecting amortization, any accelerated payments, and inclusive of any
upfront mortgage insurance premium financed by the borrower – and an estimate of the current value of the
home. To estimate the house value each month, we update the appraisal value of the property using the
CoreLogic metro area overall repeat-sale house price indices. Thus, the current LTV is a dynamic variable
that changes to reflect both debt amortization as well as house price changes. For streamline refinances, we
impute the origination LTV using the updated LTV at the end of the prior FHA mortgage. In the estimation,
we include intervals for this current LTV variable beginning with an indicator for 80-84 LTV to an indicator
for 120 LTV or higher. The left-out category is a current LTV below 80.

13

That is, the variance of the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity was converging to zero in the estimation.

10
Two other important borrower-specific risk factors are the credit score and the debt-to-income ratio
(DTI). For underwritten mortgages, we observe the borrower’s FICO score at the origination date, so in our
data FICO is a static variable that does not change over the life of a mortgage. However, it can change
between mortgages for a given borrower experience if more than one underwritten mortgage is involved. For
internal FHA refinances, we use the new FICO score if the loan is underwritten, while we carry over the
FICO score from the prior FHA mortgage for streamline refinances. In the estimation, we include a series of
indicator variables for FICO score ranges from below 580 to 680-719. The left-out category is a FICO score
of 720 or higher. We include a separate indicator if the FICO score is missing and the mortgage is not a
streamline refinance.
We also include the borrower’s back-end DTI which is a measure of the borrower’s ability to meet
monthly mortgage payments. The numerator of the back-end ratio is the sum of the annual mortgage
payments, property taxes, house insurance and any other annual recurring debt payments such as student
loans, auto loans and minimums on credit card balances. The denominator is the borrower’s annual income.14
We include indicators for DTI intervals from 28 – 35, 36 – 43, and 44 or higher. The left-out category is a
back-end DTI of less than 28. We include an indicator if the DTI is not recorded and the mortgage is not a
streamline refinance.
Additional indicators are included for the type of mortgage (FRM is the left-out type), term of the loan
(30-year is the left-out term), reason for the mortgage (purchase loan is the left-out reason), level of
documentation (full documentation is the left out status), and property type (single family residence is the
left-out property type). In addition, we control for the size of the FHA mortgage at the origination. Models of
strategic default predict that the default risk increases with the mortgage balance since the costs of default are
mostly fixed while its benefits tend to increase with the size of the remaining balance.15

14

In cases where there is a co-applicant for the mortgage the sum of the two annual incomes is used.

15

See for example Haughwout et al (2010).

11
Several local economic variables are included. To ensure that the coefficients on the LTV indicators
reflect the effect of the borrower-specific equity position on observed default behavior, we include the 12month change in local house prices to capture the effect of non borrower-specific factors. FHA mortgages
with high LTVs are likely to be in local housing markets that have suffered more serious house price declines
and have faced many other economic challenges as well. While we attempt to control for local dynamics,
there are other stress variables not completely captured in our data. Including the change in local house prices
helps isolate any of these left-out factors that are correlated with declining house prices, which in turn impact
borrower behavior.
The effect of an unemployment spell on a borrower’s behavior is difficult to capture since we do not
observe these spells.16 The local unemployment rate is our best proxy, although it is not highly correlated with
the unobserved borrower-specific unemployment. We include the MSA unemployment rate reported by the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics lagged 6 months to take into account the time lag between the onset of
unemployment and when the borrower reaches the 90-day delinquency status. The unemployment variable is
dynamic at a monthly frequency.17
We capture the incentive to prepay a mortgage by including a spread variable that reflects the decline in
interest rates since origination. This is calculated each month by taking the difference between the average 30year fixed-rate mortgage interest rate at the origination month and its average value at that month, then
setting it to zero if the difference is positive, i.e. interest rates have increased.18 To the extent that there is
value in the option to refinance a mortgage, the refinance incentive can reduce the likelihood of default.

See Foote et al (2008) and Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007) for discussions of the “double-trigger” hypothesis that the
combination of a borrower being in negative equity and then suffering an income shock leads to a higher likelihood of default and
foreclosure. Aragon et al (2010) show that FHA borrowers who are significantly underwater are also dangerously exposed to
unemployment risk. The question is how to take this into account given micro hazards do not feature the unemployment rate.

16

17 For purchase mortgages, we zero out the first four observations (months 3 – 6 following origination) on the unemployment
variable since the lag value is pointing to a time before the mortgage is underwritten. This is based on the premise that an unemployed
borrower would not be approved for a new FHA mortgage.
18

We use the mortgage rate reported in the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey.

12
Local contagion can affect a borrower’s decision to default as well. A recent survey (Fannie Mae,
[2010]) finds that borrowers who know someone who has experienced a foreclosure are more than twice as
likely to seriously consider default compared to borrowers who do not.19 We control the contagion effect by
including the number of distressed sales per 10,000 households in the MSA. We calculate a three-month
moving average of distress sales for each MSA using CoreLogic data. The number of households in the MSA
is taken from the 2008 American Community Survey.20
Finally, the legal environment that governs how mortgage delinquencies are handled varies by state and
we include two variables to capture this variation. First, mortgages originated in a state with a judicial
foreclosure process can expect delays in completing any foreclosure, which could incentivize borrowers to
strategically default.21 An indicator for judicial foreclosure is included in the estimation. Second, mortgages
are considered as recourse depending on the state, meaning the lender has the ability to pursue a defaulted
borrower with a deficiency judgment. Recourse loans potentially provide more security to the lender and as a
result, borrowers may be less likely to default. We also include an indicator for recourse.
A concern with loan-level data is that we only have information on first lien mortgages. If the borrower
takes out second liens, then the actual combined LTV will exceed the measured LTV used in the analysis.
This will bias the hazard coefficient estimates on the LTV intervals to the extent that second liens are
prevalent in the data. To explore this we examined a unique panel data set which links credit files across

19

A similar result is also found in Guiso et al (2009).

20

http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DTSelectedDatasetPageServlet?_lang=en&_ts=286380818796)

21

See for example discussions of strategic default in Foote et al (2008) and Haughwout et al (2010).

13
household members constructed by Equifax for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to calculate what
fraction of FHA borrowers have second liens. However, we did not find this to be a source of concern.22

IV. Estimation Results
We report the exponentiated hazard coefficients from the estimation in Table 4. A reported hazard above
(below) one indicates a higher (lower) prepayment or default risk relative to the baseline borrower experience
consisting of high-quality, fully-documented, 30-year, fixed-rate purchase mortgages with current LTV below
80, FICO score above 720, DTI below 28, and secured by a single family residence.
We begin by examining the impact of the current LTV on the default and prepayment risks. 23 The results
show high LTV to be an important driver of FHA default risk, which rises monotonically with the estimated
current LTV of the underlying mortgage. A borrower with an estimated current LTV between 100 and 104 is
more than twice as likely to default compared to a borrower with an estimated current LTV below 80. As we
raise the current LTV to 120 or higher, the relative default risk increases to over three and a half times higher
than the baseline. These estimated LTV effects reflect changes in default risks holding constant the change in
local house prices over the past year.
LTV is also a determinant of prepayment. Recall that prepayment in our borrower-based data involves
either paying off the mortgage due to a sale of the house or refinancing to a new non-FHA mortgage. Finding
the required resources to pay off a mortgage in full is particularly hard for borrowers in negative equity (LTV
more than 100) who need to make up the difference between the property value and the mortgage balance in

The Equifax data follows a 5 percent random sample of households over time by linking credit files across household members. As
of December 2009, the data indicate that only 6.7 percent of FHA borrowers had some form of a second lien. In contrast, 27.6
percent of prime borrowers and 25.9 percent of non-prime borrowers hold at least one second lien. Conditional on an FHA borrower
having a second lien, the average balance on the second lien is 22.4 percent of the existing combined balances across all liens. Hence
not having data on second liens poses less of a problem for FHA borrower experiences. We also looked at households with an FHA
mortgage and no other first lien mortgage. While it is possible that the borrower has two homes, with an FHA mortgage on one
house and only a second lien on the second house, we do not expect many such cases. It is then highly likely that any existing secondliens are tied to the same property.

22

23

Note however that the measured current LTV for a borrower is a noisy measure of the true current LTV.

14
cash.24 Comparing a borrower with an estimated current LTV of 100 – 104 to one with an estimated LTV
below 80, the prepayment rate is reduced to 64 percent of the baseline. As we raise the estimated current
LTV to 120 or higher, the prepayment rate declines only slightly further to 50 percent of the baseline. A
borrowers with an underwater mortgage faces a combination of a high default risk and a low prepayment rate
which implies a high cumulative probability that the borrower experience will be non-sustainable.
The FHA has stressed the improvement in the FICO scores for its new originations over the past couple
of years as a factor that will hold down credit losses compared to earlier vintages.25 This improvement in
FICO scores can be seen in Table A1 where the average FICO score for all new originations went from the
low to mid 600s in 2007 to close to 700 in 2010. Our results confirm that the credit score at origination is a
strong predictor of default. The default risk rises dramatically as the borrower’s FICO score is lowered.
Relative to a borrower with a FICO score above 720, the default hazard is over seven times higher for
borrowers with FICO scores between 580 and 619, and over ten times higher for borrowers with FICO
scores below 580.26
The affordability of the FHA mortgage as gauged by the borrower’s back-end DTI is also a determinant
of the sustainability of an FHA borrower experience. Recall that the back-end DTI captures not only the
mortgage and related housing costs (such as property taxes and insurance), but also other recurring debt. As
we move from a borrower with considerable budget leeway (a back-end DTI below 28) to a borrower who is
more cash-flow constrained in making all required payments (a back-end DTI of 44 or higher), the relative
default hazard increases by more than 50 percent.

24

The effect of this “collateral constraint” on prepayments has previously been observed in other mortgage products (see Caplin et al
(1997)). The FHA streamline refinance program is designed precisely to prevent the collateral constraint imposed by high LTVs from
limiting borrowers’ ability to refinance.
25

See Secretary Donovan’s written testimony before the House Committee on Financial Services, December 1, 2011.

Deng and Gabriel (2006) also find that FICO scores are a strong predictor of FHA defaults using data covering from 1992 to 1996.
Their results indicate a smaller effect than our findings. This may reflect that they can control for other borrower characteristics such
as age, sex, race and number of dependents.
26

15
Turning to the other mortgage-specific factors, we find that borrower experiences that begin with a
cash-out refinance mortgages are 28 percent more likely to default and 47 percent more likely to prepay
(holding constant the current LTV and the mortgage balance). In terms of documentation, the results indicate
that borrower experiences involving mortgage originations with less than full documentation are associated
with lower default risks than the baseline. However, the data also indicate that borrower experiences
involving mortgages with missing LTV, FICO and DTI information all have significantly higher default risks.
The mortgages with these missing origination characteristics are concentrated in the low- and no-doc loans.
Taken together, this indicates that mortgages that are not subject to full underwriting pose higher credit risks
to the FHA. Adjustable rate mortgages are over three times more likely to prepay than FRMs. Lastly,
borrower experiences with higher mortgage origination balances have higher prepayment and default risks.
The higher default risk is consistent with simple models of strategic default where the incentive to strategic
default is increasing in the mortgage balance controlling for the current LTV (see Haughwout et al (2010)).
Housing market-specific variables are meant to capture economic determinants of prepayment and
default. As noted earlier, the local unemployment rate is included as a proxy for whether the borrower
experiences an unemployment spell. While measurement error will attenuate the estimated impact, the data
still suggest that the lagged MSA unemployment rate is significantly related to the default risk on an FHA
borrower experience. Controlling for the current LTV, declining house prices over the past year are
associated with rising prepayment and default risks. This could reflect a variety of other economic factors in
local housing markets that are correlated with declining house prices. The data do not indicate the presence
yet of a contagion effect from distress sales. With regard to the interest rate incentive to prepay, the interest
rate spread is a strong predictor of prepayment for borrower experiences involving fixed-rate FHA
mortgages.27
Finally, the legal environment governing mortgage lending which varies by state affects default risk. The
data indicate that judicial foreclosure is associated with higher default risk on FHA borrower experiences,
27

Deng and Gabriel (2006) also find this result for a sample of FHA mortgages originated between 1992 and 1996.

16
supporting the hypothesis that some borrowers strategically default. As noted earlier, mortgages with
recourse should raise the costs of default and therefore lower the default risk on a mortgage. The data
indicate, however, that default risk is 11 percent higher for borrower experiences located in states with
recourse lending.

V. Forecasts
We use the estimated model to generate default and prepayment forecasts for the portfolio of active
FHA borrower experiences as of the end of our estimation sample. The forecast is performed over a five-year
horizon where we use updated dynamic variables based on consensus forecasts for four underlying data series
– house prices, unemployment rate, 30-year fixed-rate mortgage interest rates and distressed sales ratios. In
particular, the unemployment rate is projected to decrease at an increasing rate, going down by a total of 2.9
percentage points at the end of five years.28 Mortgage rates are projected to increase by 20 basis points in each
of the five years.29 The percent of distressed sales is projected to stay at current levels for the first two years,
then to return to average historical levels over the next three years.30 Finally, average nationwide house prices
are projected to decline by around 2.5 percent in the first two years then slowly appreciate in the next three. 31
For simplicity, the forecast paths of the economic variables are assumed to be the same across all
metropolitan areas covered by our data. We simulate the performance of FHA borrowers from the end of
our sample period in October 2011 until September 2016 according to the methodology described in Section
IIIA.

28

Unemployment forecast taken from Survey of Economic Projections
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20120125.pdf
29

Author’s assumption

30

Author’s assumptions

31

Home price expectations data are from Macro Markets https://pulsenomics.com/Sept2011-HPE-Survey.html

17
One might expect the sustainability performance of a particular vintage of FHA borrowers to improve
with the passage of time because this has certainly been the historical pattern based on mortgage based
analysis. Unfortunately, this appears to be less apparent with recent vintages of FHA borrowers. Default rates
are projected to remain high for years to come as shown in the 5-year projections given in Table 5. In
particular, 31 percent of loans are expected to default within this time frame. Looking across the three
vintages, the cohort of 2007 FHA borrowers is projected to perform the worst with as much as 53 percent of
borrowers defaulting on their loans. While the 2009 vintage is projected to perform better, the default rate is
still estimated to be around 23 percent.
In addition to the continuing high rate of default, the other striking factor is how few are projected finally
to graduate to sustainable homeownership by paying off their FHA-insured mortgages in full. Across all three
vintages more than twice as many borrowers are projected to become 90 or more days delinquent as are
projected to fully achieve sustainable homeownership.
There is a simple reason why recent FHA borrowers may not fit the historical pattern in which after a
few years default rates decrease rapidly over time. In the past, generally rising house prices and the availability
of non-FHA mortgages have made it possible for borrowers to pay off their FHA mortgages in full. Neither
of these routes is currently available for most FHA borrowers. There has been little or no increase in prices
since these borrowers purchased their homes – in fact, we estimate that 40 percent of the active loans at the
end of our sample period are in negative equity, and another 20 percent are near negative equity with an LTV
of 95 to 100. Additionally, house prices are not expected to significantly increase over the next five years. As a
consequence, many recent FHA borrowers are likely to remain vulnerable to economic shocks so that
defaults are projected to continue at a high rate.
The bottom line is that while borrowers from 2009 are projected to perform better than those from 2007
and 2008, there is little reason to argue that sustainability issues were confined only to the 2007 and 2008
vintages of FHA borrowers.

18
VI. Underestimation of Risk
The FHA is designed to be a self-funded mortgage insurance program and not to need direct taxpayer
support. To gauge the FHA’s performance and to evaluate its financial condition, an external audit of its
insurance fund is conducted each year. A key part of this audit review involves projecting future default of
currently active FHA mortgages. For the past three years, default projections from the prior year have been
revised upward.32
The recent systematic underestimation of future credit losses may be due to deficiencies in the audit
analysis (Gyourko [2011). Aragon et al [2010] argued that an important flaw is the data framework used in the
analysis – it is based on FHA mortgages rather than on FHA borrower experiences. In the mortgage-based
view an internal refinance is treated as a successful exit as if the credit risk had been eliminated. Meanwhile, in
the borrower experience view, subsequent mortgages taken out by the same borrower are tracked and the
borrower’s risk only leaves the FHA system when the borrower pays off the final FHA mortgage in full. This
is quantitatively important since recent reductions in mortgage interest rates have dramatically increased the
volume of internal refinancing from one FHA mortgage into another. In our sample where we track
borrowers and their multiple mortgages, we estimate that only 6.4 percent of FHA borrowers since 2007 have
successfully exited the FHA program. In contrast, if we use the mortgage data framework, the success rate is
three times as high at 19.4 percent.33 This reflects the fact that a majority of terminated mortgages have in fact
immediately been refinanced back into new FHA mortgages.
The intuition that an analysis using mortgages rather than borrowers overstates successes and understates
future losses has not resonated with everyone for a couple of reasons. First, it is standard academic and
industry practice to perform credit risk analysis at the mortgage level. In this sense, the external audit is
implementing what is considered the “best practice”. Second, some have argued that there is no

32

IFE 2009 (page i), 2010 (page iii) and 2011 (page iii).

Around 18 percent of our borrowers have two or more FHA mortgages comprising their current borrower experience. The time in
months between a mortgage origination (either a purchase mortgage or a refinance from a non-FHA mortgage) to an internal
refinance peaks at around 12 months.

33

19
understatement of risk because for internal refinances the credit risk is carried forward in the data as the
FHA mortgage that prepays is replaced by the new FHA mortgage. As a consequence, the credit risk is not
treated in the data as if it has terminated even if mortgages are analyzed individually rather than as a linked
sequence.
Our customized FHA data allow us to further investigate the implications of the data structure on
projected credit losses. We already presented the hazard estimates based on analyzing the data organized by
borrower experiences in Table 4. For comparison, Appendix Table A4 presents the hazard estimates based
on analyzing the data organized by mortgages. It is important to highlight that the same data is used in both
cases, the same variables are used to explain defaults and prepayments, and the same statistical model is used
in the estimation. The only difference is how the unit of observation is defined – a borrower experience
versus a mortgage.
The relative hazard coefficients between the two approaches are similar in many respects. The key
difference is seen in the coefficients of the high LTV indicators in the prepayment hazards and in the baseline
hazards. Data organized according to borrower experiences indicate that those with a current LTV of 120 or
higher have a prepayment rate that is only 50 percent of the rate for borrowers with a current LTV of 80 or
less. In contrast, data organized according to mortgages reveal a relative prepayment rate of 78 percent that of
the baseline. The same pattern exists for each of the high LTV indicators which indicate that the FHA’s
streamline refinance program helps reduce the friction that high LTVs create for refinancing. This contrast is
evidence that the FHA streamline refinance program is achieving its goal of allowing more high LTV FHA
borrowers the opportunity to refinance to a lower mortgage rate.
Figures 1 and 2 contrast the default and prepayment baseline hazards between the borrower and
mortgage data frameworks. The baseline default hazard curves are very similar for both data frameworks for
the first two and a half years. Afterwards, the borrower baseline default hazard is above the mortgage baseline
default hazard. However, the differences are more apparent for the baseline prepayment hazards. The
mortgage data approach significantly raises the estimated baseline prepayment hazards relative to the

20
borrower-centered data approach particularly in the first two years.34 The striking difference in the
estimated baseline prepayment hazards meaningfully impacts default projections going forward by
underestimating the amount of time for which the borrower will remain at risk of default. This is illustrated in
Figure 3 where we show the estimated prepayment survivor functions over the five year forecast horizon for
the active mortgages at the end of our sample. At any point in the forecast horizon, the survivor functions as
we have constructed them indicate the fraction of the borrowers (or mortgages) that would be predicted to
still be active assuming that there are no exits due to serious delinquency. Using borrower data, 92 percent of
the borrowers are predicted to still be active in five years. In contrast, using mortgage data, only 47 percent of
the mortgages are predicted to still be active in five years – a decline of 45 percentage points.
Table 6 provides the 5-year projections of the estimated hazard models based on the two different
frameworks for the same set of mortgages that are still active at the end of our sample. To reiterate, the only
difference is due to the data structure since all variables, including forecast paths of time-dependent variables,
are identical. Using the data organized by borrower experiences, we estimate that 7.3 percent of the currently
active borrowers will prepay over the next five years. In contrast using the data organized by mortgages, we
estimate that the prepayment rate will be much higher at 47.5 percent. Switching the analysis from FHA
borrowers to mortgages increases the forecasted prepayment rate by 40 percentage points due to the recent
heavy use of the FHA’s internal refinance programs. Similarly, using the estimates from the borrower data we
project that 17.3 percent of the active mortgages at the end of our sample will reach 90 days delinquent over
the five year forecast horizon. In contrast, using the estimates from the mortgage data we project that only
11.2 percent will reach 90 days delinquent.
The 2010 audit report on the FHA’s mutual mortgage insurance fund indicated that the FHA linked their
streamline refinances for the purpose of initializing the origination LTV on the streamline refinance. In
addition, the FICO and DTI information was filled in from the prior FHA mortgage. However, mortgages

While the direction of the effect on the baseline prepayment baseline hazards should be robust, the magnitude of the difference
between the borrower and mortgage based hazards will depend on the degree to which the borrower data base spans periods where
the internal refinancing activity has been less active than of recent.

34

21
rather than borrowers were still used as the unit of observation. Instead, mortgages that began as a
streamline refinance were allowed to have separate estimated default and prepayment hazards.35 This raises
the question of how this strategy does at approximating the results one would obtain from switching to the
borrower data framework. The results in Table 6 indicate that in our sample of FHA data this strategy moves
the projections in the direction of those obtained by the borrower based analysis, but only partially. For
example, using our borrower-based methods, we project defaults over the next five years to be more than
twice as high as successful exits. Even after applying the FHA’s new estimation strategy, defaults over the
next five years are projected instead to be less than half as high as successful exits. The continued overcounting of successful exits results in a potentially significant underestimate of the risk to the FHA’s
insurance program.

VII. Concluding Remarks
We produce first results on the sustainability of homeownership for FHA borrowers between 2007 and
2009. More than 15 percent of these borrowers have already been 90 days or more delinquent, with less than
half that number graduating to sustainable homeownership by paying off all FHA mortgages. We project that
the proportion who have been 90 days or more delinquent will rise above 30 percent within five years. Fewer
than 15 percent will have fully graduated to sustainable homeownership.
We show that accurately measuring sustainability requires a new data structure organized around
borrowers rather than mortgages. The current mortgage based data structure results in future defaults being
under-estimated and prepayments overestimated. This combination artificially lowers loss estimates to the
FHA’s insurance fund. This same data structure is used by the GSE’s (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), which
therefore understate the risks their mortgages pose to borrowers and to taxpayers.

35

See Integrated Financial Engineering (2010), page A-11.

22
Opening up FHA and GSE data to researchers is important to help inform the debate of how the U.S.
housing finance markets can rebuilt on more stable foundations. Even without making their data publicly
available, the FHA and the GSE’s could readily adopt the borrower-based data structure developed herein.
This would serve the cause of transparency and help policy-makers to determine these organizations' roles in
the U.S. housing finance markets of the future.

23
References:
Aragon, Diego, Andrew Caplin, Sumit Chopra, John V. Leahy, Yann LeCun, and Mario Scoffier.
“Reassessing FHA Risk.” NBER Working Paper No. 15802, March 2010.
Brevoort, Kenneth P. and Cheryl R. Cooper. “Foreclosure’s Wake: The Credit Experience of Individuals
Following Foreclosure.” Finance & Economics Discussion Series 2010-59, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, 2010.
Caplin, Andrew. “The FHA Reform Act of 2010.” Testimony before House Committee on Financial
Services, Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity, March 11, 2010.
http://www.house.gov/apps/list/hearing/financialsvcs_dem/caplin.pdf
Caplin, Andrew. “Perspectives on the Health of the FHA Single-Family Insurance Fund.” Testimony before
the House Committee on Financial Services, December 1, 2011.
Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy. "Collateral Damage: Refinancing Constraints and
Regional Recessions." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29 (November 1997): 496-516.
Currie, Janet and Erdal Tekin. “Is There a Link Between Foreclosure and Health?” Working Paper, Princeton
University, March 2012.
Deng, Yongheng, and Stuart Gabriel. "Risk-Based Pricing and the Enhancement of Mortgage Credit
Availability Among Underserved and Higher Credit-Risk Populations." Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 38 (September 2006): 1431-1460.
Fannie Mae Foundation. The Fannie Mae National Housing Survey, 2010.
Ferreira, Fernando, Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy. “Housing Busts and Household Mobility.” Journal of
Urban Economics 68, no. 1 (2010): 34-45.
_______________. "Housing Busts and Household Mobility: An Update." NBER Working Paper No.
17405, September 2011.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. "Negative Equity and Foreclosure: Theory and
Evidence." Journal of Urban Economics 6, no. 2 (2008): 234-245.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen. "Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages,
Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures." Working Paper No. 07-15. Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, December, 2007.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. "Moral and Social Constraints to Strategic Default on
Mortgages." Working Paper No. 15145. National Bureau of Economic Research, July, 2009.
Gyourko, Joseph. Is FHA the Next Housing Bailout? A Report Prepared for the American Enterprise Institute,
2011.
Haughwout, Andrew, Ebiere Okah, and Joseph Tracy. "Second Chances: Subprime Mortgage Modification
and Re-Default." Staff Report No. 417. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August, 2010.
Integrated Financial Engineering, Inc. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage
Insurance Fund (Excluding HECMs) for Fiscal Year 2009. Prepared for U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. Washington, DC, November 6, 2009.

24
Integrated Financial Engineering, Inc. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage
Insurance Fund (Excluding HECMs) for Fiscal Year 2010. Prepared for U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. Washington, DC, 2010.
Integrated Financial Engineering, Inc. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage
Insurance Fund Forward Loans for Fiscal Year 2011. Prepared for U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. Washington, DC, October 12, 2011.
Kalbfleisch, Jack D., and Ross L. Prentice. The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data. Wiley, 2002.
Meyer, Bruce D. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells." Econometrica 58 (July 1990): 757-782.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration
Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund for Fiscal Year 2005. Washington, DC, October 14, 2005.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Annual Report to Congress Regarding the Financial Status of
the FHA Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund Fiscal Year 2010. Washington, DC, November 15, 2010.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Written Testimony of Secretary Shaun Donovan. Hearing
before the House Committee on Financial Services. “Status of the FHA Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund
and the FY 2011 Actuarial Report.” Washington, DC, December 1, 2011.

25
Table 1. Time from 1st Missed Payment to “Default” Trigger for Loans Ending in REO
Trigger
Definition

Mean

Std Dev

25th

50th

75th

Maximum

60+
90+
Foreclosure start
REO start

2.2
3.9
9.6
15.8

1.4
2.4
6.0
7.2

1
2
5
10

1
2
7
14

2
5
12
20

35
40
55
61

Source: CoreLogic FHA Data

Table 2. Definition of “Default” and Likelihood of a Claim
Total

Still Active
Last
Last
Obs
Obs
Delinq Current
25,945
8,724
21,801
5,728

Censored
Paid
Off or
REO
4,680
4,448

Terminated
Pct Paid
Off or
Pct
REO
REO
10.9
58.4
12.7
61.5

Trigger
Reached
Servicing
Definition
Trigger
Transferred
60+
42,992
3,643
90+
35,131
3,154
Foreclosure
17,045
9,037
1,601
2,479
3,928
23.0
69.6
start
Notes: Percent REO is conditional on a loan being paid off. Estimated cure rate = (number paid off w/o
claim + number w. last observation current) / number that reach trigger.
Source: CoreLogic FHA Data

Est.
“Cure”
Rate
24.8
21.2
16.4

26

Table 3. Summary Statistics
a) Static Variables for Underwritten Loans
Variable
Credit Score (FICO):
Less than 580
580 – 619
620 – 679
680 – 719
720 or higher
Missing
Debt-to-income (DTI):
Less than 28
28 – 35
36 – 43
44 of higher
Missing
Loan purpose:
Cash out refinance
Non-cash out refinance
Unknown refinance
Purchase
Other loan-specific:
Not full documentation
Adjustable rate
Not 30-year term
Origination balance ($10k)
State-specific
Judicial foreclosure
Recourse
Borrower Experience

Mean
673
0.061
0.120
0.353
0.177
0.237
0.053
40.5
0.072
0.133
0.193
0.255
0.347

Std Dev
64
0.238
0.325
0.478
0.382
0.425
0.224
9.8
0.259
0.339
0.394
0.436
0.476

Minimum
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0

Maximum
900
1
1
1
1
1
1
75
1
1
1
1
1

0.139
0.170
0.050
0.641

0.346
0.376
0.218
0.480

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

0.405
0.015
0.087
17.8

0.491
0.122
0.282
9.1

0
0
0
1.5

1
1
1
77.9

0.371
0.761
1.2

0.483
0.427
0.404

0
0
1

1
1
5

27

Table 3. Summary Statistics (continued)

Variable
Loan-to-value (LTV):
Less than 80
80 – 84
85 – 89
90 – 94
95 – 99
100 – 104
105 – 109
110 – 114
115 – 119
120 or higher
Missing
Economic determinants:
Lag unemployment rate change
House price change, 12 month (10
percent)
Distress sales share (1 percent)
Interest rate differential (100 bp)
Duration at risk (months)

Mean

b) Dynamic Variables
Std Dev Minimum Maximum

0.056
0.038
0.073
0.145
0.211
0.154
0.090
0.046
0.025
0.044
0.117

0.229
0.192
0.260
0.352
0.408
0.361
0.286
0.210
0.156
0.206
0.321

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

7.52
−0.48

4.07
0.63

0.0
−3.9

32.6
2.4

5.47
0.73
19

5.79
0.63
16

0
0
2

56.3
4.7
276

Notes: Summary statistics for the dynamic variables vary slightly between the prepayment
and default as well as unlinked and linked data files. We report the statistics from the
linked default data.

28
Table 4. Borrower Based Prepayment and Default Hazard Estimates:
Variable

Default

Prepayment

80 – 84

1.29***
(0.064)

0.96**
(0.061)

85 – 89

1.28***
(0.055)

0.65***
(0.038)

90 – 94

1.53***
(0.058)

0.68***
(0.034)

95 – 99

1.79***
(0.065)

0.64***
(0.031)

100 – 104

2.22***
(0.081)

0.64***
(0.032)

105 – 109

2.57***
(0.097)

0.60***
(0.032)

110 – 114

2.85***
(0.115)

0.58***
(0.036)

115 – 119

3.13***
(0.139)

0.53***
(0.041)

120 or higher

3.72***
(0.152)
1.73***
(0.073)

0.50***
(0.035)
0.57***
(0.032)

10.82***
(0.319)
7.52***
(0.214)
3.91***
(0.106)
2.01***
(0.064)
5.28***
(0.180)

0.43***
(0.023)
0.59***
(0.022)
0.70***
(0.019)
0.84***
(0.027)
0.57***
(0.029)

28 – 35

1.17***
(0.039)

1.05
(0.054)

36 – 43

1.41***
(0.044)

1.10*
(0.054)

44 or higher

1.59***
(0.049)
1.65***
(0.052)

1.10**
(0.052)
0.97
(0.047)

Loan-to-Value:

Missing
Credit Score (FICO):
Less than 580
580 – 619
620 – 679
680 – 719
Missing
Back end Debt-to-Income (DTI):

Missing

29
Table 4. Borrower Based Prepayment and Default Hazard Estimates (continued)
Variable

Default

Prepayment

1.28***
(0.024)
1.22***
(0.021)
1.15***
(0.029)

1.47***
(0.045)
1.15***
(0.034)
1.31***
(0.060)

0.77***
(0.013)
1.06
(0.049)
1.98***
(0.039)
1.02***
(0.0007)

1.80***
(0.048)
3.16***
(0.21)
0.98
(0.045)
1.04***
(0.001)

1.09***
(0.015)
1.11***
(0.020)

0.81***
(0.019)
1.13***
(0.033)

1.04***
(0.003)
0.94***
(0.011)
1.00
(0.001)

0.99**
(0.005)
0.92***
(0.019)
0.99***
(0.002)

4,171,301
160,939

3.09***
(0.055)
4,097,331
159,169

Loan purpose:
Cash-out refinance
Non-cash-out refinance
Unknown refinance
Other loan-specific:
Not full documentation
Adjustable rate
Not 30-year term
Origination balance ($10k)
State-specific:
Judicial foreclosure
Recourse
Economic determinants:
Lag unemployment rate
House price change, 12 month (10
percent)
Distress sales share (1 percent)
Interest rate differential (1 percent)
Number of months at risk
Number of subjects

Note: The left out group is the set of high-quality FHA fully documented 30-year fixed rate
purchase mortgages with current LTV below 80, FICO score above 720, DTI below 28,
secured by a single family residence. Six property type indicators are included. Borrower
experiences are left-censored at January 2007.
*** significant at the 1% level ** significant at the 5% level * significant at the 10% level

30
Table 5. Five-Year Projections

Combined: 2007-2009
2007
2008
2009

Still Active

Default

Prepay

Ratio

56.6
30.6
41.5
67.8

31.5
53.2
41.3
23.4

11.9
16.1
17.2
8.8

0.73
0.77
0.71
0.73

Note: Vintages represent calendar years. Ratio = Default / (Default + Prepay)

Table 6. Borrower vs. Mortgage: Five-Year Projections for Active Loans
Still Active Default Prepay
Borrower Experience
75.4
17.3
7.3
Mortgage
No interactions
41.2
11.2
47.5
Streamline refinance interactions
52.5
14.1
32.9

Ratio
0.70
0.19
0.30

Note: Streamline refinance interactions allow all mortgages that begin as a streamline
refinance to have separate default and prepayment hazards from mortgages that begin
otherwise. Ratio = Default / (Default + Prepay).

31
Figure 1. Baseline Default Hazards: Mortgage vs. Borrower
0.00045
0.00040
0.00035
0.00030
0.00025
0.00020

By Mortgage

0.00015

By Borrower Experience

0.00010
0.00005
0.00000
-0.00005

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

44

48

Figure 2. Baseline Prepayment Hazards: Mortgage vs. Borrower
0.00700
0.00600
By Mortgage

0.00500

By Borrower Experience

0.00400
0.00300
0.00200
0.00100
0.00000
4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

44

48

32
Figure 3. Survivor probabilities over the forecast horizon – borrower and mortgage
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
By Mortgage

0.5

By Borrower Experience

0.4
1

5

9

13

17

21

25

29 33

37

41

45

49 53

57

Months into forecast horizon
Note: The default hazards have been set to zero in constructing these survivor functions.

33
Table A1. Comparison between FHA Originations and CoreLogic Sample: Credit Score (FICO)
Fiscal

FY

Year
2007

Quarter
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3

2008

2009

2010

Purchase
FHA
633
631
628
632
631
642
667
673
676
683
696
698
697
698
698

CL
639
635
632
634
633
635
655
669
673
678
688
697
697
697
698

Conventional Refi
FHA
619
616
613
621
620
630
644
646
655
674
689
688
692
699
695

CL
620
620
618
615
615
620
637
645
652
669
685
688
690
696
699

FHA-FHA Refia
FHA
557
587
613
613
612
625
622
628
648
667
676
675
681
686
693

CL
625
628
628
625
626
633
643
647
649
663
676
678
680
686
689

Alla
FHA
607
624
623
628
625
635
656
663
668
679
691
693
694
697
698

CL
634
631
628
628
626
628
648
662
666
674
687
694
695
696
698

Notes: FHA statistics are from the FHA Quarterly Reports. Fiscal years run from October of the prior year
through September of the indicated year.
a Based on fully underwritten mortgages and exclude streamline refinances

34
Table A2. Comparison between FHA Originations and CoreLogic Sample: Loan-to-value (LTV)
Fiscal
Year
2007

2008

2009

2010

FY
Quarter
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3

Purchase
FHA
CL
95.7
95.7
95.6
95.4
95.3
95.3
95.7
95.5
94.9
94.8
95.0
94.7
95.1
95.1
95.2
95.2
94.7
94.7
95.1
95.0
95.1
94.9
95.2
94.9
95.1
94.8
95.0
94.8
94.9
94.6

Conventional Refi
FHA
CL
89.4
89.7
89.2
89.7
88.7
89.2
89.1
89.6
89.3
89.6
89.8
90.4
89.7
90.2
89.4
89.8
89.9
90.3
90.9
91.2
92.2
92.5
90.6
90.9
89.2
89.6
89.5
89.9
88.6
89.3

FHA-FHA Refi
FHA
CL
89.4
90.3
90.0
90.6
88.9
89.7
89.4
90.1
90.2
91.2
90.8
91.4
90.8
91.4
89.8
90.5
91.6
92.0
93.0
93.7
93.3
94.0
91.5
92.3
92.9
93.9
90.4
91.3
89.8
91.1

All
FHA
91.7
93.4
93.2
93.6
92.0
92.1
92.9
93.1
92.9
93.1
94.0
93.7
92.7
93.0
94.1

CL
92.0
93.4
93.3
93.6
92.2
92.4
93.1
93.3
93.1
93.2
94.1
93.7
92.7
93.1
94.0

Notes: FHA statistics are from the FHA Quarterly Reports. Fiscal years run from October of the prior year
through September of the indicated year. The FHA LTV averages exclude any financed up-front mortgage
insurance premium from the loan balance. The up-front premium charged from FY09 through March 2010
was 1.75% for fully underwritten mortgages, and 1.5% for streamline refinanced mortgages. Starting in April
2010 the up-front premium was increased to 2.25% for all mortgages. Prior to FY09 the premiums varied. We
adjust the CoreLogic LTV by backing out these up-front mortgage premiums.

35
Table A3. Comparison between FHA and CoreLogic Early Delinquency

Year
2007

2008

2009

2010

Quarter
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3

Purchase
FHA
CL
0.6
0.4
3.6
2.8
3.4
2.6
2.6
2.5
2.1
2.3
2.7
1.8
2.3
1.5
1.6
1.1
1.2
0.9
0.9
0.6
0.7
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.3
0.7
0.5

Refinance
FHA
CL
0.8
1.3
2.1
1.9
3.1
2.0
2.3
1.8
3.3
1.7
3.0
2.0
4.0
2.1
3.4
1.6
2.2
0.9
2.2
0.6
2.0
0.6
2.2
0.7
0.9
0.3
0.8
0.3
0.7
0.3

All
FHA
0.7
3.1
3.3
2.5
2.8
2.9
3.1
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.5
0.7
0.7
0.7

CL
2.2
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.2
2.1
1.8
1.4
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.5

Notes: FHA statistics are from the FHA Quarterly Reports. Fiscal years run from
October of the prior year through September of the indicated year. Refinances include
all fully underwriter conventional to FHA and FHA to FHA refinances. Early
delinquency is defined to mean a mortgage that reaches 90-days delinquent within the
first 6-months since origination.

36
Table A4. Mortgage Based Prepayment and Default Hazard Estimates
Variable

Default

Prepayment

80 – 84

1.23***
(0.061)

0.93***
(0.031)

85 – 89

1.21***
(0.053)

0.78***
(0.022)

90 – 94

1.44***
(0.055)

0.75***
(0.019)

95 – 99

1.72***
(0.063)

0.80***
(0.019)

100 – 104

2.10***
(0.077)

0.86***
(0.021)

105 – 109

2.44***
(0.093)

0.88***
(0.023)

110 – 114

2.81***
(0.117)

0.88***
(0.026)

115 – 119

3.11***
(0.144)

0.86***
(0.030)

120 or higher

3.72***
(0.159)
1.67***
(0.064)

0.78***
(0.025)
0.47***
(0.013)

10.71***
(0.315)
7.41***
(0.211)
3.93***
(0.106)
2.02***
(0.064)
4.71***
(0.162)

0.85***
(0.019)
0.96**
(0.017)
0.97**
(0.014)
0.97
(0.016)
0.74***
(0.018)

28 – 35

1.16***
(0.039)

1.18***
(0.030)

36 – 43

1.39***
(0.044)

1.31***
(0.031)

44 or higher

1.56***
(0.048)
1.68***
(0.052)

1.32***
(0.030)
0.93**
(0.022)

Loan-to-Value:

Missing
Credit Score (FICO):
Less than 580
580 – 619
620 – 679
680 – 719
Missing
Back end Debt-to-Income (DTI):

Missing

37

Table A4. Mortgage Based Prepayment and Default Hazard Estimates (continued)
Variable

Default

Prepayment

1.30***
(0.024)
1.44***
(0.023)
1.28***
(0.031)

1.38***
(0.019)
0.78***
(0.012)
1.11***
(0.025)

0.84***
(0.014)
1.11**
(0.051)
1.97***
(0.038)
1.02***
(0.0007)

2.22***
(0.027)
4.42***
(0.12)
0.70***
(0.018)
1.03***
(0.0005)

1.08***
(0.015)
1.10***
(0.020)

0.88***
(0.010)
0.94***
(0.013)

1.03***
(0.003)
0.95***
(0.011)
1.00
(0.001)

0.93***
(0.002)
0.76***
(0.007)
1.00***
(0.001)

4,052,279
191,393

2.70***
(0.023)
4,014,051
188,789

Loan purpose:
Cash-out refinance
Non-cash-out refinance
Unknown refinance
Other loan-specific:
Not full documentation
Adjustable rate
Not 30-year term
Origination balance ($10k)
State-specific:
Judicial foreclosure
Recourse
Economic determinants:
Lag unemployment rate
House price change, 12 month (10
percent)
Distress sales share (1 percent)
Interest rate differential (1 percent)
Number of months at risk
Number of subjects

Note: The left out group is the set of high-quality FHA fully documented 30-year fixed rate
purchase mortgages with current LTV below 80, FICO score above 720, DTI below 28,
secured by a single family residence. Six property type indicators are included. Mortgages are
right censored at January 2007
*** significant at the 1% level ** significant at the 5% level

