                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES, AND FINANCIAL CRISES:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE AMERICAN RECORD

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                         Joseph G. Haubrich

                                        Working Paper 18194
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18194


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2012




We wish to thank David Altig, Luca Benati and John Cochrane for helpful comments, and participants
at the Swiss National Bank conference on Policy Challenges and Developments in Monetary Economics,
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Stanford, Claremont, UCLA, Santa Clara, UC Santa Cruz, and
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Patricia Waiwood provided excellent research assistance. Much
of this paper was written at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland where Michael Bordo is a Visiting
Scholar and the research was funded by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record
Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich
NBER Working Paper No. 18194
June 2012
JEL No. N1

                                             ABSTRACT

Do steep recoveries follow deep recessions? Does it matter if a credit crunch or banking panic accompanies
the recession? Moreover does it matter if the recession is associated with a housing bust? We look
at the American historical experience in an attempt to answer these questions. The answers depend
on the definition of a financial crisis and on how much of the recovery is considered. But in general
recessions associated with financial crises are generally followed by rapid recoveries. We find three
exceptions to this pattern: the recovery from the Great Contraction in the 1930s; the recovery after
the recession of the early 1990s and the present recovery. The present recovery is strikingly more tepid
than the 1990s. One factor we consider that may explain some of the slowness of this recovery is the
moribund nature of residential investment, a variable that is usually a key predictor of recessions and
recoveries.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Joseph G. Haubrich
Federal Reserve Bank ofCleveland
1455 East 6th Street
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
jhaubrich@clev.frb.org
  Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises:
          Evidence from the American Record

                By Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich∗


           June 18, 2012.
          Do steep recoveries follow deep recessions? Does it matter if a
          credit crunch or banking panic accompanies the recession? More-
          over does it matter if the recession is associated with a housing
          bust? We look at the American historical experience in an attempt
          to answer these questions. The answers depend on the definition
          of a financial crisis and on how much of the recovery is consid-
          ered. But in general recessions associated with financial crises are
          generally followed by rapid recoveries. We find three exceptions
          to this pattern: the recovery from the Great Contraction in the
          1930s; the recovery after the recession of the early 1990s and the
          present recovery. The present recovery is strikingly more tepid
          than the 1990s. One factor we consider that may explain some of
          the slowness of this recovery is the moribund nature of residential
          investment, a variable that is usually a key predictor of recessions
          and recoveries.



                                        I.   Introduction

  The recovery from the recent recession has now been proceeding for twelve
quarters. Many argue that this recovery is unusually sluggish and that this reflects
the severity of the financial crisis of 2007-2008 (Roubini, 2009). Yet if this is
the case it seems to fly in the face of the record of U.S. business cycles in the
past century and a half. Indeed, Milton Friedman noted as far back as 1964
that in the American historical record “A large contraction in output tends to
be followed on the average by a large business expansion; a mild contraction,
by a mild expansion.” (Friedman 1969, p. 273). Much work since then has
confirmed this stylized fact but has also begun to make distinctions between
cycles, particularly between those that include a financial crisis. Zarnowitz (1992)
documented that pre-World War II recessions accompanied by banking panics
   ∗ Bordo: Rutgers University and Hoover Institution, 434 Galvez Mall, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305-6010, michael.bordo@gmail.com. Haubrich: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, PO Box 6387,
Cleveland, OH 44101-1387, jhaubrich@clev.frb.org. The views expressed here are solely those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland or the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System. We wish to thank David Altig, Luca Benati and John Cochrane for
helpful comments, and participants at the Swiss National Bank conference on Policy Challenges and
Developments in Monetary Economics, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Stanford, Claremont,
UCLA, Santa Clara, UC Santa Cruz, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Patricia Waiwood provided
excellent research assistance.
                                                  1
2                             BORDO AND HAUBRICH


tended to be more severe than average recessions and that they tended to be
followed by rapid recoveries.
  In this paper we revisit the issue of whether business cycles with financial crises
are different. We use the evidence we gather to shed some light on the recent re-
covery. A full exploration of this question benefits from an historical perspective,
not only to provide a statistically valid number of crises, but also to gain perspec-
tive from the differing regulatory and monetary regimes in place. We look at 27
cycles starting in 1882 and use several measures of financial crises. We compare
the change in real output (real GDP) over the contraction with the growth in
real output in the recovery, and test for differences between cycles with and with-
out a financial crisis. After comparing the amplitudes, we then look at various
measures of the shape of cycles, ranging from simple steepness measures to more
recent tools such as Harding and Pagan’s (2002) excess cumulative movement.
  We then turn to more quantitative measures of financial stress and assess their
impact on the shape of the resulting recovery. With both price (credit spread)
and quantity (bank loan) data, finer distinctions between financial crises can be
drawn. In other words, is the strength of the recovery related to either the change
in lending or the credit spread? Finally, we introduce residential investment as a
possible explanation for a slow recovery after a recession that involves a housing
bust, as the U.S. is currently experiencing.
  Our analysis of the data shows that steep expansions tend to follow deep con-
tractions, though this depends heavily on when the recovery is measured. In
contrast to much conventional wisdom, the stylized fact that deep contractions
breed strong recoveries is particularly true when there is a financial crisis. In fact,
on average, it is cycles without a financial crisis that show the weakest relation
between contraction depth and recovery strength. For many configurations, the
evidence for a robust bounce-back is stronger for cycles with financial crises than
those without. The results depend somewhat on the time period, with cycles
before the Federal Reserve looking different from cycles after the Second World
War.
  We find that measures of financial strength have some impact on the strength of
recoveries. Our results also suggest that a sizeable fraction of the shortfall of the
present recovery from the average experience of recoveries after deep recessions is
due to the collapse of residential investment.
  Though the literature on this topic is extensive, there is little work that in-
corporates both such a long data series and examines financial crises. Friedman,
(1969, 1988) has a similarly long series but does not consider the effect of finan-
cial crises, in addition to using somewhat different data and empirical techniques.
In contrast to most subsequent work, Friedman looks at growth over the entire
expansion. Wynne and Balke (1992, 1993) include only cycles since 1919 and do
not consider the effect of financial crises. They measure growth 4 quarters into
the expansion. Lopez-Salido and Nelson (2010) explicitly look at the connection
between financial crises and recovery strength but look only at post-World War II
.   .                     DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                         3


cycles in the US. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) concentrate on major interna-
tional financial crises since the Second World War, and document long and severe
recessions, but make few direct comparisons of the recovery speed with noncri-
sis cycles. Howard, Martin and Wilson (2011) look at the relationship between
recoveries and crises for 59 countries since 1970 and reach conclusions similar to
ours. Bordo and Haubrich (2010) find that contractions associated with a finan-
cial crisis tend to be more severe but do not gauge the speed of the resulting
recovery. Cerra and Saxena (2008) look at data for 190 countries and find that
output losses in disasters are in general not recovered, in the sense of returning to
the pre-crisis trend line. Gourio (2008) finds strong recoveries after disasters, in
the sense of exceptionally high growth rates. Stock and Watson (2012) use a 198
variable dynamic factor model on data since the Second World War, attributing
recent slow recoveries to demographic factors in the labor market. Gali, Smets
and Wouters (2012) estimate a structural new Keynesian model and attribute the
current slow recovery to adverse demand shocks stemming from the zero lower
bound and wage markups. Hall (2011) defines a related concept of slump, when
employment is below 95.5 percent of the labor force.
   The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents an historical nar-
rative on U.S. recoveries. Section 3 examines the amplitude, duration and shape
of business cycles since 1882, testing whether strong recoveries follow deep con-
tractions, and whether financial crises alter that pattern. Section 4 looks at how
credit spreads and bank lending affect the relationship between contraction depth
and recovery strength. Section 5 examines the connection between weak recover-
ies and slow residential investment. It incorporates the long-standing importance
of housing in the transmission mechanism. Section 6 concludes and offers some
policy advice for the current recovery in light of the historical record.

                                  II.   Narrative

  We present some descriptive evidence and historical narratives on U.S. business
cycle recoveries from 1880 to the present. Figure 1 shows the quarterly path of
GDP from the preceding peak to the trough of each business cycle and then the
quarterly path of GDP from the trough for the same number of quarters that
occurred in the downturn. The figure makes it easy to determine if output has
returned to the level at the peak, a natural comparison point that has often been
used before, such as in Romer (1984). Even so, it does not account for trend
growth, or a return to any “full potential” of the economy. At some level, even
very basic questions of interpretation are unresolved: Cole and Ohanian (2004)
start out their paper with “The recovery from the Great Depression was weak.”
Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 493) insist that “severe contractions tend to be
succeeded by vigorous rebounds. The 1929-1933 contraction was no exception.”
  Table 1 shows some metrics on the salient characteristics of the recessions and
recoveries. Column 1 reports the date of the cyclical peak, as determined by the
NBER. Column 2 measures the steepness of the drop, and column 3 shows the
4                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


steepness of the recovery, both of which are measured as the percentage change
in real GDP divided by the duration of the contraction: that is, if the contraction
lasted seven quarters, we go out seven quarters into the recovery. Column 4 shows
the total change (usually a drop) in GDP during the contraction, and column 5
shows the total change (usually an increase) during the recovery going out the
same number of quarters as the contraction lasted. Columns 6 and 7 show the
percentage changes.
  Table 2 summarizes the historical experience of all U.S. business cycles since
1880. It is divided into three eras: pre-Federal Reserve; interwar; and post-World
War II (panels A,B, and C). Column 1 dates the NBER trough, column 2 shows
the dates of the recovery, column 3 indicates if it was a major recession; column
4 indicates whether a banking crisis occurred during the recession; column 5
indicates whether there was a credit crunch as defined in Bordo and Haubrich
(2010); column 6 indicates whether there was a housing bust as indicated by
Shiller (2009); and column 7 indicates whether or not there was a stock market
crash. Each panel is divided into two parts, the first showing recessions cycles
where the pace of the recovery was at least as rapid as the downturn. The second
shows cycles where recoveries were slower than the downturn.

                  A.   1880-1920: The Pre-Federal Reserve Period.

  During this era the U.S. was on the gold standard and did not have a central
bank. The NBER demarcates 11 business cycles, of which two, 1893(I) to 1894(II)
and 1907(II) to 1908(II), had major recessions. There were also 4 banking panics
and 6 stock market crashes. Most of the recoveries were followed by recoveries at
least as rapid as the downturns with the exception of the cycle following World
War I. The key driving forces in the pre-WWI business cycles were foreign shocks,
e.g. Bank of England tightening, banking instability, the state of harvests in the
U.S. relative to Europe, and investment in railroads. Fels (1959) and Friedman
and Schwartz (1963) have useful narratives of business cycles in this era.
  The recovery of 1879 to 1882, according to Friedman and Schwartz (chapter
2), shows a perfect example of the operation of the price-specie-flow mechanism
of the classical gold standard. Favorable harvests in the U.S. at the same time
as unfavorable ones in Europe generated a large balance-of-trade surplus and
gold inflows, raising the money supply and stimulating the economy. The key
driver of expansion was railroad construction, continuing the boom that had
been interrupted by the panic of 1873 and the resulting recession. The recession
of 1882-85 featured a banking panic in May 1884 and a stock market crash. The
banking panic ended with the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates and U.S.
Treasury quasi-central banking operations. The recovery of 1885(II) to 1887(II)
was driven by capital and gold inflows. The recovery was interrupted by a brief
one-year mild contraction.
  The recovery from 1888(I) to 1890(III) was driven by good harvests in the U.S.
and bad ones in Europe (Fels 1959). Two big shocks ended the recovery: the
.   .                    DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                         5


passage of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which led to serious capital flight
based on fears that the U.S. would be forced off gold; and the Baring Crisis in
London, which led to a sudden stop of capital flows to all emerging markets,
including the U.S. These events culminated in a banking panic in New York,
which was ended by the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates. The recession
ended in May 1891 and recovery from 1891(II) to 1893(I) was fostered by a series
of good U.S. harvests, which generated gold inflows.
  The decade of the 1890s was shadowed by silver uncertainty and falling global
gold prices, which produced persistent deflationary pressure. The recovery ended
in May 1893 with a stock market crash and a major banking panic which spread
from New York City to the interior and then back. The panic led to many bank
failures across the country and a monetary contraction, contributing to a serious
recession. It ended with the suspension of convertibility of deposits into currency
in the fall of 1893. The subsequent recovery from 1894(II) to 1895(III) was aided
by the Belmont Morgan syndicate, which was created in early 1895 to rescue
the US Treasury’s gold reserves from a silver-induced run. Silver uncertainty
contributed to capital flight and led to another recession from late 1895 to 1897.
The election of 1896 was fought over the issue of free silver and once the silver
advocate William Jennings Bryan was defeated, the pressure eased.
  The recovery from 1897(II) to 1899(II) began a long boom interrupted by a few
minor recessions. The key drivers of the boom were important gold discoveries
in Alaska and South Africa which increased the global monetary gold stock and
ended the Great Deflation of the late nineteenth century. Increased gold output
stimulated the real economy. A very mild recession in 1899-1900, associated with
the outbreak of the Boer War, interrupted the expansion. Gold inflows and good
harvests drove the recovery from 1900(I) to 1902(IV), which ended with the ”rich
man’s panic” of 1902 and a mild recession from 1902 to 1904. The following recov-
ery from 1904(II) to 1907(IV) was driven by heavy capital inflows from London,
in part reflecting insurance claims resulting from the San Francisco earthquake
(Odell and Weidenmeier 2004). The Bank of England reacted to declining gold
reserves by raising its discount rate and rationed lending based on U.S. securities.
This created a serious shock to U.S. financial markets, triggering a stock market
crash and a major banking panic in October 1907. The banking panic led to many
bank failures, a drop in the money supply and a serious recession, which ended in
May 1908. The panic and recession of 1907-08 led to the monetary reform that
created the Federal Reserve in 1913.
  The recession of 1907-1908 was followed by a vigorous recovery from 1908(II) to
1910(I). Friedman and Schwartz attribute this to gold inflows reflecting a decline
in US prices relative to those in Britain stemming from crisis. A mild recession
from 1910 to 1912 triggered by capital outflows was followed by a brief recovery
in 1912-1913. The onset of World War I in 1914 led to a recession and banking
crisis. The recession was then followed by a major boom, driven by the demand
for U.S. goods by the European belligerents and then the U.S. as it prepared for
6                             BORDO AND HAUBRICH


war.
  The wartime recovery ended with a recession from 1918(III) to 1919(I) following
the cessation of hostilities and the conversion from war to peace. The vigorous
recovery involved a major restocking boom and rapid commodity inflation in the
US. The Federal Reserve, which had opened its doors in 1914 and had become an
engine of inflation subservient to the Treasury, was reluctant to raise its discount
rate to fight inflation in 1919 because of concern over the Treasury’s portfolio. In
the face of a declining gold reserve, the Fed reluctantly tightened sharply at the
end of 1919 precipitating a serious recession in 1920.

                        B.   The Interwar Period: 1920-1945

  The Federal Reserve was established in 1914 in part to solve the problem of the
absence of a lender of last resort in the crises of the pre-1914 national banking era.
In the Fed’s first 25 years there were three very severe business cycle downturns
and several minor cycles. In addition to exogenous shocks such as wars, Fed
policy actions were key in both precipitating and mitigating cycles. Most of the
recoveries in this period were at least as rapid as the downturns that preceded
them with one important exception: the recovery from the Great Contraction of
1929 to 1933.
  Recovery 1921(III) to 1923(II): The recession that followed Fed tightening in
December 1920 was severe but short: industrial production fell 23%, wholesale
prices fell 37% and unemployment increased from 4% to 12%. No banking panic
occurred but the stock market crashed in the fall of 1920. In the face of mounting
political pressure the Fed reversed course in November 1921 and the real econ-
omy began recovering in August 1921. By March 1922 Indusrial Production had
increased 20% above the previous year’s level.
  Recoveries 1924(II) -1926(III) and 1927(IV) - 1929(III): Two mild recessions
in the mid-1920s reflected Fed preemptory tightening in the face of incipient
inflation. In each case the recessions were followed by healthy recoveries. There
were no banking crises or stock market crashes in these episodes, but there was
a housing bust in 1926 (White 2010).
  Recovery 1933(I) - 1937(II): The Fed tightened beginning in late 1926 to stem
the stock market boom which had begun that year. This tightening led to a
recession in August 1929 and a major stock market crash in October. A series
of banking panics beginning in October 1930 ensued. The Fed did little to off-
set them, turning a recession into the Great Contraction. The recovery began
after Roosevelt’s inauguration in March 1933 with the Banking Holiday. Other
key events in spurring recoveries included the U.S. leaving the gold standard in
April, Treasury gold and silver purchases, and the devaluation of the dollar by
close to 60% in January 1934. These policies produced a big reflationary im-
pulse from gold inflows, which were unsterilized and so passed directly into the
money supply. They also helped convert deflationary expectations into inflation-
ary ones (Eggertsson 2008).Expansionary monetary policy largely explains the
.   .                     DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                           7


rapid growth from 1933 to 1937 (Romer 1992). As Table 2 and Figure 1 show,
the recovery, although rapid (output grew by 33%) was not sufficient to com-
pletely reverse the preceding downturn. The recovery may have been impeded
somewhat by New Deal cartelization policies like the NIRA, which, in an attempt
to raise wages and prices artificially reduced labor supply and aggregate supply
(Cole and Ohanian 2004).
  Recovery 1937(III) - 1945(I): The 1937-38 recession, which cut short the rapid
recovery from the Great Contraction of 1929-1933 was the third worst recession
of the twentieth century, as real GDP fell by 10% and unemployment, which had
declined considerably after 1933, increased to 20%. The recession was produced
by a major Fed policy error. Policymakers doubled reserve requirements in 1936
to sop up excess reserves and prevent future inflation. The Fed’s contractionary
policy action was complemented by the Treasury’s decision in late June 1936 to
sterilize gold inflows in order to reduce excess reserves. These policies led to a col-
lapse in money supply and a return to a severe recession (Friedman and Schwartz
1963, Meltzer 2003). Fiscal policy hardly helped, with the Social Security payroll
tax debuting in 1937 on top of the tax increase mandated by the Revenue Act of
1935 (Hall and Ferguson, 1998).
  The recession ended after FDR in April 1938 pressured the Fed to roll back
reserve requirements, the Treasury stopped sterilizing gold inflows and desteril-
ized all remaining gold sterilized since December 1936 and the Administration
began pursuing expansionary fiscal policy. The recovery from 1938 to 1942 was
spectacular: output grew by 49% fueled by gold inflows from Europe and a major
defense buildup.

                         C.   Post-World War II: 1945 -2011

  In the post-World War II era, with only two exceptions, recoveries were at least
as rapid as the downturn. In general recessions were shorter and recoveries longer
than before World War II (Zarnowitz 1992). There also were fewer stock market
crashes. The key exceptions to this pattern were the recovery of 1991(I) -2001(I)
and the recent recovery which started in 2009(II). The recent recession was the
only one with a banking crisis, stock market crash and housing bust.
  1945(IV) -1948(IV). The conversion from a wartime to a peacetime economy led
to a very sharp, quick recession followed by a very rapid recovery. The recovery
ended in 1948 with Fed tightening to fight inflation, leading to a mild recession
from 1948 to 1949.
  1949(IV) -1953(II). According to Meltzer (2003, chapter 7) the rapid recovery
from the 1948-49 recession was aided by deflation, which encouraged gold inflows
and increased the real value of the monetary base.
  1954(III)- 1953(II). After the Federal Reserve Treasury Accord of March 1951,
the Fed was free again to use its policy rates to pursue its policy aims. At the end
of the Korean War, it tightened policy to stem inflation, leading to a recession
beginning in July. The Fed then began easing policy well before the business cycle
8                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


trough in May 1954, leading to a rapid recovery. Again in the face of incipient
inflation the Fed began a tightening cycle at the end of 1954, which led to a
recession beginning in August 1957(II) (Friedman and Schwartz 1963 chapter 11,
Meltzer 2010, chapter 2).
   1958(II) - 1960(II). The recession of 1957-58 was one of the most severe re-
cessions of the postwar period but it was very short-lived. It ended after April
1958 following expansionary policy that began in November 1957. The subse-
quent recovery was vigorous. Again the Fed, worrying about rising inflation and
gold outflows, began tightening in August 1958. The tightening cycle ended with
a recession beginning in April 1960 (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, chapter 11,
Meltzer 2010, chapter 2).
   1961(I) - 1969(IV). By early 1960 the FOMC recognized that the economy had
slowed and began to ease two months before the April business cycle peak. The
recession of 1960-61 was mild and brief, lasting 10 months. Fed policy continued
to be loose throughout the downturn. The recession ended in February 1961 and
the subsequent recovery exhibited very rapid growth with low inflation.
   1970(IV) - 1973(IV). In face of rising inflation after 1965, the Fed began tight-
ening. This was not enough to stem the buildup of inflation, although it led to
the Credit Crunch of 1966 and a growth slowdown (Bordo and Haubrich 2010).
Fed tightening in the summer of 1969 led to a mild recession beginning in July
1969. Policy began to ease after January 1970. In April 1970 Chairman Arthur
Burns abandoned the anti-inflationary policy that had been pursued by his pre-
decessor William McChesney Martin, because of the slowing economy. The easy
policies continued until after the business cycle trough. Recovery in real GDP
was relatively sluggish, and unemployment didn’t peak until the summer of 1971.
   1975(II) - 1980(I). In the face of rising inflation in 1972, the Fed tightened
but not enough (Meltzer 2010 chapter 6). Further tightening occurred in the
summer of 1973. The recession which began in November was one of the worst
in the postwar period. Real GDP fell by 3.4% and unemployment increased
to 8.6%. The recession was greatly aggravated by the first oil price shock, which
doubled the price of oil, and by wage price controls which prevented the necessary
adjustment. During this episode the U.S. experienced a minor banking crisis with
the failure of Franklin National and other significant banks (Lopez-Salido and
Nelson 2010) Beginning in July 1974 the Fed shifted to easier policy in the face
of rising unemployment. The recovery began in April 1975. As in most of the
postwar recessions the pace of the recovery exceeded the pace of the downturn.
   1980(III) - 1981(III). By 1979 inflation had reached double digit-levels. In Au-
gust, Paul Volcker was appointed chairman of the Federal Reserve. In October, he
announced a major shift in policy aimed at lowering inflation. The announcement
was followed by a series of sizable hikes in the federal funds rate. The roughly 7
percentage point rise in the nominal funds rate between October 1979 and April
1980 was the largest increase over a six-month period in the history of the Federal
Reserve. The tight monetary stance was temporarily abandoned in mid-1980 as
.   .                   DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                       9


interest rates spiked and economic activity decelerated sharply. The FOMC then
imposed credit controls (March to July 1980) and let the funds rate decline. The
controls led to a marked decline in consumer credit, personal consumption, and
a very sharp decline in economic activity. The recession ended in July 1980 and
was followed by a very rapid recovery.
  1981(IV) - 1990(III). Fed policy began to tighten again in May 1981 in the
face of a jump in inflation. It raised the federal funds rate from 14.7% in March
to 19.1% June. This second and more durable round of tightening succeeded
in reducing the inflation rate from 10% in early 1981 to 4% in 1983 but at the
cost of a sharp and very prolonged recession. Real GDP fell by close to 3% and
unemployment increased from 7.2% to 10.8%.During this period there were two
minor banking crises, the first between 1982-1984 as a consequence of the Latin
American debt crisis, which seriously impacted the money center banks, and the
second, the Savings and Loan Crisis from 1988-1991 (Lopez-Salido and Nelson
2010). There also was a stock market crash in the fall of 1987.
  The Fed shifted to a looser policy in June 1982. After the trough, real output
rose rapidly, and the pace of the recovery greatly exceeded that of the downturn.
The recession of 1991 was preceded by Fed policy tightening beginning in De-
cember 1988 (Romer and Romer 1994). The FOMC wanted to reduce inflation
from the 4% to 4.5% range. The federal funds rate was raised from 6% to 9 7/8%
between March and May. The recession began in July 1990 and was aggravated
by an oil price shock after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990. The recession
was mild. Real GDP fell by only 1.1%.
  1990(I) to 2001(I). The FOMC only began cutting the funds rate in November
1990 because its primary concern was to reduce inflation which had reached 6.1%
in the first half of 1990 (Hetzel 2008 chapter 15). The recovery from the trough
in March 1991 was considered tepid and it was referred to as a jobless recovery.
Unemployment peaked at 7.75% in June 1992. The recession was also viewed as
a credit crunch (Bordo and Haubrich 2010), and real housing prices declined by
13% suggesting a minor housing bust. This is the first recovery in the post-war
era where the pace of expansion was less than that in the downturn.
  2001(IV) - 2007(IV). In 2000 the Fed loosened monetary policy because of the
fear of Y2K. The tech boom, which had elevated the NASDAQ to unsustainable
levels, led to a bust and a decline in wealth and consumption. The FOMC didn’t
forecast a recession and was slow to respond because of tightness in the labor
market (Hetzel 2008, page 241). Although real growth began decelerating in
mid-2000, the FOMC began reducing the funds rate in January 2001, from 6.5%
to 1% by June. After the trough in November, although real growth had picked
up, employment had not and like the previous recession there was talk about
a jobless recovery. By March 2004 the unemployment rate was at 5.7% still
near its cyclical peak. Moreover since 2003 the Fed had worried about deflation
and the zero lower bound problem. Consequently the funds rate was maintained
at its recession low until June 2004 when, alarmed by an increase in inflationary
10                           BORDO AND HAUBRICH


expectations, the Fed began raising the funds rate at 0.25% increments increments
until late summer 2007.
   2009(II) - ?. The recent recession which began in December 2007 was precip-
itated by a banking crisis and a stock market crash consequent on the end of
a major housing boom. The severity of the resulting recession from December
2007 to the summer of 2009 reflected both a credit crunch and tight Fed policies
(seen in high real federal funds rates, Hetzel 2009). The recession was the most
severe in the postwar period (real GDP fell by more than 5% and unemployment
increased to 10.8%). The financial crisis in the fall of 2008 was without doubt the
most serious event since the Great Contraction.
   Both the crisis and the recession were dealt with by vigorous policy responses:
on the monetary policy side, the Federa Reserve cut the funds rate from 5.25% in
early fall 2007 to close to zero by January 2009), introduced quantitative easing
via the purchase of mortgage-backed securities and long-term Treasuries from
January 2009 to June 2011, and formed and an extensive network of facilities
created to support the credit markets directly and reduce spread. These programs
involved a tripling of the Fed’s balance sheet, on top of a massive fiscal stimulus
package. The recovery since 2009 has been tepid with real growth expanding at
slightly above 2%. The pace of recovery is well below the drop of output during
the recession.

         III.   The Relationship between Recessions and Recoveries

   In this section we take a more statistical view of the relationship between the
depth of the contraction and the strength of the following expansion. At this
point, we make no claims about causality: we do not consider here whether
financial crises contribute to recessions or recessions create financial crises.
   Our data is based on Bordo and Haubrich (2010), where we provide a more
detailed description. Business cycle turning points (in quarters) come from the
NBER. Real Gross Domestic Product, again at a quarterly frequency, is based on
Balke and Gordon (1986) and Gordon and Krenn (2010), extended via the NIPA
accounts. This gives us quarterly RGDP for 27 business cycles, starting with the
peak in 1882 and ending with the recovery from the 2007 recession.
   We measure the amplitude of the contraction by the percentage drop (from the
peak) of quarterly RGDP. We measure the recovery strength as the percentage
change from the trough at two horizons: four quarters after the cyclical trough
and after a time equal to the duration of the contraction. Going out the length of
the contraction, while it appeals to symmetry, appears to be new, as most papers
restrict their attention to 4 quarters (or 12 months if they use monthly data).
Friedman is the exception, looking at growth to the next cyclical peak. Morley
and Piger (2012) in their discussion of bounceback models, consider recoveries of
up to six quarters after a trough, while Howard, Martin and Wilson (2011) look
out three years after a trough. Papell and Prodam (2011) look at when growth
rates return to trend and when both levels and growth return to trend.
.     .                  DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                         11


   Exactly what constitutes a financial crisis depends on how it is defined, and the
question has been answered several ways. In this section, for the pre-World War
II years we use the chronology from Bordo and Eichengreen (2002) and also add
1914, a year in which the bond markets closed. For the post war period, we use
the chronology of Lopez-Salido and Nelson. This gives us crisis periods of 1884-5,
1892-93, 1895, 1904, 1907, 1914, 1930-33, 1973-75, 1982-84, 1988-91 and 2007.
Consequently, the recessions we associate with a financial crisis are those that
start in 1882, 1893, 1907, 1913, 1929, 1973, 1981, 1990 and 2007. (We drop the
1945 recession from our sample. This is reasonable, but it matters, as it was the
deepest recession of the century outside the Great Depression, with an extremely
weak recovery.) It is perhaps interesting to note that the five GDP “disasters”
picked out by Barro and Jin (2011) in the US were for the cycles with troughs in
1908, 1914, 1921, 1933 and 1947, with three of those five being associated with a
financial crisis. (With our data, we would add 1894 and 1938 as disasters where
RGDP fell by 10 percent or more.) Interestingly, of our 27 business cycles, only 4
did not have some form of financial crises, according to the reckoning of Reinhart
and Rogoff (1899, 1923, 1953 and 1960).

               A.   Are Deep Recessions Followed by Steep Recoveries?

  The visual evidence (Figure 2) strongly suggests that deep recessions are fol-
lowed by strong recoveries, though it suggests that a few outliers, particularly
the Great Depression, may have a disproportionate impact. Regressing growth
4 quarters after the trough against contraction amplitude shows a positive but
small and statistically insignificant relationship. The relationship is tighter, and
stronger, if we examine more of the recovery, measuring growth out to the dura-
tion of the contraction after the trough. Looking out only 4 quarters can give a
misleading picture, particularly for longer recessions. Much of the difference is in
fact driven by the Great Depression, and it should not be surprising that the drop
in output from 1929 to 1933 was not fully reversed by 1934, though the economy
came much closer by 1936.
  Do financial crises affect the bounceback? The scatterplots in Figure 3 strongly
suggest a difference between the recoveries in crisis and noncrisis cycles, but for
reasons contrary to the conventional wisdom. In crisis times, strong recoveries
follow deep recessions, but outside of a crisis, they do not. The relation is in fact
negative, though not statistically significant.
  To get a more formal view of the difference, we run a set of regressions based
on the following specification:

(1)        %∆YT +k = α1 + α2 DF + β1 [%∆YP −T ] + β2 DF [%∆YP −T ].

As a baseline we also run

(2)                       %∆YT +k = α1 + β1 [%∆YP −T ].
12                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


  Thus the strength of the expansion is regressed against a constant, a dummy
for financial crises, a measure of the depth of the contraction and an interaction
between the financial crisis dummy and the depth of the contraction. A Chow
test then determines the significance of excluding the dummy and the interaction
term. This specification is meant to capture two separate ways that a crisis may
affect the bounceback. On average, such contractions may have a slower recovery,
but the relationship between contraction depth and recovery strength may also
be affected.
  It may not be proper to lump all crises and all cycles together, given the very
different monetary standards and regulatory regimes in place over time. We split
the data several ways, dropping the Great Depression, and separately examining
the years after the founding of the Federal Reserve and after the Second World
War. Table 3 reports the results out to the first four quarters of the expansion,
and Table 4 looks at the expansion going out the duration of the contraction.
  Looking only at 4 quarters of the recovery, there is not much evidence that re-
coveries following financial crises are much different. At a formal level, the Chow
test does not show a significant difference. Informally, the coefficient on the finan-
cial dummy is uniformly negative, indicating that recoveries following financial
crises are on average somewhat smaller, though the coefficient is significant in
one case. The interaction term, also insignificant, is split between negative and
positive values: in the one significant case the depth of the recession has a greater
impact on the strength of recoveries when there is a crisis.
  The differences are more striking once more of the recovery is considered, as
Table 4 shows. The interaction term and the Chow test are significant in all
but the post-World War II samples. The dummy for financial crises is always
negative, but it is significant only half the time. The post-World War II sample
shows no significant difference between crisis and noncrisis recoveries (perhaps
because crises were less severe, a point we return to later), but for the other
samples a clear pattern emerges: the dummy for financial crisis is negative, but
the interaction term is positive. This means that relatively mild recessions with
a crisis have slower than average recoveries, but the deeper the recession, the
stronger the recovery. For the entire sample, the crossover point is about 3.25%,
met by most crisis contractions except 1882, 1973, 1981 and 1990, which perhaps
contributes to the impression that the crisis recoveries are weaker. The numbers
have economic heft: a one percent deeper recession with a crisis will lead to greater
than an extra one and one half percent of growth in the quarters following the
trough.
  Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010) find the world has had five global financial crises
since 1880 (1890-91, 1907-08, 1913-14, 1930-33 and 2007-2008). Figure 4 plots
recovery amplitude (4 quarters) against contraction amplitude for these crises and
all post-World War II contractions, including 2007-2008.
  Like the previous figures, figure 4 shows a positive relationship between contrac-
tion amplitude and recovery strength, though the coefficient is relatively small.
.   .                     DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                           13


In part, this arises from the three most recent cycles, which seem different, with
both a lower intercept and a lower slope. Some speculation suggests that this
results from changes in labor market behavior since the 1980s. (Beauchemin,
2010).

                              B.   Does “shape” matter?

   Another possible relationship between contractions and expansions concerns
their shape. One obvious measure of shape is steepness, or change in output
divided by duration. Tables 5 and 6 report the results of regressing the steepness
of the recovery against the steepness of the contraction, again dropping 1929 and
looking at post-Fed and post-World War II periods.
   Steepness does pick out differences between recoveries with and without finan-
cial crises. The financial crisis dummy is significantly negative in six of eight cases,
turning positive for the post-World War II period both times. So everything else
equal, crisis recoveries are smaller. But everything else is not equal, for the inter-
action term is signficantly positive in the same six cases, while the coefficient on
contraction depth is insignificant, small and generally negative. The conclusion
is that crisis recoveries show a strong relationship between contraction depth and
recovery strength, but the noncrisis recoveries do not. Far from overturning the
stylized fact, crisis recoveries account for it!
   Steepness is not the only measure of shape. For example, the contraction might
be “L” shaped, that is, dropping quickly at first, but then only slowly reaching
a trough. (Macroeconomic Advisors, 2009) This might be thought of as a worse
contraction than one that is more linear. Or, the cycle might have a “V” shape or
a “U” shape or some other imaginative denotations–the 2007 cycle has at times
been described as having a “square root sign” shape.
   Quantifying shape beyond mere steepness may seem a daunting task, but Hard-
ing and Pagan (2002) have a useful approach. They measure the extent to which
the drop in output during the contraction deviates from a straight line and develop
an index of excess cumulated movements. Several specifications, however, have
not uncovered any meaningful relationship between the shape of the contraction
and the shape of the recovery.

                    IV.   Bank Lending and Credit Crunches

  Designating a time period as having a crisis or not is in some ways an unsubtle
approach to the problem–it also does little to uncover the mechanisms involved in
the amplitude of cycles. An alternative pursued in this section looks for measures
of financial stringency, and then examines their effect on the strength of the
recovery. In the historical context, measures of financial stringency are associated
with more severe recessions (Bordo and Haubrich 2010), and it thus makes sense
to look at their effect on the strength of recoveries.
14                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


  The first approach makes a distinction between crises based on their severity,
as measured by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Replacing the crisis dummy in
the interaction term with the Reinhart and Rogoff index of crisis severity (which
essentially adds up the number of different crises occuring during particular years,
which we sum over contractions), we attempt to account for the effect of crisis
severity. The results looking out either four quarters from the trough or the
duration of the contraction into the expansion were quite similar, so in Table 7
we report only the results for duration. Again the results are somehwat mixed.
The financial crisis dummy is usually positve, but insignificant. The interaction
term is significant in all four cases, positive except for the post-World War II
period. Thus, for most of the sample, a more severe crisis means a stronger
recovery.
   Another approach preserves the interaction between the simple dummy for fi-
nancial crises but adds controls for financial conditions during the recovery. To
capture both the market-based and the intermediary-based aspects of finance,
we include stock prices and bank loans. It is perhaps more common to measure
financial conditions via some sort of credit spread, and in our earlier work we
followed that tradition and looked at the spread between Baa and safe bonds, or
between different grades of railroad bonds for the 19th century. Credit spreads
will play an important role in the results of the next section, but here we look
more on the quantity side. While certainly the price of credit should matter, some
authors (Owens and Schreft, 1995) define a “credit crunch” as nonprice rationing
of credit, and thus observable mostly from the quantity side. Schularick and Tay-
lor (2012) use (annual) bank lending as a measure of credit conditions. The stock
price index for 1875-1917 is the Cowles commission index, releveled to match the
Standard and Poor index which begins in 1917. For bank lending, we construct a
new quarterly series from 1882 to 2010 for all commercial banks, detailed in the
appendix.
  Table 8 reports the results of regressing the expansion strength against con-
traction depth, the change in real loans over the expansion and the change in
the stock index over the expansion. It is meant to uncover whether financing
problems held back the recovery. Because adding dependent variables reduces
the degrees of freedom, we only report results for the entire sample and for a
subsample that excludes the 1929 cycle. The results are somewhat mixed, but
the interaction term is postive in the entire sample, both at four quarters and
duration, and positive, statistically significant and quantitatively large in three of
the four cases considered. Again it appears that if there is a difference between
cycles with and without a crisis, the rebound from a financial crisis is particularly
strong if the recession was deep.
  Looking at the controls, however, shows that financing matters for the recovery,
though the results do depend on the horizon, particularly for bank lending. Loans
are quantitatively and statistically significant except when 1929 is dropped from
the four-quarter specification. Higher bank lending is associated with a stronger
.   .                     DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                       15


recovery. The effect on the stock index is more consistent across horizons. There
is a positive relationship between changes in the stock index and the strength of
recovery, both with and without the Great Depression. Of course, particularly
with the stock market, causality is hard to determine, and the results may only
be telling us that strong recoveries have bull markets.

                            V.   The Effect of Housing

  Housing deserves separate attention, if only because it played such a prominent
role in the 2007-2008 crisis. In fact, housing has been important in many cycles
(Leamer, 2007) and a stylized fact noticed even by Burns and Mitchell is that
household investment (which is predominantly housing) leads the business cycle
(Fisher, 2007). A standard story for the transmission of monetary policy was
that the Federal Reserve would raise rates, which in the days of Regulation Q
would lead to disintermediation, cutting off funds needed for construction (Jaffee
and Rosen, 1979). Home builders famously sent Paul Volcker hundreds of two-
by-fours to protest his raising of rates (Greider, 1987, p. 462). Other work
has suggested that a shock to the housing market can account for much of the
output decline in the recent recession (Henly and Wolman, 2011). More recently,
chairman Bernanke (2011) has remarked that
        Notably, the housing sector has been a significant driver of recovery
        from most recessions in the United States since World War II, but this
        time–with an overhang of distressed and foreclosed properties, tight
        credit conditions for builders and potential homebuyers, and ongoing
        concerns by both potential borrowers and lenders about continued
        house price declines–the rate of new home construction has remained
        at less than one-third of its pre-crisis level.
  The obvious question is to what extent the problems in the housing market can
account for the slow recovery so far. Clearly, questions of precedence, causality
and influence are difficult to sort out. Our approach is to ask a counter-factual:
What would the current recovery look like if it followed the historical pattern
based on the depth of the contraction? Since the recovery in fact is much slower
than predicted by just the recession depth, that is, the bounceback is weaker than
expected, we see if the effects of the financial crisis or problems in the housing
market can account for the difference.
  In essence, the first step is to look for outliers in the relationship between
recession depth and recovery. If we can identify which recoveries look different,
can we start to understand why? We do this in a three-step process. First, as
mentioned already, we compare actual with fitted values in a regression of RGDP
growth in the recovery against contraction depth, again also measured by the
drop in RGDP. We then add a measure of financial distress, the risk spread used
in Bordo and Haubrich (2010), Moody’s Seasoned Baa less Long-term Treasury
Composite, and again compare fitted with actual values. Finally, we add a third
16                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


term, Residential Investment, as our measure of the housing market, comparing
actual to fitted values. Using the measures of financial distress and the housing
market unfortunately restricts the data to the post-World War I era, though
unlike Leamer, we are able to consider the interwar years.
   Figure 5 graphically reports the results. (Table 9 reports the regressions.) The
first panel compares actual change in real GDP for the recovery (as before, length
of the contraction after the trough) with the fitted value from the regression
against contraction depth. The most recent three cycles stand out as having
particularly weak recoveries given the size of the recessions. Their bounce back
is abnormally slow.
   The second panel shows how much of the shortfall we attribute to problems
in the financial sector. This might be expected to be large, as the 1990 cycle is
famous for its financial “headwinds,” and the problems of the current crisis need
no further recapitulation. Does financial stringency explain the slow recovery?
To the measures of loan growth and stock appreciation from the previous section
we add the interest rate risk spread. This does improve the fit overall, though for
the current crisis the fit worsens. Adding these financial variables also reverses
the trend of last three recessions, which no longer look weaker than predicted.
So, as noted before, there is some support in the most recent cycles for financial
crises to lead to weaker recoveries.
   The third panel shows the effect of adding Residential Investment, an obvi-
ous measure of the housing market, and a key component of Leamer’s (2007)
contention that “Housing is the business cycle.” This panel shows the actual
and fitted values using contraction depth, loan growth, stock appreciation, risk
spread, and residential investment. Residential investment is not a large compo-
nent of national expenditure, but it is closely linked to the purchases of consumer
durables and other housing-sensitive sectors, which together give it a bigger im-
pact. The improvement is particularly noticeable for the current recovery. This
was also the case in the last five recessions, which show noticeable improvement in
fit–a Wald test rejects excluding the extra variables at well above the one percent
level. Nevertheless, the orders of magnitude are strikingly greater in the current
recovery.
   In the absence of a model, of course, this finding points to the need for further
analysis, to determine if weakness in housing was directly to blame for the weak
recovery, or if it merely reflected or transmitted other problems, such as weakness
in the intermediary sector. Nonetheless, the role of housing does stand out as a
marker for weakness in the current recovery.

                   VI.   Prospects for the Current Recovery

  Recessions that accompany a financial crisis tend to be long and severe (Bordo
and Haubrich, 2010, Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). What that portends for eco-
nomic growth once a recovery has started is less certain, however. On the one
hand, there is the feeling that “growth is sometimes quite modest in the after-
.   .                    DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                        17


math as the financial system resets.” (Reinhart and Rogoff, p. 235). On the other
hand, there is the stylized fact behind Friedman’s plucking model, that “A large
contraction in output tends to be followed on the average by a large business ex-
pansion,” (Friedman, 1969, p. 273). One popular measure, the time required to
return output to the pre-crisis level, confounds the depth of the recession with the
strength of recovery. For many purposes, it is important to separate the notions
of contraction depth and recovery strength.
  Where does that leave the current recovery? It remains an outlier, as one of the
few cases where output did not return to the level of the previous peak after the
duration of the recession. In this it resembled two very different recessions, the
Great Depression and 1990. Significantly, both of those combined financial prob-
lems and (real) housing price declines, albeit of strikingly different magnitudes.
The unanswered question, of course, relates to causality–tracing out the exact
shocks, and their transmission, remains key. Must housing recover for the recov-
ery to take off, or will the economy pull the industry along? These are questions
for another day.
  Also of great importance is the question of whether additional monetary stimu-
lus could speed up the current recovery. Since the end of 2009, short-term interest
rates have been close to zero. The Federal Reserve has gone through two rounds
of quantitative easing and a maturity extension program designed to lower long-
term interest rates and stimulate investment expenditure. Yet the housing sector
has not recovered, and residential investment has remained flat. This raises the
question of whether further quantitative easing could make the pace of recovery
more consistent with the depth of the recession. It is possible that forces other
than looser monetary policy may be needed to instill recovery in the housing
sector. One possibility is that house prices still need to fall further to clear the
market. Then builders would be eager to borrow, knowing that prices will no
longer fall, and lenders will be more eager to lend knowing that the value of their
collateral has stabilized.

                                VII.   References

   Balke, Nathan S., and Robert J. Gordon, (1986), Appendix B: Historical Data,
The American Business cycle: continuity and Change NBER Studies in Business
Cycles, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
   Barro, Robert J., and Tao Jin, (2011), ”On the Size Distribution of Macroeco-
nomic Disasters,” Econometrica, vol. 79.5, pp. 1567-1589.
   Beauchemin, Kenneth R., (2010), ”Not Your Father’s Recovery?” FRB Cleve-
land Economic Commentary, September 9,.
   Bernanke, Ben. S. ”The Near- and Longer-Term Prospects for the U.S. Econ-
omy”At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson
Hole, Wyoming August 26, 2011.
   Bordo, Michael D., and John S. Landon-Lane (2010) ”The Global Financial Cri-
sis of 2007-2008: Is It Unprecedented?” NBER Working Paper 16589, December
18                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


2010.
   Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell. (1946). Measuring Business Cycles.
Studies in Business Cycles, no. 2. New York: NBER.
   Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena, (2008) ”Growth Dynamics: the
myth of recovery,” American Economic Review, vol. 98.1, pp. 439-457.
   Cole, Harold L. and Lee. E Ohanian, (2004) ”New Deal Policies and the Persis-
tence of the Great Depression: a general equilibrium analysis,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 112 (4) pp. 779-816.
   Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2008) ”Great Expectations and the End of the Depres-
sion,” American Economic Review, 90(4).
   Farlow, Stanley J., (1993)Partial Differential Equations for Scientists and En-
gineers, Dover Publications, Inc., New York.
   Fels, Rendig, (1959) American Business Cycles, 1865-1897,University of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
   Fisher, Jonas D. M., (2007) ”Why Does Household Investment Lead Business
Investment over the Business Cycle?” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 115, no.
1, pp. 141-169.
   Friedman, Milton (1969) ”The Monetary Studies of the National Bureau,”
Chapter 12 in The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays, Aldine Pub-
lishing Company, Chicago (Originally from The National Bureau Enters its 45th
year, annual report, 1964).
   Friedman, Milton , (1988), ”The ’Plucking Model’ of Business Fluctuations
Revisited,” Hoover Institution Working Paper in Economics, E-88-48.
   Gali, Jordi, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters, (2012) “Slow Recoveries: A
Structural Interpretation,” NBER Working Paper 18085.
   Gordon, Robert J., and Robert Krenn, (2010) “The End of the Great Depres-
sion 1939-41: policy contributions and fiscal multipliers,” NBER Working Paper
16380.
   Greider, William (1987) Secrets of the Temple: How the Federal Reserve runs
the country, Simon and Schuster, New York.
   Gourio, Francois, (2008) ”Disaster and Recoveries,” American Economic Re-
view, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 98.2, pp. 68-73.
   Hall, Robert E., (2011) ”The Long Slump” American Economic Review, vol.
101 no. 2, pp.431-469.
   Hall, Thomas E. and J. David Ferguson. (1998) The Great Depression: an
international disaster of perverse economic policies. Univeristy of Michagan Press,
Ann Arbor.
   Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan, ”Dissecting the Cycle: a methodological
investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 29, no. 2, March 2002, pp.
365-381.
   Henly, Samuel E. and Alexander L. Wolman, (2011)”Housing and the Great
Recession: a VAR accounting exercise,” Economic Quarterly, FRB Richmond,
97.1, pp. 45-66.
.   .                   DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                     19


  Hetzel, Robert L.(2008) The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve: A History.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  Jaffe, Dwight M., and Kenneth T. Rosen, (1979) “Mortgage Credit Availibiility
and Residential Construction,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 333-
76.
  Leamer,Edward E., 2007. ”Housing is the business cycle,” Proceedings, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 149-233
  Lopez-Salido, David and Edward Nelson, ”Postwar Financial Crises and Eco-
nomic Recoveries in the United States,” Working paper, May 21, 2010.
  Macroeconomic Advisors, ”The Shape of Things to Come,” MA Macro Focus,
April 27, 2009, vol. 4, no. 6.
  Meltzer, Allan H. (2003) A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
  Meltzer, Allan H. (2010) A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2 book 1:
1951-1969 University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
  Odell, Kerry, and Marc Weidenmier, (2004). “Real Shock, Monetary After-
shock: The 1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,” Journal of
Economic History, Vol. 64, 1002-1027.
  Owens, Raymond E.and Stacey L. Schreft (1995)“Identifying Credit Crunches,”
Contemporary Economic Policy, Volume 13, Issue 2, pages 63-76.
  Papell, David H., and Ruxandra Prodan (2011), “The Statistical Behavior of
GDP after Financial Crises and Severe Recessions,.
  Reinhart, Carmen S., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, (2009) This Time is Different:
Eight centuries of financial folly, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
  Romer, Christina D.(1992) ”What Ended the Great Depression?” The Journal
of Economic History, vol. 52 no. 4 pp. 757-784.
  Romer, Christina D. (1994) ”Remeasuring Business Cycles” The Journal of
Economic History,, vol. 54.3 pp. 573-609.
  Romer, Christina D and David H. Romer. (1994). ”Monetary Policy Matters.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (August): 75-88.
  Roubini, Nouriel, ”A Phantom Recovery?” Project Syndicate, 14 August 2009.
  Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, (2012) “Credit Booms Gone Bust:
monetary policy, leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008” American Eco-
nomic Review, 102(2) pp. 1029-1061.
  Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson,(2012) “Disentangling the Channels of
the 2007-2009 Recession,” NBER Working Paper 18094.
  White, Eugene N. ”Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and
Bust of the 1920s,” NBER Working Paper 15573 December 2009.
  Wynne, Mark A. and Nathan S. Balke,(1993) ”Recessions and Recoveries,”
Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Q1, 1993, pp. 1-17.
  Wynne, Mark A. and Nathan S. Balke, (1992)”Are Deep Recessions Followed
by Strong Recoveries?” Economics Letters, vol. 39, pp. 183-189.
20                           BORDO AND HAUBRICH


  Zarnowitz, Victor (1992), Business cycles: Theory, history, indicators, and fore-
casting University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
.   .                    DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                        21


                                  Data appendix

  Construction of the quarterly bank loan numbers. We started with the Annual
numbers for all commercial banks, Millenial statistics, table Cj253 “Commercial
Banks-number and assets.” Total Loans. After 1914Q4 these are made quarterly
by interpolation using RATS disaggregate (linear, ar1) procedure using Total
Loans for all member banks, from the Fed’s Banking and Monetary Statistics,
1914-1941 No. 18, All Member banks-Principal assets, “Loans” p. 72-74. The
data were pushed forward to 1955 Q4 using the data from Banking and Monetary
Statistics 1941-1970 table 2.1 All Member Banks A. Total assets and number of
bank loans. There were several missing quarters, which we interpolated using
No. 48, Weekly Reporting Banks in 101 Leading Cities-Principal Assets and
Liabilities, weekly and monthly.
  To go back further, we again began with the Millenial statistics, and interpo-
lated again, this time using national and state bank data. The national bank
data came from the NBER series, adding up NBER 14016, Loans and Discounts,
national banks, country districts, NBER 14018, Loans and discounts, national
banks, Reserve cities other than central, and NBER 14019, Loans and Discounts,
National Banks, Central Reserve cities. Some judgment was used to apportion
the data into quarters.
  Annual State bank data comes from Millenial Statistics, Cj151, State banks,
Loans and discounts. It was made quarterly by linear interpolation. The state and
national bank numbers were added together and used to interpolate the Millenial
statistics annual number. This let us interpolate from 1896 to 1913. Then we
attached the series for state and national banks, discounting by the ratio for that
series to the Millenial series in 1914. This gave us a series from 1882 to 1955.
Figure A1 shows the series.

           The Simple Analytics of the (literal) Plucking Model

   Friedman provides a simple intuitive description of the “plucking Model” of
business cycles, and one of us (Bordo) had the privledge of hearing him describe
it in class. This note describes some simple consequences for business cycle facts
obtained by taking the model literally.
   The standard way to model the motion of a vibrating string uses what is known
as the one-dimensional wave equation, a partial differential equation (PDE) of the
Hyperbolic type (Farlow, 1993, Lesson 16). This equation is

(B1)                               utt = a2 uxx ,

where u(x,t) denotes the position of the string as a function of horizontal position
and time.
  The equation also has boundary conditions. For the plucking model, these
naturally take the form of fixing the starting location (x = 0), the ending location
22                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH


(x = L), and the pluck point (x = P ), yielding

(B2)                               u(0, t) = y0
(B3)                              u(L, t) = yL
(B4)                             u(P, 0) = yP .


  Here L is the length of the business cycle, and pluck point should be expressed
as a fraction of L, so that

                                            P
(B5)                                   p=
                                            L
This of course is not fully generally–the end point need not be fully fixed, as it may
have an elastic connection, and it takes the length of the cycle as already known,
so that once the length of the contraction (time from the start to P) is known, the
length of the recovery (from P to L) is also known. Still, the simple formulation
provides a way to think about various slope relations between expansions and
contractions in a structured manner.

   Our interpretation given Friedman’s writings and teachings is that the initial,
static, shape of the string describes the time series of aggregate income. This
makes the analytics very simple, because the static equilibrium (before the string
is released) is easy to calculate. Since the string is not moving utt = 0 and
consequently uxx = 0, and the string position is piecewise linear, subject to the
boundary conditions. Assuming a downward pluck (since we are talking about a
contraction) we set:

(B6)                                 y0 = 0
(B7)                                yL ≥ y0
(B8)                                yP ≤ 0.


  This yields simple expressions for the slope of the business cycle segments. The
contraction slope is

                                          YP − Y0
(B9)                               SC =
                                            pL

And the expansion slope is

                                   E =    YL − YP
(B10)                             SC              .
                                           L−P
.    .                   DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                       23


    Then

                             ∂S C   (Y0 − YP )
(B11)                             =            > 0.
                              ∂p       pL2


                                 ∂S C    1
(B12)                                 =    > 0.
                                 ∂YP    pL

   As the contraction becomes longer (as a fraction of the cycle) the slope becomes
flatter (less negative). As the depth of the contraction decreases, the contraction
becomes more shallow.

                            ∂S E   L(YL − YP )
(B13)                            =             > 0.
                             ∂p    (1 − p)2 L2


                              ∂S E      −1
(B14)                              =          < 0.
                              ∂YP    (1 − p)L

As the contraction gets longer, the slope of the recovery gets steeper. As the
contraction gets deeper, the slope of the recovery gets steeper. This corresponds
to Friedman’s analysis.
24                         BORDO AND HAUBRICH




           Table 1: Output Change in Business Cycles, 1880-2011
                       Steepness                   RGDP             Percent
                                                   Change           change
               PEAK Contraction Recovery Cont              Rec      Cont    Rec
       March 1882 (I) 0.20%             0.40%      2.59    5.14     3.15%   6.25%
      March 1887 (II) -1.12%            0.77%      -3.36   2.32     -3.75%  2.70%
       July 1890 (III) -0.34%           4.42%      -1.03   13.27    -1.05%  13.72%
     January 1893 (I) -2.48%            3.44%      -12.38  17.21    -11.09% 17.33%
  December 1895 (IV) 0.28%              0.81%      1.67    4.86     1.41%   4.04%
       June 1899 (III) 0.58%            3.08%      2.92    15.39    2.10%   10.88%
 September 1902 (IV) 0.48%              4.48%      3.34    31.37    2.09%   19.23%
        May 1907 (II) -6.03%            5.89%      -24.13  23.54    -11.82% 13.08%
      January 1910(I) 0.52%             0.75%      7.71    11.55    3.61%   5.22%
     January 1913 (I) -2.77%            3.47%      -19.38  24.28    -8.33%  11.39%
    August 1918 (III) -11.93%           -21.83%    -23.86  -43.67 -8.34%    -16.66%
     January 1920 (I) -1.28%            5.55%      -7.66   33.28    -3.42%  15.39%
        May 1923 (II) 2.80%             2.46%      13.99   12.32    5.43%   4.54%
   October 1926 (III) -0.76%            5.37%      -3.78   26.84    -1.26%  9.08%
    August 1929 (III) -7.14%            6.26%      -99.95  87.64    -31.60% 40.51%
        May 1937 (II) -5.49%            6.88%      -21.96  27.52    -6.96%  9.37%
    February 1945 (I) -40.98%           -16.66%    -122.94 -49.97 -19.25% -9.69%
 November 1948 (IV) 0.96%               10.00%     3.86    40.02    0.81%   8.36%
        July 1953 (II) -3.99%           12.11%     -15.96  48.43    -2.53%  7.88%
    August 1957 (III) -7.32%            15.44%     -21.95  46.31    -3.15%  6.86%
       April 1960 (II) -1.35%           14.07%     -4.04   42.22    -0.54%  5.62%
  December 1969 (IV) -0.45%             12.63%     -1.80   50.50    -0.16%  4.45%
 November 1973 (IV) -8.40%              17.78%     -42.00  88.90    -3.18%  6.96%
     January 1980 (I) -17.55%           30.50%     -35.10  61.00    -2.23%  3.96%
       July 1981 (III) -8.48%           30.68%     -42.40  153.42 -2.64%    9.81%
       July 1990 (III) -14.55%          11.63%     -29.09  23.25    -1.36%  1.10%
       March 2001 (I) 7.31%             19.24%     21.92   57.71    0.73%   1.90%
  December 2007 (IV) -30.41%            25.53%     -182.49 153.21 -5.14%    4.55%
   Steepness is change divided by duration; Recoveries are measured by the
        duration of contraction after the trough; RGDP in 1972 dollars.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Bordo and Haubrich (2010), Gordon and
         Krenn (2010) Balke and Gordon (1986), and NIPA accounts.
.     .                     DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                       25


              Table 2 Descriptive Evidence on U.S. Recoveries 1880-2011
                           A. Pre-Federal Reserve 1880-1920
          Recessions with recoveries that are at least as rapid as the downturn
    Trough      Recovery              Major       Banking       Credit   Housing    Stock
                                      Recession   Crisis        Crunch   Bust       Crash
    1885(II)    1885(II)-1887(II)     No          Sept. 1884    Yes      No         Feb. 1884
     1888(I)    1888(I)-1890(III)     No          No            No       No         No
    1891(II)    1891(II)-1893(I)      No          Nov. 1890     No       No         Nov. 1890
    1891(II)    1894(II)-1895(IV)     Yes         May 1893      Yes      ?          May 1893
    1894(II)    1894(II)-1895(IV)     No          No            No       No         No
    1897(II)    1897(II)-1899(III)    No          No            No       No         No
    1900(IV)    1900(IV)-1902(IV)     No          No            No       No         Oct. 1903
    1908(II)    1908(II)-1910(I)      Yes         Oct. 1907     Yes      ?          Oct. 1907
    1911(IV)    1911 (IV)-1914(IV)    No          No            No       No         No
    1914(IV)    1914(IV)-1918(III)    No          Yes           No       ?          Fall 1917


           Recessions with recoveries that were slower than the downturn
    Trough   Recovery          Major       Banking Credit       Housing Stock
                               Recession Crisis       Crunch Bust        Crash
    1919(I) 1919(I)-1920(I) No             No         No        No       No
     Source: Bordo and Haubrich (2010), Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Shiller
                                       (2009)
                 ?-Shiller (2009) shows a drop in real house prices.


                                 B. Interwar 1920-1945
          Recessions with recoveries that are as least as rapid as the downturn
    Trough      Recovery              Major       Banking    Credit   Housing     Stock
                                      Recession   Crisis     Crunch   Bust        Crash
    1921(III)   1921(III)-1923(II)    Yes         No         No       ?           Fall 1920
    1924(III)   1924(III)-1926(III)   No          No         No       No          No
    1927(IV)    1927(IV)-1929(III)    No          No         No       Yes         No
    1938(II)    1938(II)-1945(I)      Yes         No         Yes      No          Feb 1937,
                                                                                  May 1940


           Recessions with Recoveries that   were slower than the downturn
    Trough Recovery            Major         Banking            Credit   Housing        Stock
                               Recession     Crisis             Crunch Bust             Crash
    1933(I) 1933(I)-1937(II) Yes             1930, 1931, 1933 Yes        Yes            Oct. 1929
26                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH




                               C. Postwar 1948-2011
        Recession with recoveries that are at least as rapid as the downturn
     Trough   Recovery              Major       Banking   Credit    Housing    Stock
                                    Recession   Crisis    Crunch    Bust       Crash
 1945(IV)     1945(IV)-1948(IV)     No          No        No        No         Sept. 1946
 1949(IV)     1949(IV)-1953(II)     No          No        No        No         No
 1954(II)     1954(II)-1957(III)    No          No        Yes       No         No
 1958(II)     1958(II)-1960(II)     No          No        Yes       No         No
 1961(II)     1961(II)-1969(IV)     No          No        Yes       No         Spring 1966
  1970(I)     1970(I)-1973(IV)      No          No        Yes       No         May 1970
  1975(I)     1975(I)-1980(I)       Yes         Yes       Yes       ?          Nov. 1973
 1980(III)    1980(III)-1981(III)   No          No        Yes       No         No
 1982(IV)     1982(IV)-1990(III)    Yes         Yes*      Yes       No         Aug. 1990
 2001(IV)     2001(IV)-2007(IV)     No          No        No        No         Spring 2001




         Recession with Recoveries that were slower than the downturn
 Trough Recovery              Major      Banking       Credit    Housing Stock
                              Recession Crisis         Crunch Bust       Crash
 1991(I) 1991(I)-2001(I) No              Yes*          Yes       ?       No
 2009(II) 2009(II)-?          Yes        Sept. 2008 Yes          Yes     Oct. 2008
  Source: Bordo and Haubrich (2010), Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Shiller
                                     (2009)
               ?-Shiller (2009) shows a drop in real house prices.
          -*Lopez-Salido and Nelson (2010) identify a banking crisis.
.    .                    DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                    27




    Table 3: Regressions of 4 quarter expansion growth on contraction amplitude
          Variable                All       No 29   Post-Fed Post WW2
          Constant            6.125*** 6.180*** 4.807***       5.589***
                               (0.925)     (0.770)   (1.135)     (0.125)
          CAmp                   0.111       0.076     0.079       0.599
                               (0.089)     (0.280)   (0.128)     (0.328)
          R2                     0.01        0.003     0.01        0.01
          N                        27          26       17          11
          Constant            6.434*** 6.434*** 5.658***       5.539***
                               (1.044)     (1.044)   (1.301)     (1.242)
          FinDum               -0.5864     -2.360*    -1.254      -0.404
                               (1.293)     (1.381)   (1.536)     (1.917)
          CAmp                  -0.565      -0.565    -0.510      0.756
                               (0.556)     (0.556)   (0.705)     (0.541)
          F inDum ∗ CAmp         0.796    1.219**      0.692      -0.816
                               (0.593)     (0.559)   (0.704)     (0.740)
          R2                     0.16         0.20     0.12        0.20
          Chow Test χ2 (2)        2.18      8.13**     1.574       2.605
          Sig level              0.34         0.02     0.46        0.27
                     HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                    *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
28                         BORDO AND HAUBRICH




 Table 4: Regressions of Duration expansion growth on contraction amplitude
       Variable                All       No 29   Post-Fed Post WW2
       Constant            5.982*** 7.059*** 3.765***       5.042***
                            (1.312)     (0.996)   (1.281)     (1.244)
       CAmp                0.740***       0.060  0.911***       0.310
                            (0.273)     (0.324)   (0.250)     (0.357)
       R2                     0.32        0.001     0.43        0.04
       N                       27           26       17          11
       Constant            7.229*** 7.229*** 6.281*** 5.159****
                            (1.875)     (1.090)   (1.026)     (1.251)
       FinDum               -3.663*      -2.251  -4.376**      -1.168
                            (2.246)     (1.820)   (1.776)     (2.538)
       CAmp                  -0.790      -0.790    -0.677      0.415
                            (0.573)     (0.573)   (0.738)     (0.488)
       F inDum ∗ CAmp 1.886*** 1.549**            1.893**       0.109
                            (0.552)     (0.603)   (0.735)     (0.849)
       R2                     0.51         0.23     0.67        0.06
       Chow Test χ2 (2) 15.51***        7.48**   11.95***       0.303
       Sig level              0.004        0.02     0.003       0.86
                  HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                 *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
.     .                    DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                     29




    Table 5: Regressions of 4 quarter expansion steepness on contraction steepness
          Variable                All       No 29    Post-Fed Post WW2
          Constant           1.810*** 1.801*** 1.744***          1.385***
                               (0.232)     (0.227)    (0.320)     (0.303)
          Cstp                  -0.259      -0.324     -0.602      0.140
                               (0.441)     (0.450)    (0.494)     (0.325)
          R2                     0.05        0.07       0.24        0.01
          N                       27          26         17          11
          Constant           1.833*** 1.833*** 1.713***          1.430***
                               (0.252)     (0.252)    (0.363)     (0.310)
          FinDum             -0.906*** -0.916*** -0.923*         2.096***
                               (0.298)     (0.300)    (0.473)     (0.593)
          Cstp                -0.776**    -0.776** -0.771**        0.366
                               (0.346)     (0.346)    (0.390)     (0.453)
          F inDum ∗ Cstp      1.585*** 1.617*** 1.487*** -3.787***
                               (0.368)     (0.366)    (0.405)     (0.764)
          R 2                    0.42        0.41       0.39        0.30
          Chow Test χ2 (2) 22.77*** 23.48*** 13.52***              25.61
          Sig level              0.000       0.000      0.001      0.000
                     HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                    *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
30                          BORDO AND HAUBRICH




 Table 6: Regressions of Duration expansion steepness on contraction steepness
      Variable               All        No 29    Post-Fed Post WW2
      Constant           1.939***     1.923***   2.151***    1.372***
                          (0.312)      (0.302)    (0.444)      (0.280)
      Cstp                 -0.663      -0.7832     -1.349       0.287
                          (0.762)      (0.777)    (0.836)      (0.263)
      R2                    0.12         0.13       0.38        0.04
      N                      27           26         17           11
      Constant           1.965***     1.965***   2.068***    1.467***
                          (0.361)      (0.361)    (0.487)      (0.269)
      FinDum            -1.3741*** -1.371*** -1.513***       2.126***
                          (0.381)      (0.382)    (0.540)      (0.717)
      Cstp               -1.475**     -1.475**   -1.652**     0.655**
                          (0.627)      (0.627)    (0.641)     (0.3050)
      F inDum ∗ Cstp     2.475***     2.468***   2.616***    -4.253***
                          (0.639)      (0.643)    (0.649)      (1.037)
      R 2                   0.48         0.47       0.54        0.56
      Chow Test χ2 (2) 123.45*** 22.972*** 17.615***            38.90
      Sig level             0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
                 HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
.    .                   DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                    31




    Table 7: Regressions of Duration expansion growth on contraction amplitude
                              and RNR crises severity
         Variable                All       No 29   Post-Fed Post WW2
         Constant            5.983*** 7.059*** 3.765***         5.042***
                              (1.312)     (0.996)   (1.281)      (1.244)
         CAmp                0.740***       0.060  0.911***       0.310
                              (0.273)     (0.324)   (0.250)      (0.357)
         R2                     0.32        0.001     0.43         0.04
         N                       27          26        17           11
         Constant            6.839*** 7.207*** 6.215***         4.811***
                              (1.144)     (1.098)   (1.036)      (1.388)
         FinDum                 1.708      -0.755     0.111       0.764
                              (2.703)     (1.884)   (2.305)      (2.109)
         CAmp                  -0.382      -0.767    -0.640       0.761
                              (0.462)     (0.566)   (0.727)    (0.60605)
         RnRDum ∗ CAmp 0.103*** 0.316*** 0.123**                -0.227**
                              (0.031)     (0.122)   (0.048)      (0.124)
         R2                     0.55        0.23      0.66         0.14
                      2
         Chow Test χ (2)     18.23***      7.86**  13.70***        4.43
         Sig level              0.000       0.020     0.001       0.109
                    HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                   *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
32                          BORDO AND HAUBRICH




 Table 8: Regressions of expansion on contraction depth, controlling for change
                   in stock price, and bank loans 1887-2007
      Variable          All(4Q) No 29 (4Q) All (Dur) no 29 (dur)
      Constant          2.928***      3.013**        1.992   2.607**
                         (1.073)      (0.992)      (1.603)    (1.043)
      CAmp                 0.122        0.017      0.569**      0.035
                         (0.209)      (0.305)      (0.285)    (0.337)
      Loan                 0.219      0.284**        0.092   0.447***
                         (0.153)      (0.128)      (0.137)    (0.011)
      Stock              0.166**      0.154**      0.242**    0.114**
                         (0.078)      (0.068)      (0.098)    (0.055)
      R2                   0.17         0.17          0.44      0.26
      N                      26          25            26        25
      Constant             3.206     3.563***     3.723***    3.031**
                         (1.084)      (1.168)      (1.206)    (1.252)
      FinDum              -0.400       -2.908    -5.158***     -1.025
                         (1.112)      (1.793)      (1.746)    (1.762)
      CAmp                -0.535       -0.535       -0.719     -0.652
                         (0.567)      (0.557)      (0.588)    (0.573)
      F inDum ∗ CAmp       0.853      1.219**     1.909***    1.243**
                         (0.558)      (0.573)      (0.560)    (0.532)
      Loan              0.307***        0.200     0.199***   0.361***
                         (0.093)      (0.131)      (0.071)    (0.110)
      Stock             0.127***     0.143***     0.146***   0.108***
                         (0.041)      (0.042)      (0.044)    (0.041)
      R2                   0.32         0.33          0.68      0.41
                  2
      Chow Test χ (2)       2.35        5.45*     18.48***      5.62*
      Sig level            0.309        0.066        0.000      0.060
                 HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
.   .                   DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                      33




Table 9: Regressions of expansion on contraction depth, stock price, bank loans,
               risk spread, and residential investment 1920-2007
                 Variable
                 Constant   5.016***     3.851**    3.574***
                             (1.238)      (1.573)     (1.337)
                 CAmp       -1.051***   -1.104***   -0.914***
                             (0.064)      (0.223)     (0.115)
                 Spread                    2.194    -2.970***
                                          (1.400)     (0.856)
                 Stock                  14.029***   14.873***
                                          (5.242)     (4.311)
                 Loan                      6.333       1.677
                                         (17.866)    (12.669)
                 ResInv                              7.616***
                                                      (2.247)
                 N               16         16           16
                 R2            0.84        0.91         0.93
                  HAC robust standard errors in parentheses
                 *,**,***-Significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level
                           34                                          BORDO AND HAUBRICH

 Business Cycle Peak: March 1882                                                    Business Cycle Peak: March 1887
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                   Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
113                                                                                101


111
                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                         Trough
109
                                                   Trough
                                                                                    99
107


105
                                                                                    98

103
                                                                                    97
101


 99                                                                                 96
      0      2    4    6       8       10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26                        0           1           2           3       4           5           6        7       8
                           Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                 Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: July 1890                                                     Business Cycle Peak: January 1893
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                   Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
114                                                                                105

112                                                                                103
                                                   Trough
                                                                                                                                         Trough
                                                                                   101
110
                                                                                    99
108
                                                                                    97
106
                                                                                    95
104
                                                                                    93
102
                                                                                    91

100                                                                                 89

 98                                                                                 87
      0            1               2           3            4           5     6          0       1           2       3           4   5       6           7       8        9   10
                           Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                 Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: December 1895                                                 Business Cycle Peak: June 1899
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                   Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
108                                                                                119

                                                                                   117
106
                                                                                   115
104
                                                                                   113
102
                                                                                   111

100                                                                                109

                                                                                   107
 98                                                                                                                                      Trough
                                                   Trough
                                                                                   105
 96
                                                                                   103
 94
                                                                                   101

 92                                                                                 99
      0      1     2    3          4    5      6      7     8      9    10 11 12         0      1        2       3       4       5   6      7        8       9       10 11 12
                           Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                 Quarters since peak of business cycle
                                                           DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                                                           35

 Business Cycle Peak: September 1902                                              Business Cycle Peak: May 1907
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                 Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
122                                                                              101


                                                                                  99
118
                                                                                                                                      Trough
                                                  Trough                          97
114

                                                                                  95
110
                                                                                  93

106
                                                                                  91

102
                                                                                  89


 98                                                                               87
      0      1   2    3       4   5     6     7     8      9 10 11 12 13 14            0          1           2           3       4          5        6     7    8
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                               Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: January 1910                                                Business Cycle Peak: January 1913
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                 Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
110                                                                              103

                                                  Trough
108                                                                              101


106                                                                               99
                                                                                                                                      Trough


104                                                                               97


102                                                                               95


100                                                                               93


 98                                                                               91
      0          2            4         6           8         10       12   14         0      1   2       3       4       5   6   7     8      9 10 11 12 13 14
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                               Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: August 1918                                                 Business Cycle Peak: January 1920
          Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                 Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
                                                                                 112
 99
                                                                                 108
 95                                                                                                                                   Trough
                                                                                 104

 91
                                                                                 100

 87
                                                                                  96

 83                                                                               92
                                                  Trough

 79                                                                               88


 75                                                                               84
      0                   1                   2                    3        4          0      1       2       3       4       5   6      7       8    9    10 11 12
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                               Quarters since peak of business cycle
                               36                                      BORDO AND HAUBRICH

 Business Cycle Peak: May 1923                                                           Business Cycle Peak: October 1926
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                        Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
112                                                                                     108

110
                                                                                        106
108
                                                      Trough                                                                          Trough
                                                                                        104
106

104                                                                                     102

102
                                                                                        100
100
                                                                                         98
 98

 96                                                                                      96
      0       1           2      3       4        5       6        7   8       9   10         0   1       2       3        4      5       6       7       8       9   10
                              Quarters since peak of business cycle                                           Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: August 1929                                                        Business Cycle Peak: May 1937
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                        Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
102                                                                                     102

 97                                                                                     100

 92
                                                                                         98
                                                      Trough                                                                          Trough
 87
                                                                                         96
 82
                                                                                         94
 77
                                                                                         92
 72

 67                                                                                      90


 62                                                                                      88
      0   2       4       6     8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28                               0       1       2        3          4           5       6       7       8
                              Quarters since peak of business cycle                                           Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: February 1945                                                      Business Cycle Peak: November 1948
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                        Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
                                                                                        111
100
                                                                                        109
 95
                                                                                        107
                                                                                                                                      Trough
 90                                                                                     105
                                                      Trough

 85                                                                                     103

                                                                                        101
 80
                                                                                         99
 75
                                                                                         97

 70                                                                                      95
      0               1              2            3            4           5       6          0       1       2        3          4           5       6       7       8
                              Quarters since peak of business cycle                                           Quarters since peak of business cycle
                                                           DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                                                                37

 Business Cycle Peak: July 1953                                                                 Business Cycle Peak: August 1957
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                               Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
106                                                                                            104

105                                                                                            103

104                                                                                                                                        Trough
                                                                                               102
                                                  Trough
103
                                                                                               101
102
                                                                                               100
101
                                                                                                99
100
                                                                                                98
 99

 98                                                                                             97

 97                                                                                             96
      0       1           2           3       4           5           6           7       8          0         1         2             3             4          5       6
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                    Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: April 1960                                                                Business Cycle Peak: December 1969
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                               Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
106                                                                                            105

105
                                                                                               104
                                                  Trough
104
                                                                                                                                           Trough
                                                                                               103
103

102                                                                                            102

101
                                                                                               101
100
                                                                                               100
 99

 98                                                                                             99
      0           1               2           3               4               5           6          0     1       2         3         4         5         6        7   8
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                    Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: November 1973                                                             Business Cycle Peak: January 1980
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                               Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
104                                                                                            102

103
                                                                                               101
102                                                                                                                                        Trough

                                                  Trough
101
                                                                                               100

100

                                                                                                99
 99

 98
                                                                                                98
 97

 96                                                                                             97
      0   1           2       3           4   5       6           7       8           9   10         0             1                   2                   3            4
                          Quarters since peak of business cycle                                                    Quarters since peak of business cycle
                                  38                            BORDO AND HAUBRICH

 Business Cycle Peak: July 1981                                                   Business Cycle Peak: July 1990
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                     Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
108                                                                              101


106


104                                                                              100
                                               Trough
                                                                                                                                 Trough
102


100                                                                               99


 98


 96                                                                               98
      0   1        2      3       4        5       6        7   8       9   10         0                 1                   2                   3         4
                       Quarters since peak of business cycle                                             Quarters since peak of business cycle



 Business Cycle Peak: March 2001                                                  Business Cycle Peak: December 2007
      Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)                                     Gross Domestic Product (Business Cycle Peak=100)
103                                                                              101


                                                                                 100

102
                                               Trough                             99

                                                                                                                                 Trough
                                                                                  98
101
                                                                                  97


                                                                                  96
100

                                                                                  95


 99                                                                               94
      0        1              2            3            4           5       6          0      1     2    3     4      5      6      7     8      9   10 11 12
                       Quarters since peak of business cycle                                             Quarters since peak of business cycle
38                                                                                            DEEP RECESSIONS,
                                                                                                    BORDO ANDFAST RECOVERIES
                                                                                                               HAUBRICH                             39




                                                                                     Four-quarter Growth Against Contraction
                                                                                                     Depth
                                        Recovery Strength (%-change in RGDP since



                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                         0.15                        y = 0.1112x + 0.0613
                                                                                                                          R² = 0.0206
                                                                                          0.1
                                                       the Trough




                                                                                         0.05

                                                                                              0
                                                                    -0.1                          0         0.1            0.2              0.3      0.4
                                                                                        -0.05

                                                                                         -0.1

                                                                                        -0.15

                                                                                         -0.2
                                                                                         Contraction Amplitude (%-change in RGDP, Peak to Trough)




                                                                                    Expansion Growth at Contraction Duration,
                                                                                         Against Contraction Amplitude
                                                                                       0.5
       Recovery Strength (%-change over Trough)




                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                           y = 0.7397x + 0.0598
                                                                                       0.3                      R² = 0.3248


                                                                                       0.2

                                                                                       0.1

                                                                                         0
                                                  -0.1                                        0           0.1             0.2               0.3      0.4
                                                                                       -0.1

                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                       Contraction Amplitude (%-change in RGDP, Peak to Trough)



Figure 2: Expansion growth: all cycles.
     40                                           BORDO AND HAUBRICH
                                            DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                                           39



                                    Recovery Strength Against Contraction
                                           Duration, Crisis Cycles

                                 0.4                                      y = 1.1347x + 0.0259
                                                                               R² = 0.9209
                                 0.3
             Recovery Strength




                                 0.2

                                 0.1

                                   0
                    -0.05               0     0.05      0.1            0.15          0.2       0.25     0.3     0.35
                                 -0.1

                                 -0.2
                                                        Contraction Amplitude



                                    Recovery Strength Against Contraction
                                         Duration, Noncrisis Cycles

                                                             0.4

                                                                                     y = -0.7836x + 0.0802
                                                             0.3
                                                                                           R² = 0.1414
          Recovery Strength




                                                             0.2

                                                             0.1

                                                              0
                    -0.08          -0.06    -0.04    -0.02         0          0.02      0.04     0.06    0.08    0.1
                                                         -0.1

                                                         -0.2
                                                        Contraction Amplitude



Figure 3: Crisis and Non-Crisis Cycles.
40                                                  DEEP RECESSIONS,
                                                           BORDO AND FAST RECOVERIES
                                                                       HAUBRICH                          41



                                       Severity of Recession and Strength of Recovery,
                                           BLL Crisis and Post-WW2 Contractions

                                             0.45

                                              0.4         recovery                       y = 1.0331x + 0.0478
  Recovery (duration after Trough)




                                             0.35         Linear (recovery)                   R² = 0.8375

                                              0.3

                                             0.25

                                              0.2

                                             0.15

                                              0.1

                                             0.05

                                               0
                  -0.1               -0.05          0    0.05        0.1      0.15      0.2     0.25      0.3   0.35
                                                                contraction amplitude


Figure 4: Post World War two contractions and Bordo Landon-Lane contractions
      42                              BORDO AND HAUBRICH
                               DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES                                   41



                                      dur recovery fitted to drop
           50
                                                                                  GUD
                                                                                  FITTED

           40


           30


           20


           10


            0


           -10
                 1920          1940          1960          1980          2000              2020




                            Dur recovery fitted to drop, spread, stock, loan
           50
                                                                                  GUD
                                                                                  FITTED

           40


           30


           20


           10


            0


           -10
                 1920          1940          1960          1980          2000              2020




                   Dur recovery drop, spread, stock, loan and residential investment
           50
                                                                                  GUD
                                                                                  FITTED

           40


           30


           20


           10


             0


           -10
                 1920          1940          1960          1980          2000          2020




Figure 5: Actual and Fitted Values, Duration Recovery
42                       DEEP RECESSIONS, FAST RECOVERIES
                              BORDO AND HAUBRICH                  43




        10000000

         1000000
                                 loans, millions
          100000

           10000

            1000

             100

              10

               1
                   0       100        200    300   400      500   600


Figure A1: Bank Lending, on a log scale.
