NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOB DURATION, SENIORITY, AND EARNINGS

Katherine G. Abraham
Henry S. Farber

Working Paper No. 1819

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

The authors thank Joe Altonji for providing us with the data used
in this study, Jim Powell for providing valuable econometric
advice, and Leslie Sundt for providing able research assistance in
preparing the data for analysis. Useful comments on an earlier
version of this paper were received from participants in workshops
at the University of Chicago, the University of Illinois, the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of Iowa,
Columbia University and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Farber received support from the National Science Foundation. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the trustees, officers or staff members of the institutions with which they are affiliated. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1819
January 1986

Job

Duration, Seniority, and Earnings
ABSTRACT

The stylized fact that seniority and earnings in a cross-section are
positively related, even after controlling for total labor market experience,

has served as the basis for theoretical analyses of implicit labor contracts
suggesting that workers post bonds in the form of deferred compensation in

order to ensure their continued performance at an adequate level. An
alternative interpretation is that good workers or workers in good jobs or
good matches both earn more throughout the job and have longer job durations.

Another stylized fact, that labor market experience and earnings in a cross
section are positively related, has been taken as evidence of the importance

of general human capital accumulation. An alternative interpretation of this
evidence is that workers with more experience have had more time to find good
jobs and/or good matches, resulting in higher earnings.
Earnings functions are estimated including a measure of the completed
duration of jobs in order to distinguish between the competing hypotheses

regarding both seniority and experience. These yield three main results.
First, workers in longer jobs earn significantly more in every year of the job

than do workers in shorter jobs. Second, controlling for completed job
duration eliminates most of the apparent return to seniority found in standard

cross—section models. Thus, it appears that implicit contracts that provide
for workers posting bonds through deferred wage payments are less important

than has been believed. Third, for blue collar workers there is evidence that
a part of the small observed (cross—sectional) return to labor market

experience is due to sorting of workers into better jobs over time. There is
no evidence of sorting for white collar workers.

Katharine G. Abraham

The Brookings Institution

1778 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036

Henry S. Farber
Departnent of Economics E52-252F

Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cairbri&ie, MP 02139

1

"It is better to know nothing than to know what ain't so,"
— Josh
Billings, Proverb [1874]

I.

Introduction and Theoretical Background

An important stylized fact of the labor market is that workers with
longer seniority have higher earnings even after controlling for total labor

market experience. The empirical support for this stylized fact is that
standard earnings functions estimated using cross—section data produce

significant positive seniority coefficients even when a measure of total labor
market experience is also included in the regression.

The standard explanations for this positive correlation posit the
existence of implicit employment contracts under which earnings grow with time
on the job in order to provide workers with appropriate incentives regarding

turnover and/or effort. For examp1e, if a job involves investment in firm—
specific training then it may be optimal for workers and employers to
structure implicit employment agreements such that compensation is deferred
until late in the job so that workers will not quit (taking their specific

capital with them)) In effect, the worker is posting a bond to ensure
continued employment. Another possible motivation for such a deferral

arrangement exists where effort is important. Having the worker post a bond
through a deferral of compensation provides the worker with an incentive to

exert the appropriate level of effort on the job. A worker who left or whose
performance fell below agreed—upon standards and in consequence was fired

1. See Becker (1964) and Mincer (1974) for discussions of investment in
firm specific training. Mincer and Jovanovic (1981) present an an analysis of
the relationships among seniority, mobility, and earnings that relies on
investment in specific human capital.

2

would lose the bond that he or she had posted under a deferred wage contract.2
The firm-specific human capital explanation and incentive wage deferral
explanations differ in their implications regarding the relationship between
earnings and productivity growth over the work life.3 However, they share the
implication not only that the seniority earnings profile will be upward
sloping but that there will also be a positive return to seniority even after
controlling for total labor nu.rket experience, in other words, the theories

in;ly that seniority produces earnings growth in excess of the earnings groch
associated with labor market experience.

As stated above, the empirical support for these views of the labor
market rests entirely on cross—sectional earnings function estimates.
However, the positive cross—sectional association between seniority and

earnings does not in fact imply that earnings rise with seniority. An
alternative interpretation of the cross—sectional evidence is that workers who

have been on their jobs for a long time started out earning more. In this
case, despite the fact that earnings are fixed over the course of a job, a
standard earnings function regression will yield a positive seniority
coefficient.

It is in fact reasonable to suspect that the cross—sectional evidence is

contaminated in this way. Some workers may be both more stable and more
productive than others.4 Some employers may choose to pay higher wages than

2. See Viscusi (1980), Becker and Stigler (1974) and Lazear (1979) for
models in which wage deferral provides this sort of incentive for workers.
3. Medoff and Abraham (1980, 1981) and Abraham and Medoff (1982) offer
evidence on the relationship between seniority-related earnings growth and
seniority—related productivity growth.
4. Indeed, to the extent that there are turnover and training costs,
stability p se can raise an employee's value to the firm.

3

others, so that workers are unlikely to leave them.5 Finally, some worker/job
matches may be better than others, in the sense that the worker is more
productive In those Matches than in other possible matches, so that the match

is less likely to be broken off.6 It Is quite plausible, then, that high
quality workers, jobs, and matches will be associated with both higher wages

and longer job duration. To the extent that worker, job, and/or match quality
are unmeasured, they represent omitted variables In a cross—section earnings

regression. Since those spells in any cross—sectjon sample of spells in
progress that have long durations to date are more likely to be spells that
will ultimately last a long time (so that seniority will be positively
correlated with completed job duration) and completed job duration Is
positively correlated with any omitted worker, job, and/or match quality

measures, seniority In a cross—section will also be positively correlated with
these omitted quality measures. The result is an upward bias in the estimated
seniority coefficient in cross—section earnings functions.

A primary goal of the empirical analysis in this study is to distinguish
between the competing hypotheses regarding the relationships among job
seniority, completed job duration, and earnings that imply a positive cross—

sectional relationship between seniority and earnings. The results of this
analysis shed light on the various theoretical models that have been adduced
to explain the pattern of earnings over the worklife.

A second and related stylized fact of the labor market is that in a

5. The efficiency wage literature suggests various possible reasons why
some employers mlght pay higher wages than others to workers of equal quality.
These include differences in the costs of turnover, differences in the costs
of monitoring worker shirking, and differences in the value of worker loyalty.
Shapiro and StiglItz (1984) and Bulow and Summers (1985) present formal
efficiency wage models; Yellen (1984) and Stiglitz (1984) survey the
literature.
6. Jovanovic (1979) presents a theoretical analysis of the effects of
heterogeneous match quality.

4

cross—section of individuals, workers with more total years of labor market

experience have higher earnings. The standard explanation for this positive
association is that general labor market experience raises workers' on—the--job

productivity, which translates into higher earnings (Becker, 1964; Mincer,

1974; crown, 1983). An alternative view of the positive association between
experience and earnings stresses the fact that those with more experience have

had more time to find a good job and/or a good match.7 If sorting into better
jobs and/or better matches over time is an empirically important phenomenon,
it could lead to a strong positive association between experience and earnings
even in the absence of any experience—related growth in productivity.

Note that If sorting over time of workers into better jobs is an
important phenomenon, then there ought to be a positive correlation between
labor market experience at the start of a job and completed duration of the

job. In order to make this clear, consider a simple model where workers
sample at set intervals from a stable wage offer distribution. Workers change
jobs when the wage associated with the latest draw from the wage offer

distribution exceeds their current wage. It Is straightforward to show that,
as time goes by and workers are In successively higher paying jobs, the
probability of receiving an offer that dominates the best offer to date will

fall. The result will be a positive relationship between initial experience
and job duration.

On the basis of these arguments, another goal of the empirical analysis
Is to distinguish between the competing hypotheses regarding the relationships
among experience, job duration, and earnings that imply a positive cross—

sectiona1 relationship between experience and earnings. This analysis will

7. This argument was pointed out to us by Robert Topel. See Burdett
(1978) and Jovanovic (1979).

5

shed light on the extent to which there is support for the general human
capital accumulation theory as opposed to the job sorting theory.8
An intuitively appealing approach to dealing with bias in the estimated
return to seniority in the cross—section is to control for the completed

length of the job in the earnings equation.9 After all, by the argument given
above, the seniority coefficient is biased only because seniority is
correlated with job duration, which in turn is correlated with omitted worker,

job and/or match quality. Section II develops a simple stochastic model of
earnings determination that provides a basis for this approach. Moreover, if
completed job duration Is a proxy —— even an imperfect proxy ——

for

job and/or

match quality and more experienced workers do sort themselves into better jobs
and/or better matches, one might expect that controlling for completed job
duration in the earnings equation should remove at least part of the positive

search component in the estimated return to labor market experience. The
model contained In section II provides a more formal basis for this intuition
as well.

In section III we construct a completed job duration measure for use in
cross—section earnings equations, using a pooled time—series cross—section
sample of nonunion males from the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID). The analysis requires a panel data set, since information on how long

people end up staying on their jobs is needed. While not all of the jobs we
observe end during the period over which the panel is followed, there is some

information available on ultimate durations of all jobs. Even for jobs still
in progress at the end of the sample period, we know that completed job

8. Our results also have implications for a third model of the return to
experience presented in a recent paper, Harris and Hoinstrom (1982).
9. Altonji and Shakotko (1985) address the issue of bias in cross—section
estimates of the return to seniority empirically, using an instrumental
variables approach.

6

duration is at least as long as the last observed tenure on the job. This
information is used to predict the completed duration of these matches in the
context of a parametric model of job duration estimated separately for

nonunion professional, technical and managerial employees and for nonunion
blue collar employees; results for a nonunion sample spanning all occupations

are presented for comparison purposes. One interesting finding emerging from
this piece of the analysis Is that additional prior experience increases the
expected length of a new blue collar job, but not the expected length of a new
professional, technical or managerial job.

In section IV we augment standard earnings functions with our job

duration measure. Because there Is reason to think that the wage
determination process operates differently for workers in different labor
market segments, these earnings equations are estimated separately for
nonunion professional, technical and managerial employees and for nonunion

blue collar workers. Results for a nonunion sample spanning all occupations
are again presented primarily f or comparison purposes. Three issues are

addressed with these estimates. The first issue Is the extent to which
earnings are higher in jobs that end up lasting longer. Our results on this
issue are quite straightforward: workers who are in long jobs earn higher pay

in every year on the job. The second issue is the relative importance of the
"direct" effects of seniority versus omitted person, job and/or match quality
in producing the observed cross—sectional positive correlation between

seniority and earnings. We find that most of the apparent cross-section
return to seniority reflects omitted variable bias. The final issue is the
extent to which the observed positive correlation between experience and
earnings reflects the sorting of' more experienced workers into better jobs

and/or better matches. Our results suggest that more experienced blue collar
workers earn more in part because they are in better jobs and/or better

7

matches. There is no evidence of such sorting for professional, technical,
and managerial workers.

Section V contains an overview of the results and offers a few
concluding observations.

II. Completed Job Duration in the Earnings Function
We turn now to a simple model of the relationships among current job
tenure, pre—job experience, individual—, job— and match—specific earnings

components, and completed job duration. This model Illustrates two major
points. First, under the assumptions of the model, the estimated return to
tenure In standard cross—section earnings equations is biased upwards and the
estimated return to experience reflects both returns to experience

se and

returns to search. Second, again under the assumptions of the model,
controlling for completed job duration eliminates the bias In the estimated
return to seniority and removes part of the search component in the estimated
return to experience.10
Suppose that the earnings of a particular worker on a particular job at
a point in time can be written:
(1)

lnW1 =

S1

÷ 2EXP1J +

'11j

+

where
W =

hourly

S =

current

EXP =

pre—job experience,

=

earnings,

seniority (tenure),

a person/job specific error term representing the excess

of earnings enjoyed by this person on this job over and

10. A more detailed derivation of the results reported in this section of
the paper can be found in Appendix A.

8

above the earnings that could be expected by a randomly
selected person/job combination,

is

=

index of individuals,

i =
j

a person/job/time—period specific error term,

index of jobs,

=

index of years within jobs, and

t =
=

parameters of interest.

For simplicity of exposition, other factors that might Influence earnings are
omitted from the theoretical discussion and all variables are assumed to be
measured as deviations from their means. In this formulation, liii captures

the net influence of three unobservables on hourly earnings: unobserved
person quality, unobserved job quality and unobserved match quality.11 The
error p.. is assumed to be fixed over the course of a job and may be

correlated with S and EXP. The error

is assumed to be orthogonal to S,

EXP and p.

In practice, earnings functions are generally estimated using cross—

section data and

is not observable. The earnings function contained in

equation (1) as ordinarily implemented in a cross—section can be rewritten as
(2)

lnW

+ 2EXP1 + vet.

The error term (v..) is defined in terms of the underlying stochastic
structure as
(3)

v1 P1j +

Thus, the person/job specific component of the error (j..)

is

omitted from the

equation. Note that there is only a single cross—sectional observation on any
individual i or job j

in a

cross-section.

11. A brief discussion of a more general model that allows for separate
person and job/match components is presented below in the text; a more
detailed discussion can be found in Appendix A.

9

How does omitting j., from equation (2) affect the estimated values of

and 2 This depends on the correlations between p., and the variables
S.. and EXP1,. As was argued above, good workers or workers in good jobs or
good matches are likely both to stay on the job longer and to earn more money.
In a cross—section of workers, those with high current seniority are more

likely to be in long jobs, so that observed senirity and completed job
duration will be positively correlated; there will thus be a positive

correlation between observed seniority and p... One would therefore expect
estimated from ecruation (2) to be an upward biased estimate of

.

In

addition, because those workers with more pre-job experience have had more
chances to find a good job or good match and because good jobs or good matches
are likely to pay higher wages, there will be a positive correlation in a
cross—section between j

.

and

ij

EXP. ..

13

This means that

2

estimated from

equation (2) is likely to be an upward biased estimate of 2' the returns to

experience pse.
These potential biases can be stated more precisely. Suppose that the
completed duration of jobs is positively correlated with p.. so that the
following relationship holds:
(4) D. .
13

= Y.

+ .

ij

13

where D., is the completed length of the current job, p.. is as defined above,
'

is

a parameter which summarizes the relationship between D and p, and E.

captures the variation in completed job duration that cannot be linked to the
earnings advantage associated with worker, job and/or match quality.

Suppose

further that workers with more pre—job experience are likely to have found

better jobs and/or better matches. One simple approximation to such a
relationship is
(5) p. . = aEXP,
13

.

13

+ $.
13

10
where ji and EX? are as defined above, a Is a parameter that summarizes the
relationship between ji and EXP and 4.. is the variation in jt not

systematically related to EXP.12 e assume that pre—job experience is not
correlated with completed job duration except insofar as more experienced

workers are more likely to have found a good job and/or a good match, so that

E(EXP..*z) Is zero.13 If each year of any given job is equally likely to be
represented in the cross—section samp1e of observations used to estimate the
earnings function, then on average the observed seniority on the job will be

halfway through the job. More formally,

1/2

(6)

E(Sjjt) =

(7)

S1 = 1/2 D. + ijt'

and

where

Is a random variable with zero mean. The distribution of

will

vary depending upon the completed length of the job. However, its mean is

always zero, as Is cov(J.11jj.) cov(Dj.jjt) and cov(EXPijt..t).
Applying the standard bias formula to the seniority coefficient in equation
(2) estimated from cross-sectional data and simplifying yields

(8) E(1)_1=(l/2)*(l/DET1)*Y*var(EXP1)*var(41)
which is positive provided y (the coefficient summarizing the relationship
between D and i) is positive.

The expected value of the pre—job experience coefficient in equation (2)

estimated from cross—sectional data exceeds 2' the return to experience p
se. The difference between the two Is

12. It should be emphasized that equations (4) and (5) are not structural
equations but simply summarize the relationships expected in cross-section
data.

13. The consequences of relaxing this assumption are discussed briefly at

11

(9) E(2)_2=(1/DET1)*
ta*var(EXP1j)*(var(Sijt) —

l/4*var(D1)

+

l/4*var(E1)}].

which is also positive so long as a (the coefficient summarizing the

relationship between EXP1J and p) is positive.
An Intuitively appealing approach to removing the just—noted upward

biases is to control explicitly for the completed length of jobs. After all,
the tenure coefficient in equation (2) is biased only because S1 is
associated with

indirectly through U1.. Moreover, equation (4) suggests

that D11 may be useful more generally as a proxy for

j.,

so that Introducing

D1 into the earnings equation might remove at least part of the search
component In the experience coefficient estimated from a cross—section.
as an explanatory variable in a cross—

Augmenting equation (2) by adding

section yields the following specification:

(10) lnW1 =
where

€,

Is

ijt

+

2EXP.1

+

+

the estimating equation error. Using the relationships in

equations (3) and (4), this error is
(11)

=

_(l/y)*E

+

1ijt

How does introducing D.. into the earnings equation affect the estimated

tenure and experience coefficients? The bias in the tenure coefficient in the
augmented equation (10) model estimated using a cross—section can be shown to
equal zero. intuitively, even though completed job duration (U1.) is an

imperfect proxy for the omitted job/person/match quality variable ()

in

equation (2), seniority (S±jt) is correlated with ij only through its
correlation with D. ., so that controlling for- D. .
13
13

estimated

eliminates

the bias in the

tenure coefficient.

The difference between the experience coefficient in the augmented

the end of this section and in greater detail in Appendix A.

12

equation (10) Model estimated using a cross—section and 2 equals

(12) E(2)_2=(l/DET2)*a*var(EXPjj)*var(jj)*{var(sljt)_1/4*var(Djj)}.
This is still positive so long as a is positive, though comparison of equation
(12) against equation (9) reveals that introducing

into the earnings

equation reduces the difference. Note that the expected value of the search

component in 2 falls to zero as var(.) falls to zero, that is, as

D.

becomes a better proxy for p...

There are at least two obvious ways in which the model presented here

might be generalized. First, one might believe that more experienced (older)
workers are simply more stable than less experienced (younger) workers and
allow experience to have a direct positive relationship with completed job
duration that is not reflected in higher earnings once experience is

controlled for. In more formal terms, the expected value of

EXP1*c1 could

be positive. This generalization In no way affects our conclusions concerning
the seniority coefficient; the standard cross—section estimate of

is still

biased upward, and this bias is eliminated by including a measure of completed

job duration in the regression. The condition
(13)

cov(D1..)/var(D1.) >

cov(EXPj.jj)/cov(ExPi..n.j)

is sufficient for the experience coefficient in the standard cross—section

earnings equation to be an upward biased estimate of the returns to experience
me and for introducing completed job duration into the earnings equation
to reduce but not eliminate this bias.

A second generalization of the base model is to relax the assumption
that individual—, job-, and match—specific earnings components all have the

same incremental association with job duration. In a more general
specification in which earnings increments associated with unobserved

individual characteristics have a different relationship to job duration than
those attributable to job/match characteristics, equation (4) would be

13

rewritten as
(14)

where p.

is

differences,

D.. =

+

+

the earnings increment attributable to unobserved individual
is the earnings Increment attributable to unobserved

job/match characteristics,

captures the variation in completed job

duration that Cannot be linked to the earnings advantage associated wilth
either worker or job/match heterogeneity, I index individuals, and j indexes

jobs. The parameters

and

represent the relationships of Individual, and

job/match characteristics respectively with job duration, and they are both

assumed to be positive. Experience would affect job/match specific attributes
but not (fixed) Individual attributes, so equation (5) would be rewritten in

terms of B. Once again, generalizing the model in this way does not affect
our conclusions concerning bias In the seniority coefficient; the standard
cross—section estimate of

is still biased upward, and this bias is

eliminated by including a measure of completed job duration in the regression.
With regard to the estimated effect of experience, as long as the condition

(15) var(1.) +

— y )*var(j

)

0

is satisfied, the experience coefficient in the standard cross—section
earnings function Is an upward biased estimate of

and introducing completed

job duration into the model reduces the upward bias.
In sum, our theoretical analysis suggests that, under a reasonable set
of assumptions, controlling for the completed duration of the job in a

standard Cross—section earnings equation can: 1) eliminate the upward bias in
the tenure coefficient associated with the failure to consider individual, job

and/or match specific earnings components and 2) remove at least part of the
search component in the experience coefficient arising from the same source.

On this basis, the approach we adopt in the empirical analysis is to develop a
measure of completed job duration using longitudinal data and use this measure

14

In estimating a standard earnings function.

As a final note, it should be stated that we put no structural

interpretation on the estimated completed job duration coefficient In earnings

functions like equation (10). The relationship between completed job duration

and earnings is certan1y simultaneous. There is a large literature that
estimates turnover probabilities (essentially an inverse measure of job

durztin) as a function of wage rates.'4 Another way of thinking about the
approach taken here is that the earnings function In equation (1) is the

reduced form for one equation in a two equation earnings/duration model. it
is precisely this reduced form that is of interest here, but the coefficient
estimates are biased by the omitted quality measure (ii).

Thus, we include job

duration in the earnings function precisely because it is correlated with the
person, job, and/or match quality component of the error that most would argue

is the source of any "simultaneity bias".15 Despite the ambiguity regarding
causation, job duration provides exactly the information required of it in
this study.

III. Estimating Completed Job Duration

The first step in implementing the analysis described in the preceding

section is to derive a measure of completed job duration. Clearly, a data set
suitable for this task must follow individual workers over time so that one

can observe how long the jobs they hold ultimately last. The data set should
also have information on the individual workers' characteristics and their

14. Parsons (1977) and Freeman and Medoff (1984) present surveys of some
of this literature. Mincer and Jovanovic (1981) present a joint analysis of
earnings and turnover.
15. Measurement of these unobservable factors is likely to be what is
required to identify the underlying structural relationships between earnings
and job duration.

15

wages/earnings. The Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) satisfies
these requirements and is used in the empirical analysis. Given the completed
duration of every job In the sample, the analysis would proceed by including
this measure in a "standard" earnings function as a control.

Unfortunately,

there is a general problem with virtually all longitudinal data sets,
including the PSID, when Information is required on the completed duration of

a spell of any kind. This is that the individuals are followed for only a
limited period of time so that there are likely to be many jobs which do riot

end by the date at which the individual is last observed. Some procedure must
be used to impute completed durations to these jobs.
We take the approach of estimating a parametric model of job duration

that accounts for the censoring of duration in those jobs for which the end is

not observed, This model is then used to Compute an estimate of the expected
completed job duration conditional on the job lasting at least as long as the

last observed seniority level. In the estimation of the earnings function,
this estimate is used as the measure of completed job duration for the

censored spells. The actual completed job duration is used for jobs for which
the end is observed. This procedure has the advantage of using all available
information on duration.

A. The Jobs Sample

All of the subsequent analysis is performed using data for male
household heads aged 18 to 60 who participated in the Michigan Panel Study of

Income Dynamics (PSID).16 We used only observations from the random national
sample portion of the PSID (the so—called Survey Research Center or SRC

16. Unfortunately, the design of the PSID precludes meaningful examination
of females for the purposes of this study. This is because complete
information is available only for household heads, and, where households
contain both male and female adults, the male is assumed to be the head by
default.

16

subsample). Persons who were retired, permanently disabled, self-employed,
employed by the government or residents of Alaska or Hawaii were excluded from

the sample. Because we were concerned that different processes might govern
tenure attainment and earnings In the union sector than in the nonunion
sector, we also excluded observations where the individual reported that he

was unionized.17 We were also concerned about differences across occupations
in the processes determining )ob duration and earnings. In what follows, we
therefore focus our discussion on results for two occupational subgroups, one
comprised of nonunion professional, technical and managerial employees and the
second comprised of nonunion blue collar employees; results for a nonunion
sample covering all occupations are included for comparison purposes.

In each

year from 1968 through 1981 In which those individuals satisfying our

selection criteria were household heads, information was available on number
of years they had held their current job, number of years they had worked
prior to taking the current job, years of education, race, marital status,
disability status, occupation, industry, region, and earnings.18

17. Over the course of the PSID different definitions of unionization were
used. In some years unionization refers to union membership, and in other
years unionization refers to working on a job covered by a collective
bargaining agreement. Where both measures were available, collective
bargaining coverage was used.
18. Joseph Altonji kindly provided us with an extract containing these
variables which we used in performing our analyses. The procedures followed
in creating this extract are described in detail in an appendix to Altonji and
Shakotko (1985). In order to delete non—SRC subsample observations, we added
information or whether a given individual was part of the SRC subsample or the
nonrandont continuation subsample from the Survey of Economic Opportunity
(SEO). We also smoothed the tenure variable in two ways in instances where a
given individual was assigned the midpoint value of a tenure interval. First,
if the individual on a given job changed tenure intervals in succeeding years,
we computed a smooth tenure variable forward and backward from the change
point. Second, if all observations for the individual on a given job were in
the same tenure interval and thus would have been counted as having the same
tenure in all years on the job, we computed a smooth tenure variable forward
and backward from the middle observed year on the job assuming that tenure in
that year was equal to the midpoint of the interval.

17

There are 1048 jobs held by 748 individuals represented in the nonunion
professional, technical and managerial sample, 1623 jobs held by 958

individuals represented in the nonunion blue collar sample, and 2857 jobs held

by 1581 individuals represented in the full nonunion sample. Our concern at
this point is with ascertaining how long each of these jobs ultimately
lasted.

19

Various characteristics of' the jobs in each of the three samples are

reported In Table 1. Variables that can change over time In an unpredictable
fashion (e.g., marital status, occupation) are assumed constant and measured

at the fIrt point the job is observed in the sample. Any jobs for which
there are some blue collar years and some professional/technical/managerial

years appear in both occupational subsamples. The last observed seniority on
a job is always considered to be the seniority at the last date the person is
observed with an employer, whether or not there has been a change of

occupation during the course of the job.2° There were 91 cases in which an
individual reported moving from blue collar status to professional, technical
or managerial status and 87 cases in which an individual reported moving from
professional, technical or managerial status to blue collar status while a job

19. The two occupational subgroups for which separate models are estimated
do not cover all nonunion jobs. Approximately 15 percent of the nonunion jobs
were clerical and sales jobs. This is too few to support separate job
duration models for these groups. At the same time, these jobs seemed likely
to differ significantly from other white collar jobs. We chose to exclude
clerical and sales jobs rather than to include them with professional,
technical and managerial jobs in a broader white collar grouping.
20. For example, if an individual 1) was observed on a single job for ten
years running; 2) reported being a blue collar worker for the first five years
and a professional employee for the next five years; and 3) reported having 13
years seniority in the Jest observed year, then the job would appear in both
the blue collar and the professional/technical/managerial subsamples with a
last observed seniority of 13 years in both. The job would appear once in the
overall nonunion jobs sample, and it would be classified on the basis of the
first observed occupation (blue collar).

Table 1:
a
Selected Characteristics of Jobs Samples for Occupational Subgroups
Blue
Collar
Nonunion

Prof ,Tech,

Managerial,
Nonunion

Complete Censored

All
Nonunion

Complete Censored Complete Censored

Proportion with
years of tenure at
last date job
observed in range:

T I
1 <T3
3 < T
T > 10

10

.486
.248
.203
.0620

.146
.222
.298
.335

.626
.218
.123
.0334

.278
.204
.291
.227

.602
.221
.141

.0365

.242
.221
.283
.254

Mean {standard
deviation! of:
Years of tenure
at last date
job observed

Years of pre—job
experience

(Years pre—ob
experience)

Years of
education

2.97

9.19

1.99

6.79

2.15

7.35

[4.07]

[8.93J

[3.31]

[7.95]

[3.38]

[8.26]

10.04

9.50

9.85

9.84

[7.82]

[8.27]

[8.94]

11.85
[9.92]

161.9

158.8

[235.3]

[267.4]

14.5

14.7

[2.08]

[2.10]

176.9

239.0

[322.5] [366.0]
11.4
[2.31]

11.3
[2.49]

[8.50]

169.1
[291.1]

12.5
[2.65]

11.0

[944]
210.9
[334.8]
12.9
[2.89]

Proportion:

Nonwhite

.0521

.03l

.136

.134

.107

.0856

Married

.856

.871

.828

.880

.833

.869

Disabled

.0571

.0543

.0751

.115

.0759

.0938

.481

.547

.134

.214

.519

.453

.123

.148

Prof ,

tech

Managerial
Foreman, craft

.415

.455

.239

.222

Oper, labor

.585

.545

.342

.277

839

784

1396

1461

Number of
observations

403

645

aExcept for tenure and years of previous experience, all variables are
reported as of the first year the job was observed. Previous experience was
computed as the difference between reported experience in the first year the
job was observed and seniority at that point. The industry and region
characteristics of the samples are summarized in Table 1 of Appendix B.

18

was In progress.

21

In all three samples, we observe the end of a substantial fraction of
the jobs represented in the sample.

In the professional, technical and

managerial sample, we observe the actual completed duration for 403 of 1048
jobs; in the blue collar sample, for 839 of 1623 jobs; and in the full

nonunion sample, for 1396 of 2857 jobs. Not surprisingly, a large proportion
of the completed jobs are relatively short: 73 percent of the completed jobs
in the professional, technical and managerial sample, 84 percent of the
completed jobs in the blue collar sample and 82 percent of the completed jobs

In the full nonunion sample lasted no more than three years. However, In all
three samples, there are a sizeable number of completed jobs lasting 3 to 10

years and over 10 years. Longer jobs are more common among the still—in—
progress jobs: 34 percent of the incomplete jobs In the professional,
technical and managerial sample, 23 percent of the incomplete jobs In the blue
collar sample and 25 percent of the incomplete jobs in the full nonunion
sample had lasted more than 10 years as of the last date they were observed.
With regard to other characteristics, the completed jobs and the

incomplete jobs generally look similar. In the blue collar sample, completed
jobs tend to have occured slightly earlier in the workllfe (9.9 years of prejob experience for completed jobs versus 11.9 years of pre—job experience for
incomplete jobs); the same is not true for the professional, technical and

managerial sample. [n the professional, technical and managerial sample,
professionals account for a smaller share of the completed jobs than of the
incomplete jobs (48.1 percent versus 54.7 percent); in the blue collar sample,
operatives and laborers account for a larger fraction of the completed jobs

21. It is likely that these numbers overstate the true number of changes
since there are undoubtedly some errors in classification that produce
spurious movements between the two broad occupational groups.

19

than of the incomplete jobs ( 58.5 percent versus 54.5 percent). In te full

nonunion sample, completed jobs appear to have occurred earlier in the
workilfe; professionals are under-represented and operatives and laborers
over-represented among the completed jobs.

B. Specification of the Job Duration Model
In order to use completed tenure as an earnings equation control
variable in the fashion described in Section Ii, we need a method of

determining the expected completed duration of the Incomplete jobs. We
specify and estimate a parametric model of completed job duration, and then

use the estimated parameters to predict the expected completed length of jobs
still in progress as of the last date we observe them.

The proportional hazard Weibull specification serves as the basis of the

estimation reported here. In that specification, the probability that a job
has completed duration (D) greater than or equal to T is
(16)

Pr(DT) = exp[_XTU]

where u is a positive parameter. The proportional hazard assumption implies
that

(17) X = e_Z'',
where Z is a vector of observable individual characteristics hypothesized to

affect job duration and y Is a vector of parameters. The separation hazard
associated with this distribution is
(18)

Clearly,

H(t) =

where a=1 this distribution collapses to the exponential as a special

case. In this case the hazard is constant over time and equal to X. Where
>l, this distribution has an associated hazard rate which is increasing as
the spell continues. In other words, the probability that a spell ends at a
point in time given that it has lasted to that point is increasing.

Analogously, where a<l, this distribution has an associated hazard rate which

20

is decreasing as the spell continues. In other words, the probability that a
spell ends at a point in time given that it has lasted to that point is
decreasing.

If the parameters of a Weibull duration model are estimated, there is

some ambiguity in the interpretation of the estimate of a. The obvious
interpretation is that the estimated value of a indicates "true" duration

dependence. In other words, it indicates how the instantaneous probability of

a spell ending moves over time. An alternative interpretation is that the
estimate of a is biased downward by unmeasured heterogeneity in match quality
so that the estimate (particularly if less than one, as is often the case)

must be interpreted with care. Consider the simple case where there is, in
fact, no true duration dependence so that the hazard rate associated with a

given spell Is some constant X. Heterogeneity in the hazard rates across jobs
could arise because individuals have different temperaments (and thus
different separation propensities), because jobs differ in their relative
attractiveness (and thus in their turnover rates) and/or because there is
variation in the quality of the individual/job match (and thus in the

probability of the match being broken off). If there is unmeasured
heterogeneity in the hazard across spells, the spells that last a long time

are more likely to be the spells with low hazards. These spells are less
likely to end than the randomly selected spell so it appears that spells are

progressively less likely to end as time goes by. However, this apparent
duration dependence is spurious and simply an artifact of a sample of

surviving spells that is becoming increasingly dominated by spells with low
hazard rates.

For the purposes of this study, we are not interested in distinguishing

between true and spurious duration dependence. We are simply interested in
estimating a parametric model of completed job duration that is flexible

21

enough to make allowance for both true duration dependence and unmeasured

heterogeneity in hazards. While we could specify a particular distribution
for the unobserved heterogeneity in the hazard along with the Weibull form of
duration dependence, it Is well known that there are problems with robustness
of the estimates of' heterogeneity and duration dependence with regard to

changes In the assumed distributions in models of this sort.

We take the

approach of estimating a simple Weibull model of completed job duration

without any explicit representation for unmeasured heterogeneity. However,
the estimate of the parameter

is interpreted here as representing some

(unspecified) combination of true duration dependence and unmeasured

heterogeneity. The resulting predicted expected completed job durations,
which are the important end products of this analysis, are directly affected

both by this parameter and by the last observed value of seniority. Thus,
both duration dependence and unmeasured heterogeneity are accounted for, and
these predicted values should be considered to be the product of a rather

flexible specification for completed job duration. The Important point is
that we are interested in accurately predicting completed job duration, not in
isolating the degrees of true duration dependence and unmeasured

heterogeneity. The Weibull model should be adequate for this purpose.
As in the case of exponential durations, the contribution to the
likelihood function made by a completed job is the probability—density that
the job lasted exactly Sf years given that the job lasted at least S0 years.23

22. See Lancaster (1979) for a parametric approach to the problem of
estimating unmeasured heterogeneity in a Weibull model of unemploynent
duration. Heckman and Singer (1984) present a nonparametric approach to
estimating duration models with unmeasured heterogeneity.
23. It is important to condition on the length of the job as of the date
it is first observed because the sampling scheme is such that jobs will not be
observed unless they last long enough to make it to the start of the sample
period.

22

Given a Weibull distribution for duration, this is
(19)

Similarly,

Pr(D=SfID>S) =
the contribution to the likelihood function made by a job with a

censored duration is the probability that the job lasted more than Sf years
given that the job lasted at least S0 years. This is
(20)

Pr(DSfID>S) exp[_>(S_SUfl.

The log-likelihood function is formed from these probabilities as
(21) ln(L)

(C.lnPr(D.Sf.tD>S) +(i—C)lnPr(DSfD>c)j

where j indexes jobs and C is an indicator variable that equals one if the
completed job duration is censored (i.e., the job does not end during the
sample period) and equals zero otherwise (i.e., the completed job duration Is
observed).

Note that this specification of the likelihood function assumes that
unmeasured factors affecting completed job durations are independent across

spells. However, within each of the three samples, there are multiple
observations on job durations for some individuals. A more complete
specification would account explicitly for the possibility that some
individuals are inherently less likely to change jobs than others for reasons

that are unmeasured. This would induce a correlation across jobs in the
completed job durations for a given individual after controlling for observed

differences in the hazard. Given the highly nonlinear nature of the model, an
appropriate tractable procedure for accounting for this correlation is not

obvious. At this point the analysis proceeds under the assumption that
unmeasured factors affecting completed job durations are independent.

23

C. Estimation of the Job Duration Model
Column 1 and column 2 of Table 2 contain estimates of the Welbull job

duration model estimated over the subsamples of 1048 professional,technical
and managerial jobs and 1623 blue collar jobs, respectively. These estimates
were derived by maximizing the likelihood function defined above with respect
to the parameters Y and cx.24

in interpreting the estimates of the

determinants of the baseline hazard (X), recall that the hazard rate was

specified such that X=e. Thus, an increase in a variable with a positive
coefficient reduces > and increases the expected duration of the job.

The two sets of estimates exhibit some interesting differences.25 The
marginal effect of pre—job experience on job duration for professional,

technical and managerial workers is never statistically significant at the .05

level or better. In contrast, among blue collar workers, having more pre—job
experience has a significant positive association with completed job duration.

Recall that the explanation for a positive relationship between
experience and earnings based on sorting of workers into successively better
jobs also had the implication that completed job duration would be positively

related to pre-job experience. For blue collar workers there is evidence
consistent with this sorting. However, this evidence is also consistent with
the view that blue collar workers mature over time into "naturally" more

stable workers. There is no evidence for sorting or maturation for
professional, technical, and managerial workers.

24. The algorithm described by Berndt, Hall, Hall, and Hausman (1974) was
used to find the maximum.
25.
Based on a a1d test, the hypothesis that the parameters of the
models for the two subgroups are identical except for a constant shift and the
occupation dummies in Zy can be rejected at any reaonable level of

significance. The test statistic, distributed as X with 22 degrees of
freedom, is 77.9. The critical value of this distribution at the one percent
level of significance is 40.29. The independence assumption of this test is
not strictly satisfied, since the two samples contain some jobs in common.

Table 2:
Selected Coefficients froM Final Tenure Modelsa
(1)

Prof,Tech
Managerial
Nonunion

(2)

Blue
Collar
Nonunion

(3)

All
Nonunion

y (Inverse Baseline Hazard,

Years of experience

- .0238

.0548
(.0096)

.0278
(.0080)

.00106
(.00023)

— .00095
(.00068)

.00028
(.00026)

Years of education

.0740
(.0241)

.0272
(.0130)

.0386
(.0107)

Nonwhite (yes

—.407

—.00137

(.226)

(.08381)

—.0996
(.0747)

Married (yes = 1)

.298
(.134)

.477
(.070)

.416
(.059)

Disabled (yes = 1)

.0577
(.2164)

(.0197)

(Years of experience)2

Manager (yes

1)

1)

—.119

.215
(.107)

-.0295

———

—.237

(.111)

(.0809)

(.101)

Clerical, sales. (yes = 1)

—.297
(.096)

Foreman, craftworker (yes = 1)

.109
(.059)

Operative, laborer (yes = 1)

—.645
(.089)

—.726
(.092)

"Duration" Parameter

a

Log—Likelihood
Sample size

.380
(.027)

.400
(.016)

(.013)

—927.0

—1206.4

-2397.4

1048

1623

.401

2857

aTh
coefficient estimates are from a Weibull proportional hazards model
implemented using the jobs samples described in Table 1. All explanatory
variables are reported as of the start of the job. Professional/technical
employees are the omitted occupational group in the column (1) and column (3)
models and operatives/laborers are the omitted occupational group in the
column (2) model. The models also include industry and region controls; these
coefficient estimates are reported in Table 2 of Appendix B. The numbers in
parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

24

The estimates also suggest that education has a stronger positive

relationship with job duration in white collar occupations than in blue collar

occupations. In both samples, being married raises expected job duration.26
Disabled blue collar workers actually appear to have somewhat longer expected

job durations than non—disabled blue collar workers. Nonwhites have shorter
job durations than whites in the professional/technical/managerial subsample,

though the relevant coefficient is only marginally significant. There is no
significant difference in lob durations by race among blue collar workers. As
might have been expected given the lower percentage of professional/technical
workers in the completed job subsample than in the incomplete job subsample,
the column (1) estimates are weakly Consistent with the notion that, within
the white collar group, professional and technical workers' jobs last longer

than managers' jobs. Within the blue collar group, operatives and laborers
have shorter jobs than do foremen and craftsworkers. The estimates of

are

significantly and substantially less than one for both white and blue collar

jobs. We interpret this as implying some combination of negative duration
dependence and unmeasured heterogeneity.

Overall, the most interesting difference between the professional,
technical, and managerial job duration model and the blue collar job duration
model is the difference in the effects of prior experience on job duration.
We return to this finding below.
The third column of Table 2 contains the estimates of the Weibull final

tenure model estimated for the full sample of 2857 nonunion jobs. These
results are intermediate between those for the professional, technical and

managerial sample and those for the blue collar sample. The esmmated

26. If we accept the notion that married workers are more 'mature', then
this result is consistent with the view that more "mature" workers are
naturally more stable.

25

coefficients imply that jobs last longer in cases where the person taking the
job has more previous work experience, has more education, is married and is

not disabled. Jobs held by whites do not last significantly longer than jobs
held by nonwhites. The omitted occupational category in the model is the

professional/technjcaj category. Being a professional or technical worker
increases expected job duration compared to that associated with any of the

other occupational categories. The occupational category with the shortest
expected job duration is the operative/laborer category. The estimate of a is
strongly significantly less than one, which we again interpret as reflecting
some mixture of heterogeneity and negative duration dependence.
-

D. Prediction of Job Duration for Incomplete Jobs
We used the parameter estimates from the appropriate column of Table 2
to predict the expected completed job duration of each of the incomplete jobs

in each sample. This expectation is computed conditionally on the job lasting
longer than the last observed seniority (Sf years). Note that the job
duration model we have estimated is based on data for the pre-retirement

period. It will capture the net effects of quit and layoff processes on job
duration, but it will not capture the effect of the competing retirement

process which comes into play for older workers. If we predicted job
durations without taking retirement into account, some would be implausibly

long. We therefore assume that all jobs that are in progress when the worker
reaches age 65 end at that point. For an individual/job match with observable
characteristics Z that has lasted Sf years as of the last date we observe it,
the conditional expected completed job duration is:
S
(22)

E(DID>Sf)

Pr(D>Sf)

J;5

a

XataeXt

Pr(DS
dt +

Pr(DSf)

where S65 represents the seniority attained if a match lasts until the worker

26

turns 65,
Pr(D>Sf)=exP[—>..S].
(23)

Pr(DS65)=exp[->..S5], and
- zy

With an appropriate change of variables, the integral on the right side of the
conditional expectation in equation (22) can be expressed as incomplete gamma

functions. This is
(24)

L65 )ute_>t dt =

Jf
where

X"IL0

65

f

ey(h/'dy —

If

e_Yy(1)dyl

0

-

Yf>Sf and y65=>.S5. Both of these incomplete gamma functions can be

evaluated numerically.27 Estimates of the conditional expectation in equation
(22) computed using the appropriate set of parameters from Table 2 produce the
job duration measure used for incomplete jobs in the earnings function
estimation in the next section.

We also use estimates of the square of completed job duration in the

earnings function estimation. For incomplete jobs, this is estimated
similarly to completed job duration itself as
S

(25)

E(D2ID>Sf) =

Pr(D>Sf)

J5

a
dt +

Pr(DS

Pr(DS

A similar change of variables to that which produced equation (24) yields
easily approximated incomplete gamma functions which are used, along with the
appropriate set of parameters from table 2, to compute our estimate of the
square of completed job duration for incomplete jobs.

As noted earlier, actual job duration was observed for 403 of the 1048
jobs represented in the professional, technical and managerial sample, for 836

27. The approximations used were taken from Abromovitz and Steigun (1972).

27

of the 1623 jobs in the blue collar sample, and for 1396 of the 2857 jobs In

the all occupations sample. Many of the professional, technical and
managerial jobs were quite long; of the 1048 completed and incomplete jobs
represented In the sample, 19 percent were predicted to have completed
durations of 1 year or less, 10 percent to have completed durations of 1 to 3
years, 18 percent to have completed durations of 3 to 10 years and 53 percent

to have completed durations of more than ten years.28 More of the blue collar
jobs were relatively short; of the 1623 completed and incomplete jobs
represented in the sample, 33 percent were predicted to have completed
durations of 1 year or less, 15 percent to have completed durations of 1 to 3
years, 26 percent to have completed durations of 3 to 10 years, and 26 percent

to have completed durations of more than ten years.29 The distribution of
predicted completed job durations for the all occupations sample is
•

intermediate between that for the two subsamples.

30

It is not easy to assess intuitively whether the parameter estimates in

this completed tenure model are sensible. One check on the model is to
explore whether its implications regarding the distribution of completed job

durations are consistent with other available evidence. Hall (1982) has
recently reported estimates of various statistics relating to the distribution
of the lengths of completed jobs constructed using a radically different

approach than we have used here. We have computed statistics which can be

28. Of the 403 completed professional, technical and managerial jobs in
the sample, 82 (20.3%) had completed durations of three to ten years and 25
(6.2%) had completed durations of more than ten years.
29. Of the 839 completed blue collar jobs In the sample, 103 (12.3) had
completed durations of three to ten years and 28 (3.3%) had completed
durations of more than ten years.
30. The distribution for the full sample Is not simply the weighted
average of the distributions of the two subsamples for three reasons: 1) Some
jobs appear In both of the occupational subsajnples; 2) A few clerical and
sales jobs appear in neither subsample; and 3) The predicted durations for the
three samples are based on different Weibull model estimates.

28

compared to some of those he reports. For the purposes of this comparison,
all estimates of expected job duration were computed using the model of job
duration contained in the third column of Table 2.
Hall (1982) uses the CPS tenure data to draw conclusions concerning the

distribution of completed job duration. In essence, his approach is to infer
the probability that a job that has already lasted N years will last another I

years by comparing the proportion of employed persons aged A plus 1 years in
jobs that have lasted N plus 1 years to the proportIon of employed persons

aged A in jobs tnat have lasted N years. Among other statistics, he reports
the probabilities that jobs in various tenure brackets will end up lasting at

least 20 years for workers aged 40 to 45. His estimates are reported in the
first column of Table 3.

It is relatively easy to compute similar statistics based on the job

duration model in column (3) of Table 2. For comparability with Hall's
results, we perform calculations for an individual aged 42 with the sample

mean amount of education who we assume started school at age 6 and has worked

continuously since leaving school. We assume sample mean values of all other
characteristics except pre—job experience used in making our predictions; prejob experience is set so that age upon attaining the mean amount of schooling

plus seniority plus pre—job experience equals 42. Important differences
between the two sets of estimates include the fact that our sample includes

only nonunion male heads of households, whereas Hall's estimates reflect the
experiences of all 40 to 45 years olds, both union and nonunion and both

female and male. Our estimates of the statistics reported by Hall appear in
the last column of Table 4.

The two sets of estimates are quite similar overall. The major
difference between them is that we generally find somewhat higher

probabilities that short jobs will end up lasting over 20 years. The fact

Table 3:
Aggregate Final Tenure Distributions:
Estimated Using Alternative Approaches

Estimates
based on
Table 2:

Estimates
reported by
Hall (1982)

lasting
20 or more

Probability that
a job with
indicated
current tenure
will end up
lasting 20
or more

years:

years:

Probability that
a job in indicated
tenure Interval

will end up

o — 0.5 years
0.5
1
2
3
5
10
15
20

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
÷

1 year
2 years
3 years

5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years
years

.046
.078
.113
.157
.204
.355
.590
.980

1,000

0.25
0.75
1.50
2.50
4.00
7.50
12.50
17.50
20.00

years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years

.116
.147
.181
.218
.268
.384
.571
.826

1.000

aThe Hall (1982) figures apply to all 40 to 45 year olds. Our estimates are
computed for a 42 year old white male with mean characteristics for the full
nonunion jobs sample using the parameter estimates contained in the third
column of table 2.

29

that Hall's estimates include women while ours do not could explain this
discrepancy, though the fact that Hall's estimates include union jobs while

ours do not seems likely to work in the opposite direction. Overall, we find
it reassuring that Hall's nonparametric procedure and our parametric procedure
produce similar results and take this as evidence that our estimates of
completed job duration are reasonable.

IV. Earnings Function Estimates
Having derived an estimate of completed tenure which can be used as a
control variable in earnings functions, we turn now to the empirical

investigation of the central questions motivating this research. First, do
those on long jobs receive higher earnings than those on short jobs? Second,
if so, what fraction of the positive association between seniority and

earnings in the cross section reflects the fact that those with longer service

tend to be in better paying, longer jobs? Third, is there any evidence that
the positive cross—sectional association between labor market experience and
earnings in significant measure reflects the fact that more experienced
workers have found better jobs and/or better matches?
Consider a standard earnings function of the form:

(26) ln(W) =

+E

where ln(W) is the logarithm of real average hourly earnings, X is a vector of
individual characteristics,

is a vector of parameters, and

represents

unmeasured factors affecting earnings. This earnings function is estimated
using each of three samples of individual—year observations from the three
samples of jobs from the PSID discussed in Section III. As previously noted,
in presenting our empirical findings we have chosen to focus primarily on the
results for the two broad occupational subgroups: nonunion professional,
technical and managerial employees and nonunion blue collar employees.

30

Results for the full nonunion sample are also presented for comparison

purposes. Recall that

the

samples consist only of nonunion male heads of

households. There are 3603 individual—year observations on workers in the
1048 professional, technical, and managerial jobs; 3926 individual-year
observations on workers in the 1623 blue collar jobs; and 8688 individual—year
observations on workers In the 2857 jobs on the overall sample.31

The first column in each of tables 4a, 4b and 4c contain, for each of
the

samples, the means and standard deviations of the central variables used

in the analysis. Given that we wish to identify the incremental return to
seniority over and above the return to general labor market experience, the
earnings functions we estimate include total labor market experience rather

than pre—job experience.32 The professional, technical and managerial sample
has slightly more total labor market experience (18.14 years versus 17.62
years) and slightly longer current tenure (8.85 years versus 6.46 years) than

the blue collar sample. As explained in Section III, expected job duration
and the expected value of its square were computed based on the Weibull model
for the relevant sample of jobs where the end of the job was not observed; for
the remaining jobs, actual completed job duration and its square are used.
Expected job durations are somewhat longer in the professional, technical and
managerial sample than in the blue collar sample (20.78 years versus 13.94

years). The characteristics of the full nonunion sample are intermediate

31. Persons who were retired, permanently disabled, self—employed,
employed by the government or residents of Alaska or Hawaii were also
excluded. The overall nonunion sample includes clerical and sales workers.
32. If both seniority and the experience term were entered linearly, the
two specifications would yield identical fits. If the squares of seniority
and/or experience appear in the earnings function, the two specifications will
not yield identical fits. However, we have estimated all of the Section IV
models with pre-job experience and its square in place of total experience and
its square, and the qualitative conclusions emerging from the analysis do not
change.

31

between those of the two occupational subsamples.33
As with the sample of jobs, the individual—year sample has multiple

observations for some Individuals. If there are unmeasured Individual factors
affecting earnings then one might want to estimate some sort of errors
components model that accounts for correlations across observations in t.

While this is relatively straightforward to implement In a linear model, the
estimates presented In this section are standard ordinary least squares (OLS)

estimates that do not account for such correlatIons. The reason for thIs is
fundamentally related to the ultimate goal of using a measure of completed job

duration to account for heterogeneous worker, job, and/or match quality and

yield better estimates of the returns to seniority and experience. If we
estimate a standard fixed effect earnings model, which is equivalent to
including a separate constant term for each individual in the sample in the
earnings function, we can learn nothing about the relative returns to

seniority and experience from those for whom only one job is observed. Unless
a job change occurs, seniority an experience both increase by one each year,

so that their effects are not separately identifiable. Moreover, the
completed job duration measure will vary within the observations on a

particular individual only for those individuals observed on more than one

job. Observing multiple jobs for an individual will be more likely where jobs
are relatively short. It is likely that the returns to seniority and
experience among the group of workers who change jobs during the period we

observe them will differ from the returns to seniority and experience in the
sample as a whole.

In addition, the relationship of the key job duration

33. As was true with the jobs samples, the all occupations means are not
simply the weighted averages of the means for the two occupational subgroups,
since some jobs appear in both of the occupational subsamples, a few clerical
and sales jobs appear in neither, and the predicted job durations for the
three samples are based on different Weibull models.

32

measure with earnings cannot be adequately estimated through a sample of short

jobs. On balance, it seems preferable to leave the fixed effects unaccounted
for rather than to have the entire analysis rely on jobs with short completed
durations.

Given that a key variable, completed job duration, is proxied by our
estimate of the expectation of completed job duration, the question of

potential measurement error in this variable ought to be addressed. There are
actually two sources of error In the predicted completed job duration measure.
The first is that the parameters of the job duration model are only estimates
so that the predictions of expected job duration are themselves subject to

error. However, it can be shown that in large samples the estimation error in
the parameters of the job duration model is of small enough order that
coefficient estimates in equations which use the derived measure of duration

as an explanatory variable will be consistent. The second source of error is
that the expected value of completed job duration Is used in place of the

actual realization of completed job duration. This is not a problem because,
by definition, the expected value of completed job duration is uncorrelated

with the deviation between the expected and the true value. Since the
measurement error is exactly the deviation between the expected value and the
true value, there is no correlation induced between the included regressor and

the error term in the regression. Thus, there is no bias from this source in
our estimated earnings function coefficients.
While these sources of measurement error do not induce inconsistency in
the earnings function parameter estimates, they do affect the estimates of the

standard errors of the coefficients. The standard errors presented are
corrected for the effects of these errors and for general heteroskedasticity

33

of the form analyzed by White (1980).

34

Table 4a contains ordinary least squares (OLS) regression results for

the nonunion professional, technical and managerial sample. Column (1) is a
standard earnings equation; It suggests that professional, technical and

managerial employees enjoy sizeable returns to both labor market experience

and seniority with a particular employer. Column (2) differs from the
standard earnings function In that it also Includes expected job duration and

the expectation of the square of ob duration.35
The first thing to note about the coefficient estimates in column (2) is
that there is a very strong positive association between job length and

earnings. A man on a job that ends up lasting 10 years rather than 5 earns
7.6 percent more in each year on that job; a man on a job that ends up lasting

20 years rather than 5 earns 18.2 percent more in each year on that job. The
estimates in column (3) allow the effects of completed job duration and its

square to vary with seniority. The substance of the results do not change and
the evidence is persuasive that workers in long jobs earn more uniformly over
the life of the job.36

34. See Newey (1984) for a detailed discussion of the sort of standard
error calculations used here.
35. We include the expectation of the square of job duration because we
do not wish to be unduly restrictive about the functional form of the
underlying relationships.
36. The positive relationship between job duration and earnings, which
exists for both of the occupational subsamples and the full nonunion sample,
provides strong evidence against the Harris and Holmstrom (1982)
Interpretation of the return to experience. In their model, the worker and
all firms are initially uncertain about the worker's productivity. The
initial wage equals the expected value of the worker's productivity minus an
insurance premium and the employer guarantees not to reduce the initial wage.
Workers revealed to have high productivity receive wage increases, either from
treir original employer or by taking a new job with another employer. Workers
revealed to have low productivity cannot duplicate their original wage
elsewhere and for that reason are more likely to stay with their original
employer. Thus, the simple Harris and Holnstrom model predicts a negative
correlation between job duration and earnings; our results indicate that this
correlation is strongly positive.

Table 4a:
Selected Coefficients from ln (average hourly earnings Models
Managerial and Professional Nonunion Sample

Mean
[s.d.]

Years of
experience
(Years of
2
experience)

Years of current
seniority
(Years of currept

seniority)
E(completed job
duration)

(E(completed jb
duration)}
E(job duratlon)*[=i
if seniority Si]
{E(job duration))2*[=1
if seniority 51]
E(job duration)*[=i
if I < seniority 5 3]
{E(job duration))2*{=1
if 1 < seniority 5 3]
E(job duration)*[=i
if 3 < seniority 5 10]

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0289

.0283

.0255

18.14
[10.11]

(.0029) (.0026) (.0030)

431.20

—.00047 —.00047 —.00041

[411.46]

8.85
[8.32]

(.00007) (.00006) (.00007)
.0220

147.47

—.00044
(.00009)

20.78
[12.12]

.0201

(.0025)
——-

[501.82]

—.00036
(.00006)

1.44

.0201
(.0078)

[4.47]

31.96
[119.1]

———

2.29

———

—.00039
(.00027)

[6.08]

.0297
(.0057)

———

54.47
[173.9]

-.00067
(.00017)

———

6.03
[10.46]

.0260
(.0039)

———

165.7
(E(job duration)}2*[=1
if 3 < seniority 5 10] [324.9]

E(job duration)*[=i
if 10 < seniority]

.00407

(.0026) (.00173) (.00247)

[227.79]

628.88

.00543

-.00051
(.00010)

376.7
[569.1]

.0193
(.0030)

———

{E(job duratlon)}2*{=1
if 10 < seniority]

—.00030
(.00007)

.3681

.3817

.3832

aAll models also include controls for education, race, marital status,
disability, occupation, industry, region, and year. These coefficient
estimates are reported in Table 3a of Appendix B. E(completed job duration)
is computed using the estimates in column (1) of table 2. The numbers in
parentheses are standard errors. The standard errors in columns (2) and (3)
are asymptotic and corrected for the fact that E(completed job duration) is
predicted. Sample size=3603.

34

A second noteworthy feature of the results in column (2) is that there
is a marked fall in the estimated return to seniority compared to the standard

model. In the model of column (1), an additional year of seniority at the
mean was associated with 1.4 percent higher earnings; in the column (2) model
which includes completed job duration as a control, an additional year of

seniority is associated with only 0.5 percent higher earnings. In the column
(1) model, 10 years of seniority contribute 19.2 percent to earnings and 20
years of seniority contribute 30.2 percent; in the column (2) model, 10 years
of seniority contribute 5.6 percent to earnings and 20 years of seniority

contribute 11.5 percent to earnings. Thus, roughly two thirds of the
estimated return to seniority in the cross section appears to reflect bias

associated with higher earnings on longer jobs, rather than true returns to
seniority per Se.

37

A third question of interest is whether standard estimates of the return

to experience include a component reflecting returns to search. The fact that
the estimated return to experience does not fall when completed job duration
and its square are introduced into the model suggests that, for professional,
technical and managerial employees, the answer to this question is 'no"; the

positive association between experience and earnings appears to reflect true
returns to experience rather than sorting of more experienced workers into
better jobs.

Table 4b reports a similar set of earnings equations estimated using OLS

for the sample of blue collar nonunion employees. Column (1) is again the
standard cross section earnings equation. In this model, there appear to be

37. With both seniority and seniority squared in the column (2) model,
the coefficient of neither was significantly different from zero. Results
based on the estimates of this model are virtually identical to those we
report.

Table 4b:
Selected Coefficients from in (average hourly earnings) Models
Blue Collar Nonunion Samplea

Mean
[s.d.]

Years of
experience
(Years of
2
experience)

Years of current
seniority

(Years of curret
seniority)

E(completed job
duration)

{E(completed jb
duration))

17.62

(2)
.0103

(3)
.0104

[11.19]

(.0025) (.0025) (.0025)

435.59

—.00030 —.00022 — .00023

[475.31]

6.46
[7.45]

97.16
[193.90]
13.94

(.00006) (.00005) (.00006)
.0263

362.05

{E(job duration))2*[=1

16.85

—-—

.0182
(.0020)

———

—.00026
(.00006)

1.14

.0298
(.0088)

———

[63.40]

E(job duration)*[=j.
if 1 < seniority < 3]

1.58
[4.12]

{E(job duration)}2*[=1
if 1 < seniority
3]

25.61
[86.82]

E(job duration)*[=1
if 3 < seniority < 10]

[8.24]

.00109

—.00051
(.00010)

[438.37]

[3.14]

.00389

(.0026) (.00200) (.00282)

[11.62]

E(job duration)*[=1
if seniority 1]

if seniority 1]

(1)

.0146

—.00084
(.00041)
.0423
(.0056)

———

—.00119
(.00023)

4.66

.0337
(.0040)

———

102.7
{E(job duration)}2*[=1
if 3 < seniority
10] [208.5]

—.00079
(.00014)

E(job duration)*[=j.
if 10 < seniority]

6.57
[12.89]

———

{E(job duration)}2*[=1
if 10 < seniority]

216.9

———

.0154
(.0030)

[457.9]

—.000092
(.000069)

.3810

.3934

.3996

Al1 models also include controls for education, race, marital status,
disability, occupation, industry, and region. Thes coefficient estimates are
reported in Table 3b of Appendix B. E(completed job duration) is computed
using the estimates in column (2) of table 2. The numbers in parentheses are
standard errors. The standard errors in columns (2) and (3) are asymptotic
and corrected for the fact that E(completed job duration) is predicted.
Sample size=3926.

35

substantial returns to both labor Market experience and tenure. If anything,
it appears that seniority is worth more to blue collar workers than to white
collar workers (2.0 percent per year versus 1.4 percent per year at the

respective sample means. However, blue collar workers appear to have lower
returns to labor market experience (0.4 percent per year versus 1.2 percent
per year at the respective sample means).
The estimates in column (2) of table 4b, which include expected job
duration and the expectation of its square, imply that, like professional,

technical and managerial employees, blue collar workers in long jobs earn

substantially more than blue collar workers in short jobs. A man in a job
that ends up lasting 10 years earns 7.5 percent more in each year of that job
than a man in a job that ends up lasting 5 years; a man in a job that ends up

lasting 20 years earns 19.4 percent more than a man in a job that end up
lasting 5 years. The estimates in column (3) allow the effects of couwleted
job duration and its square to vary with seniority. As with the professional,
technical and managerial workers, the substance of the results do not change
and the evidence is

persuasive

over the life of the job.

that workers in long jobs earn more uniformly

38

For the blue collar sample, as with the professional, technical, and
managerial sample, the positive association between job duration and earnings
appears to account for most of the apparent return to seniority in the
standard cross section earnings equation; the estimated return to seniority at
the mean drops from 2.0 percent in the standard column (1) model to under 0.4
percent per year in the column (2) model and loses statistical significance.

The point estimates of the coefficients in the column (1) model imply that 10

38. Once again, this is strong evidence against the Harris and Holmstrom
(1982) interpretation of the return to experience. See note 36.

36

years of seniority add 24 percent to earnings and 20 years of seniority add 38
percent; those in the column (2) models, that 10 years of seniority contribute
4 percent to earnings and 20 years of seniority contribute 8 percent.

39

With regard to the return to general labor market experience, the
results for blue collar workers are somewhat different than for the

professional, technical, and managerial workers. For those white collar
workers, there was no evidence of a positive search component in the return to

experience estimated using the standard (column 1) specification, in
contrast, the estimated return to experience for blue collar workers falls by
approximately 20 to 30 percent when our measures of completed job duration are

introduced into the regression (column (2)). Essentially, a piece of the
already—low estimated return to labor market experience among blue collar
workers appears to reflect an underlying correlation between experience and

job and/or match quality, rather than returns to experience per Se. The
estimated return to an additional year of experience at the mean drops from
0.4 percent in column (1) to 0.3 percent in column

(2)..

In the column (1)

model, 10 years of experience contribute 12 percent to earnings and 20 years
of experience contribute 19 percent; in the column (2) model, 10 years of
experience add 8 percent to earnings and 20 years of experience add 13
percent.

Finally, Table 4c presents results like those just discussed for the

full nonunion sample. With one exception, the full sample results are
intermediate between those f or professional, technical and managerial

employees and those for blue collar workers. The standard earnings function

39. Again, in a model like that in column (2) that included both
seniority and its square, neither had a coefficient that was significantly
different from zero. Results based on the estimates of this model are very
similar to those we report.

Table 4c:
Selected Coefficients from in (average hourly earnings) Models
Full Nonunion Sample

Mean
Years of
experience
(Years of
2
experience)

Years of current
seniority

(Years of curren
seniority)

[s.d.]
17.61
[10.68]

(.0018) (.0017) (.0018)

424.13

—.00038 -.00037 -.00034

[443.47]

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0227

.0210

.0193

(.00004) (.00004) (.00004)

7.38

.0272

[7.89]

(.00:18)

116.77

—.00059

[208.68] (.00006)

E(completed job
duration)

16.59
[12.02]

——-

{E(completed jb

459.84
[466.28]

———

duration))

.00690
.00396
(.00125) (.00179)

.0213
(.0015)

—.00040
(.00004)

1.28

.0223

if seniority 1]

[3.73]

(.0054)

{E(job duration)}2*[=1

22.8

E(job duration)*[=1

if seniority 1]
E(job duration)*[=1
if 1 < seniority
3]
{E(job duration))2*[=l
if 1 < seniority
3]

E(job duration)*{=1
if 3 < seniority
10]
{E(job duration)}2*[=1
if 3 < seniority < 10]

[86.3]

.0315
(.0037)

———

38.4
[124.2]

———

———

[246.5]

275.6

.0276
(.0026)

123.1

{E(job duration))2*[=1
if 10 < seniority]

—.00075
(.00013)

5.11
[8.99]

8.25
[14.14]

—.00055
(.00021)

1.95
[5.05]

E(job duration)*[=1
if 10 < seniority]

R2

———

—.00058
(.00008)
.0215
(.0020)

———

[502.2]

—.00034
(.00005)

.4790

.4889

.4903

aAll models also include controls for education, race, marital status,
disability, occupation, industry, and region. These coefficient estimates are
reported in Table 3c of Appendix B. E(coinpleted job duration) is computed
using the estimates in column (3) of table 2. The numbers in parentheses are
standard errors. The standard errors in columns (2) and (3) are asymptotic
and corrected for the fact that E(completed job duration) is predicted.
Sample size=8688.

37

estimates of column (1) indicate the existence of substantial returns to both

labor market experience and seniority. In column (2), both expected job
duration and the expectation of its square are significant, and the estimated
association between job duration and earnings looks similar to that for the

occupational subgroups. The estimates in column (3) allow the effects of

completed job duration and its square to vary with seniority. As with the
occupational subgroups, the evidence is persuasive that workers in long jobs
earn more uniformly over the life of the job.

The noteworthy difference between the full sample results and the
occupational subgroup results is that the estimated return to seniority
remains slightly larger in the full nonunion sample model than in either of
the occupational subsample models (0.7 percent per year and highly
significant, versus 0.5 percent per year in the professional, technical and

managerial sample and an insignificant 0.4 percent per year in the blue collar

sample). This pattern of results may imply that there is a return to
seniority with a particular employer for some workers that takes the form of
promotion from a blue collar position to a white collar position.40

However,

even in the estimates for the full nonunion sample, no more than a third of

the apparent return to seniority estimated using the standard cross section

earnings function appears to reflect a true return to seniority pse.
The estimated return to labor market experience in the full sample
column (2) model is between that f or the two occupational subsamples.

40. As noted earlier, fewer than 178 of the 2857 jobs in the full nonunion
sample involve a move from blue collar status to professional, technical or
managerial status or vice versa. However, if there were substantial returns
to seniority for even a small number of workers taking the form of cross—
occupational category promotions, this could conceivably yield returns to
seniority for the full sample that exceed the returns to seniority for the
occupational subsamples by the 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points we find.

38

V. Concluding Comments
The basis for considering implicit contracts under which compensation is

deferred from early until late in workers time with their employers to be an
important feature of the labor market has been the simple cross sectional
evidence that long seniority workers have higher wages, even taking their

total labor market experience into account. The evidence presented in this
study seriously undermines the empirical foundations of this sort of implicit

contract. Contrary both to the conventional wisdom and to our own prior
expectations, there seems to be only a small return to seniority in excess of
the

return

to general labor market experience for the average worker. For

both the nonunion professional, technical and managerial sample and the

nonunion blue collar sample, the point estimate of the seniority coefficient
in the model including a control for job duration suggests that the true

return to seniority is on the order of 0.5 percent per year, rather than the
1.4 to 2.0 percent per year suggested by the standard cross section model.
The seniority coefficient in the model for the full nonunion sample that
includes a control for job duration is slightly larger and more precisely

estimated than those in the models for the occupational subgroups, but even
that estimate suggests true returns to seniority that are no more than a third
as large as implied by the coefficient estimates for the same sample from a
standard cross section model.41

This evidence does not imply that implicit contracts entailing the
posting of a bond by workers through a deferral of compensation are never
important.

Indeed, they could be very important for some subgroups of workers

and even a return to seniority of 0.5 percent per year could translate into a

41. Our findings regarding the returns to seniority are consistent with
those obtained by Altonji and Shakotko (1985) using a much different
instrumental variables approach.

39

substantial cumulative contribution to annual earnings over a period of time.

It Is also possible that parts of the total compensation package other than
earnings, such as fringe benefits or other perquisites, are structured so as
to reward longevity with a particular employer.

42

However, earnings deferral

under implicit contracts appears to be a much less important factor in both
white collar and blue collar labor markets than has generally been believed.
A second significant result to emerge from our analysis is the finding
that labor market experience plays a dIfferent role for professIonal,

technical and managerial employees than for blue collar employees. There is
no evidence that nonunion professional, technical and managerial employees
sort themselves into better jobs over the course of their working lives; for
this group, there is no association between pre—job experience and job
duration, and introducing job duration as a control variable Into the earnings
function does not affect the relatively large estimated return to labor market

experience. In contrast, among nonunion blue collar employees, greater pre—
job experience is associated with significantly longer job durations and
introducing job duration as a control variable Into the earnings function
lowers the already—low estimated return to labor market experience by 20 to 30

percent. One interpretation of the results for blue collar workers is that
young blue collar workers pass through a period in which they hold a series of
short, relatively unrewarding jobs, and that, after some time, either because
they find a job that is good enough to stay with (i.e., a job that is unlikely
to be dominated by another) and/or because they mature Into more stable and
more productive workers, they settle into a longer lasting, more remunerative

42. Freeman and Medoff (1984) provide evidence that the value of nonwage
benefits such as vacations and pension plans rise with seniority. There may
also be less tangible advantages that accrue with seniority.

40
43

position.

The results regarding experience and seniority were derived by including

a measure of completed job duration in an earnings function. One benefit of
this approach is that we can examine the relationship of earnings with

completed job duration directly. In all cases it was found that workers who
are on jobs that will end up lasting a long time earn significantly more in

every year of the job.44 Indeed, this relationship largely explains the
positive cross sectional association between seniority and earnings.
We would like to be able to say more about the structural foundations of

the positive relationship between earnings and job duration. One key to
untangling the simultaneous nature of this structural relationship is the
measurement of the relative importance of individual heterogeneity versus
job/match heterogeneity as causal factors in determining earnings and job

duration. If such a measurement found that individual heterogeneity accounts
for a significant part of the positive association between earnings and job
duration, the positive relationship may be thought of as a return to

stability, per se, that stable workers could receive from many employers. If,
on the other hand, it were found that job and/or match heterogeneity accounted
for a significant part of the positive association between earnings and job

duration, there may be evidence for efficiency wage behaviour. For example,
if there are employers for whom turnover is particularly costly, monitoring
worker shirking is particularly expensive, or worker loyalty is particularly
valuable, these employers may agree to pay their workers more throughout the

43. Osterman (1980) characterizes the typical labor mariet behaviour of
non—college—educated men as consisting of a 'moratorium phase" followed by a
'settling down" phase of the sort just described.
44. This relationship is also implicit in the large body of literature on
the negative relationship between separation rates and earnings. See Parsons
(1977) and Freeman and Medoff (1984) for surveys of this literature.

41

job. Workers in such jobs will be unlikely to quit. Alternatively, the
positive association between earnings and job duration would reflect the
desire of employers to preserve idiosyncratically good matches.
In conclusion, we can offer no tangible evidence regarding why earnings
deferral under implicit contracts does not seem to be an Important overall

factor in labor markets. it may be that workers are unable or unwilling to
accept earnings deferral. Minimum wage laws might prevent some workers from
posting the bond required under an earnings deferral contract. Probably more
important, risk aversion and uncertainty about whether the firm will honor its
implicit commitments seem likely to make many workers unwilling to enter into

such arrangements. The nature of long term employment relationships are
certainly deserving of further study.

42

REFERENCES

Abraham, Katharine C. and James L. Medoff, "Length of Service and the
Operation of Internal Labor Markets," Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth
Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research Association,
December 1982, pp. 308—318.
Abromovitz, Milton and Irene A. Steigun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions,
Washington: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1972.
Altonji, Joseph and Robert Shakotko, "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?"
Working Paper No. 1616, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 1985.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capit New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1964.

Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and
Compensation of Enforcers,' Journal of Legal Studies, 3 (1974), pp. 118.

Berndt, E. K., B. H. Hall, R. E. Hall, and J. A. Hausman. "Estimation and
Inference in Nonlinear Structural Models," Annals of Economic and Social
Measurement 3/4, 1974, pp. 653—665.
Brown,

Janies, "Why do Wages Increase with Experience: Measuring the Relative
Importance of Tenure versus On-the-Job Training in Explaining Wage
Growth," mimeo, October 1983.

J3ulow, Jeremy and Lawrence Summers, "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with
Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynsian
Unemployment," Working Paper No. 1666, National Bureau of Economic
Research, July 1985.

Burdett, Kenneth, "A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates," American
Economic Review, 68, March 1978, pp. 212—220.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff, What Do Unions Do?. New York, Basic
Books 1984.
Hall, Robert E.., "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy,"
American Economic Review, September 1982, pp. 716—724.
Harris, and Bengt Holmstroin, "Ability, Performance and Wage

Differentials,"

Review of Economic Studi, July 1982, pp. 315—333
Heckman, J. and B. Singer, "A Method for Minimizing the Impact of
Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,"
Econometrica 52, March 1984, pp. 271—320.

Jovanovic, Boyan, "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of
Political Economy, 1979, pp. 972—990.

43

Lancaster, Tony, "Econometric Methods for the Duration of Unemployment,"
Econometrica, July 1979, pp. 939-956.
Lazear, Edward, "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?' Journal of Political
Economy, December 1979, pp. 1261-1284.

Medoff, James L. and Katharine G. Abraham, "Experience, Performance and
Earnings," Quarterly Journal of Economics, December 1980, pp. 703—736.
Meuoff, James L. and Katharine G. Abraham, "Are Those Paid More Really More
Productive: The Case of Experience," Journal of Human Resources,
Spring 1981, pp. 186-216.
Mincer, Jacob, Schooling, Experience and Earnings, New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1974.

Mincer, Jacob and Boyan Jovanovic, "Labor Mobility and Wages," in Studies in
Labor Markets, Sherwin Rosen, ed., Chicago: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1981, pp. 21—64.
Newey, Whitney K. "A Method of Moments Interpretation of Sequential
Est;sators," Economics Letters 14, 1984, pp. 201—206.

Osterman, Paul, Getting Started: The Youth Labor Market, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1980.
Parsons, Donald 0., "Models of Labor Market Turnover: A Theoretical and
Empirical Survey," in Research in Labor Economics, Ronald G. Ehrenberg,
ed., Greenwich, Connecticut, JAI Press, 1977, pp. 185-223.
Shapiro, C. and J. Stiglitz, "Involuntary Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device," American Economic Review, June 1984.
Stiglitz, J., "Theories of Wage Rigidity," unpublished, 1984.

Viscusi, W. Kip, "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits and the Optimal Wage
Structure," International Economic Review, October 1980, pp. 529—546.
White, Halbert, " A Heteroskedasticity—Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator
and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica 48, May 1980,
pp. 817—838.

Yellen, Janet, "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment,' American Economic
Review, May 1984, pp. 200-208.

44

APPENDIX A
Bias in Seniority and Experience Coefficients
in Cross-section Earnings Equations

This appendix derives the theoretical results concerning bias in the
coefficients on seniority and experience in cross sectional earnings functions

reported in Section II of the paper. A simple base model is presented first:
the consequences of relaxing two of this model's assumptions are then
explored.

Base Model

Suppose that the earnings of a particular worker on a particular job at
a point in time can be written:

(A.l) lnW1 =

iS1t

+

2EXP1

+

+

where

W=

hourly earnings,

S =

is

current seniority (tenure),

EXP =

is

pre—job experience,

p =

the excess of earnings enjoyed by this person on this job
over and above the earnings that could be expected by a
randomly selected person with the same observed
characteristics on a randomly selected job,
is a person/job/time—period specific error term,

index of individuals,

I =
j

=

index

of jobs,

index of years within jobs, and

t =
=

parameters of interest.

For simplicity of exposition, other factors that might influence earnings are
omitted from the theoretical discussion and all variables are assumed to be

measured as deviations from their means. In this formulation, the coefficient

45

captures the returns to experience

not any increases in earnings

that occur because more experience workers have sorted themselves into better

jobs and/or matches. The

term captures the net influence of unobserved

person quality, unobserved job quality and unobserved match quality on hourly

earnings. The error p.. is assumed to be fixed over the course of a job. The
error fjt is assumed to be orthogonal to S, EXP and p.
In practice, earnings functions are generally estimated using cross

section data and p., is not observable. When p..
U

.LJ

is

omitted, equation (A.l)

can be rewritten as
(A.2)

lnW. .

S.

=

1 ijt

ijt

+

EXP.

2

.

ij

+

v.ljt

The error term (v..t) is defined in terms of the underlying stochastic

strucure as

+

(A.3) v1 =

Suppose that the completed duration of jobs is positively correlated
with p.. so that the following relationship holds:
(A.4) D. .
13

= '(ji.

.

13

+

.

13

where D.. is the completed length of the current job, p.. is as defined above,
'v is a parameter which summarizes the relationship between D and

and

captures the variation in completed job duration that cannot be linked to the

earnings advantage associated with worker, job and/or match quality. Suppose
further that workers with more pre—job experience are likely to have found

better jobs and/or better matches. One simple approximation to such a
relationship is
(A.5) p. . = aEXP. +
13
13

13

where p and EXP are as defined above,
relationship between p and EXP and

is a parameter that summarizes the
is the variation in p not

systematically related to EXP. We assume for the present that pre—job
experience is not correlated with coupleted job duration except insofar as

46

more experienced workers are more likely to have found a good job and/or a

good match, so that E(EXPi.*E..) is zero. Substituting equation (A.5) into
equation (A.4) yields

(A.6) D

It

ij

yEXP. + y4,.

ij

+

13

.

is straightforward to show given these relationships and the stated

assumptions that
cov(EXP. .,i. .)
13
13

= *var(EXP 13.),

ii'

var(D.

(A.7)

+

13

cov(D. .,EXP.4) = cY*var(EXP.
J

Y*VarL

. + var(C.

13'

..

13'

.),

13

cov(D

ii

y*ij($ 13

4 .)

.),

lj

cov(D. .,.

.) = var(. .),

cov(D..,..) =

and

a2Y*var(EXP..) +

Y*var(1.).

If each year of any given job is equally likely to be represented in the cross
section sample of observations used to estimate the earnings function, then on
average the observed seniority on the job will be halfway through the job.
More formally,
(A.8)

E(S. . ) = l/2*D.

(A.9)

S. . = l/2*D.

13

ijt

and

where

.ijt is
.

ijt

.

13

+

,.13t
.

a random variable with zero mean. The distribution of

ijt will
.

vary depending upon the completed length of the job. However, its mean is
always zero, as is
straightforward to show that

cov(D..,..t), and cov(EXP....t). It is

47

ijt

cov(S.

= 1/2*var(D. .),

,D. .)

13

13

ijt ,EXP.13

cov(S.
cov(S.

.)

.

.

13t

(A.1O)

= l/2*cov(D.

.,EXP. .),

13

13

,+.13.) = l/2*cov(D. .,. .),
13 13

cov(Sj.t.E..)

=

cov(S. .

= 1/2*cov(D.

,.

ut 13

var(S..)

=

1/2*cov(I3..,..),
13.,j.
13.),

1/4*var(D,,)

+

and

var(..).

The standard formula for the bias in ordinary least squares regression
coefficients is:
=

(A.l1) E() where

is the estimated coefficient vector,

is the true coefficient vector,

X is the vector of explanatory variables, and T

is

the equation error.

Applying the standard bias formula to the seniority coefficient in equation
(A.2) estimated from cross sectional data yields

(A. 12) E(1)—1 =

(l/DET1)*[var(EXp,.)*E(S
cov(EXP i. ,S.

)*E(Exp .

)

*j

.1]

where DET1 is the determinant of the (X'X) matrix from equation (A.2) and the
moments are as defined above. This simplifies to:

(A.13) E(i)1r(1/2)*(1/DET1)*Y*var(EXPj)var($i.)
which is positive provided y (the coefficient summarizing the relationship
between D and p) is positive.

The expected difference between the pre—job experience coefficient in
equation (A.2) estimated from cross sectional data and

2 is

(A.14) E(2)_2=(1/DET1)*

[cov(ExP1 sijt)*E(sit*Ji1) +
This can he rewritten as:

var(S±t)*E(EXP1*,.z1)]

48

(A. 15) E(2)2=(1/DET1)*
[cx*var(EXP1j)*(var(Sjjt) —

1/4*var(D1)

+

1/4*var(.13 )}],
which is also positive so long as

(the coefficient summarizing the

relationship between EXP1. and

is

positive.

Augmenting equation (A.2) by adding D1 as an explanatory variable in a
cross section yields the following specification:

ijt

(A.16) lriW. .

=

I S.jt

+

EXP.

2

.

+

U

D.

.

+ w.

LJL

.LJ

where w is the estimating equation error. Using the relationships in
equations (A.3) and (A.4), this error is
(A.17)

(i/y)*c1 +

ijt

How does introducing D.. into the earnings equation affect the estimated

tenure and experience coefficients? The bias in the tenure coefficient in the
augmented equation (A.16) model estimated using a cross section is:
(A. 18)

./Y)
ijt .13
.,D. .)*cov(S. . ,D. .))
ijt 13
13
ijt )*var(D.13.)—cov(EXP.13

[{var(EXP. .)*var(D. .)-cov2(EXP. .,D. .))*E(_S. .
13
13
13
13

{cov(EXP.13.,S.

.

13..
13./v)

*E(_EXp

{cov(EXP.13. ,S.

-

+

ijt )*cov(EXP.13,D.13

var(EXP.

.

.

.)—

ijt ,D.
13.))

.)*cov(S. .
13

where DET2 is the determinant of the (X'X) matrix from equation (A.16).
Noting that E(_EXP1*1)=O (by assumption) and that
cov(S..t,Z)=l/2*cov(D..,Z) for any variable Z (from equation A.1O), this bias
can readily be shown to equal zero.

The expected difference between the experience coefficient in the

augmented equation (A.15) model estimated using a cross section and 2 '

49

(A.19) E(2)_2=(1/DET2)*

13 ijt

[(var(D..)*cov(EXp..,S.. )13

.,D. )*E(.s . * •/y)
13
13
ijt 13

cov(S.ijt 13
,D. )*cov(EXP
.

+

{var(
—{var(S. .

iLJt

cov(EXP

)*cov(EXp

lj.,D.13.)-

ijt )*cov(S ijt

.,S.
Ij

13

*E(_D .c. ./y)].
]3

13

Again noting that E(EXP..*..)=o and that cov(S.jt.Z)1/2*cov(D..,Z) for any
variable Z, this bias expression simplifies to

(A. 20) E(2)_P2(l/DET2)*(var(Sjt)_l/4*varD1*
a*var(EXP .)*var(c. .).
13
13

This

is still positive so long as a is positive, though straightforward

comparison of equation (A.20) against equation (A.15) reveals that introducing
D.. into the earnings equation reduces the bias in the experience coefficient.

Note that the bias in 2 falls to zero as var(..) falls to zero, that is, as
D.. becomes a better proxy for j...

Relaxing

the cov(EXP,) = 0 Assumption

The preceding has assumed that pre—job experience affects completed job
duration only through its association with job and/or match quality.

If more

experienced (older) workers are simply more stable than less experienced
(younger) workers, then experience may have a direct positive relationship

with completed job duration that is not reflected in higher earnings once

experience is controlled for. An obvious generalization of the base model is

thus to allow for the possibility that cov(EXP..,..) might be positive. This
affects several of the moments specified in equation (A.7) and equation

(A.10). The following replace the corresponding expressions in equation
(A.?):

50

var(D1) =

var(.13
ii

13,,c.
13.)

cov(D.

COV(D.,,M1.)

)

+

ii ,t.13.)

cov(D. ,EXP. ) = cei*var(EXP,

ii

y2*var(+

+ 2uY*cov(EXP.

.)

(A.21)

+

(av)2var(EXP11)

+

•)

cov(EXP. .,. .)

13 13

13

=

var(.13

=

a2y*var(EXP..)

.)

+

uy*cov(EXP
+

ii ,.
13.)

Y*var(41.)

+

a*Cov(EXP..,E1.)

all z, so that the above
Ij ,Z)
replacements also affect cov(S.lit .1). j, cov(S. ,EXP. .), cov(S. , .) and
13
ijt 13
It

remains txLI(' that co(S. ,Z)
lit

for

i/2cov(D

lit lj

.LJ ,u..iJ

cov(S4

Now consider the standard cross section earnings equation:
÷

(A.22) lnW. =

2EXP1J

+

The bias in the estimated seniority coefficient is again given by equation
(A.12); although some of the moments in equation (A.12) take on different

values when the assumption that cov(EXP1.,..)=o is dropped, the bias in the
estimated seniority coefficient still reduces to the expression in equation
(A.13).

The expected difference between the estimated experience coefficient and

is again given by equation (A.14). In the present case, this reduces to:

(A.23) E(2)_2=(l/DET1)*
[a*var(EXP1j)*{var(S1t)

(l/4y)*{cov(EXp.13.,D.
13

l/4*var(D..)} +

)*cov(D .,. .) —

ij 13

var(D.13 )*cov(EXp 13
.,E. .))
13
When cov(EXP..,E,) = 0, this reduces to the expression in equation (A.15).

Assuming a to be positive, a sufficient condition for this expression to be
positive is that
(A.24) cov(D. .,. .)/var(D. .)
13
13
13

> cov(EXP.
13 .,.
13j/cov(EXP.
13.,D.
13 .

Now consider the effect of introducing completed job duration into the

earnings equation:

ijt

(A.25) mW.

S.

1 ijt

+
2

EXP

+
13

3D.ij

+ w

ijt

51

As in the base case, the resulting bias in the tenure coefficient is given by

equation (A.18). Again, even though some of the moments in equation (A.18)
take on different values when the assumption that cov(EXP. ,E. .)

ij 13

=0

is

dropped, it can be shown that this expression equals zero. That is,
introducing completed job duration into the earnings function eliminates the
bias in the tenure coefficient.

The expected difference between the experience coefficient in an
earnings function that also includes completed job duration as a control and

is given by equation (A.19). This reduces to:

(A.26) E(2)_P2=(1/Y*DET2)*{var(Sjjt) —

(1/4)*var(D))*

This expression is positive so long as the condition stated in equation (A.24)

above holds. However, If

.)/var(D.13.)
Dij.,. 13

(A.27) cov( .

< cov(EXP .,. .)/cov(EXP. ,D. .),
13 13
lj 13

then the experience coefficient in the earnings function that includes the
measure of completed job duration will be downward biased.

If the condition

holds with equality, then including the measure of completed job duration

eliminates the bias in 2. It is straightforward to show that, so long as
both a and V are positive, the experience coefficient In equation (A.23) (the
standard cross section earnings function) is larger than that in equation

(A.27) (the earnings function that includes completed job duration). Thus,
under the condition stated in equation (A.24), introducing completed job
duration into the earnings equation reduces but does not eliminate upward bias
in the experience coefficient.

Overall, then, generalizing the base model to allow for a positive

heween EXP.. and . . does not change the main conclusions of the

correlation
analysis.

13

13

The standard cross

upward biased is befoce,

section estimate of the tenure coefficient

is

and introduc I ng U. . I nt:o the equation eliminates that

52

bias. Under reasonable conditions (as given in equation (A.24)), the standard
is also biased upwards

cross section estimate of the experience coefficient

as an estimate of the returns to experience Lse and introducing

into

the earnings equation reduces but does not eliminate that bias.
Relaxing the Single Factor Assumption

A second potential generallzaton of the base model would be to relax
the assumption that individual—, job-, and match-specific earnings components

all have the same incremental association with job duration. Consider a model
in wnich individual and job/match factors enter separately. In this more
general specification, an earnings increment attributable to unobserved
individual characteristics may bear a different relationship to job duration
than one attributable to job/match characteristics.

Equation (A.4) is

rewritten as

(A.28) D1 = Y1j1

2jj

+

+

where p. is the earnings increment attributable to unobserved Individual
is the earnings increment attributable to unobserved

differences,

job/match characteristics, ..

captures the variation in completed job

duration that cannot be linked to the earnings advantage associated with
either worker or job/match quality, i indexes individuals and j indexes jobs.
and

The parameters

capture the relationships of individual and job/match

characteristics, respectively, with job duration; both

to be positive. Assume further that

and 2 are assumed

and 8. are independent. Experience

w ;id affect job/match specific attributes but not (fixed) individual
attributes, so equation (A.5) would be rewritten in terms of

(A.29) a. . = aEXP.
13

Substituting

.

13

+ 4'

13

equation (A.29) into equation (A.28) yields

(A.30) D.. =

+ ya*EXP

+

'24,ij

Given these relationships, it follows that:

+

E1.

53

Cov(EXP1.,p.) =

= a*var(EXP.

cov(EXP. .,8 .)
13

ij

var(D..)

=

0,
.),

13

(y

+

(cxy2)2*var(EXP..)

+

(y

)2*var(4,

)

+

var(1.)

ij

(A.31) cov(D. ,EXP .) = crY *var(EXP .),
2
ij

y*var(jj),

=

cov(D1.,8.)= cr2Y2*var(EXP,.) +

cov(D..,.4)
13

=

y,)*var(+,.),
.

and

13 13.) = var(t.13.).

cov(D. .,.

The relationship between S. and D1 is as before, so that cov(Sj.t,Z) =

l/2*cov(D..,Z)

for all Z.

Now consider the standard cross—section earnings equation:

(A.32) lnW... =

+

2EXP..

+

The error term (v..t) in this specification equals:

(A.33) v.

.

ijt

with

= p.1

+

8.

13

+ 11.

ijt

the error 111jt assumed to be orthogonal to S, EXP, .i and 8. The bias in

the estimated seniority coefficient equals

(A.34) E(1)_p1=(1/DET1)*{var(EXp. .)*E(S. *(j+

)) —

COV(EXP..
which reduces to
(A.35)

So long as both

and y2 are positive, the seniority coefficient in the

standard cross section model is biased upwards. The expected difference
between the estimated experience coefficient and

2 equals

(A.36) E(2)_2=(1/DEr1)*{_cov(Exp.. ,S..t)*E(s..*(p.+8.))+
var(S1t)*E(EXP1*i1.11÷81fl}
which reduces to

54

(A.37)

l/4*var(..)+1/4* *(y_y)*var(jJ)]
to be positive, a sufficient condition for this expression to be

Assuming

positive is that

(A.38) var(..) +

(yy)*var(j)

>

0.

This condition obviously holds whenever V1 >
Now consider the effect of introducing completed job duration, D.., into

th

rn 'i fiin.—t rn
1

(A.39)

i

lnW..t

=

pisijt

+

2EXP..

+

3D1.

+

The error term in equation (A.39) equals

(A.40) w1

(l_y)*M

+

(l_3v2)*Bjj

—

3ij

+

1ijt

The bias in the estimated equation (A.39) seniority coefficient equals
(A.41)

[{var(EXP±j)*var(Dij )—cov2(EXP1 .D1))*
—
. ,D.
ijt )*var(D.)3.)—cov(EXP.13. ,D.13.)*cov(S. ijt
13

{cov(EXP. ,S.

1j
.

.)}

.

+

{cov(EXP1 ,S. jt)*c0v(Eij D1)_

ijt ij

var(EXP. )*cov(S . ,D
13

.)}

which can be shown to equal zero. The expected difference between the
estimated equation (A.39) experience coefficient and

equals

55

(A.42) E(2)_2=(l/DET2)*{_{var(D1)*cov(EXP1
cov(S..t ,D. .)*cov(EXP1. ,D1.)}*

{var(EXP1)*var(D1j)_cov2(S1jt,Dj))*

ijt

ij 13
cov(EXP. ,S. )*cov(S . ,D. .)}
13
ijt
ijt 13
—{var(S. )*cov(EXP .,D. .)—
.

.L

U

After

.U

U

.J

some manipulation, this reduces to
(A.43)

[var(Zj)+Yi(Yi_Y2)*var(l)1
which is positive so long as the condition specified in equation (A.38) holds.
It is straightforward to show that, so long as both

and

are positive,

the experience coefficient in equation (A.32), the standard cross section
earnings function, is larger than the experience coefficient in equation
(A.39), the earnings function that includes completed job duration as a
control.

In sum, generalizing the base model to allow for separate individual and
job/match effects does not affect the conclusions concerning bias in the
seniority coefficient; the standard cross section estimate of

is still

biased upward, and this bias is eliminated by including a measure of completed

job duration in the regression. With regard to the estimated effect of
experience, as long as the condition given in equation (A.38) is satisfied,

the basic results concerning the experience coefficient follow: the
experience coefficient in the standard cross section earnings function is

upward biased as an estimate of the returns to experience L se and
introducing completed job duration into the model reduces but does not
eliminate this upward bias.

Appendix B
Table 1:
Regional and Industrial Distribution of Jobs Samples Subgroupsa
Prof ,Tech,

Managerial,
Nonunion
Complete Censored

Blue
Collar
Nonunion
Complete Censored

All
Nonunion
Complete Censored

Proportion by Region:
Pacific

.129

.132

.128

.102

.125

.122

Mountain

.0670

.0558

.0453

.0536

.0494

.0527

West t h Central .0893

.102

.0906

.115

.0903

.103

East North Central .201

.216

.157

.148

.171

.180

West South Central .0844

.0853

.157

.139

.130

.108

East South Central .0323

.0481

.0775

.0944

.0666

.0746

South Atlantic

.156

.126

.191

.189

.185

.162

Middle Atlantic

.169

.157

.120

.114

.140

.138

New England

.0720

.0775

.0334

.0446

.0423

.0595

Proportion by Industry:

Ag, For, Fish

.0124

.0109

.0584

.0561

.0380

.0329

Mining

.00248

.0140

.0107

.0204

.00716

.0151

Dur Goods Man

.139

.211

.222

.236

.181

.203

NonDur Goods Man

.0397

.0775

.106

.111

.0788

.0903

Construction

.0496

.0481

.181

.162

.122

.105

Trans, Comm. Util

.0645

.0713

.0822

.116

.0731

.0931

Trade

.238

.163

.169

.120

.221

.172

Fin, Ins, RE

.0918

.0651

.0155

.00765

.0638

.0527

Services

.362

.340

.155

.170

.214

.235

403

645

839

784

Number of
observations

1396

1461

aThe other characteristics of the samples are summarized in Table 1.

Appendix B
Table 2:
Additional Coefficients from Final Tenure Modelsa

Prof,Tech
Managerial
Nonunion

Blue
Collar
Nonunion

All
Nonunion

-zy

Y (Inverse Baseline Hazard, X=e
Construction (yes = 1)

—.0513

—.297

—.277

(.4401)

(.121)

(.116)

.192

-.122
(.119)

-.106

(.439)

-.150
(.137)

-.00623
(.12966)

Transportation, communications,
utilities (yes
1)

—.191
(.408)

-.0187
(.1395)

—.0786

Trade (yes = 1)

—.420

-.353

—.414

(.379)

(.122)

(.112)

Durable manufacturin (yes = 1)

(.385)

Nondurable manufacturing (yes = 1)

Finance, insurance, real estate
(yes = 1)
Services (yes =

1)

Mountain (yes = 1)

—.329
(.400)

1)

West south central (yes = 1)

South atlantic (yes = 1)

Middle atlantic (yes = 1)

New England (yes = 1)

1)

—.420
(.144)

—.175

—.176

—.279

(.369)

(.124)

(.112)

.408

.150
(.106)

(.211)

(.133)

.124

.632

(.195)

(.119)

.0689
(.1647)

.397

-.0760
(.2045)

East south central (yes =

-1.372

(.1272)

(.204)

-.647

West north central (yes = 1)
East north central (yes =

.499

(.112)

.351
(.096)

(.093)

.216
(.078)

.305
(.092)

(.082)

.119

.588

.539

(.344)

(.119)

.358
(.102)

—.00783
(.17182)

.483
(.096)

(.080)

.00822
(.17452)

.401
(.105)

(.085)

.0380
(.2190)

.461
(.164).

.242
(.124)

.231

.168

aThe experience, education, race, marital status, disability status, and
occupational coefficients from these models are reported in Table 2 in the
tp,t

Appendix B
Table 3a:
Additional Coefficients froM in (average hourly earnings) Models
Managerial and Professional Nonunion SaMple
Mean
Is.d.1
14.90

Years of
education

[

Nonwhite (yes = 1)

Married (yes = 1)

2.05]

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0775

.0736

.0743

(.0034) (.0036) (.0034)
-

.113
[.157] (.029)

—.0946

.0640

.0519

.025

.900

—.0955

(.0403) (.0404)
.0517

[.300] (.0206) (.0216) (.0217)
Disabled (yes

1)

.044

—.0791

—.0723

—.0727

[.206] (.0299) (.0285) (.0286)
Manager (yes = 1)

.0778

.463

.0787

.0794

[.499] (.0145) (.0145) (.0144)
Construction
(yes = 1)
Durable manufacturing
(yes = 1)
Nondurable manufacturing
(yes = 1)
Transportation, communi—

.036

.142

[.187] (.055)
.143

.231

[.421] (.046)
.162

.081

[.273] (.049)
.0113

.061

.156

.153

(.0635) (.0632)
.154

.154

(.0520) (.0517)
.167

.160

(.0546) (.0540)
.0245

.0227

cation, utilities (yes=l) [.2381 (.0509) (.0581) (.0576)
Trade (yes = 1)

.152

—.0650

-.0367

—.0384

[.359] (.0479) (.0554) (.0550)
Finance, insurance, real
estate (yes
1)

Services (yes = 1)
Mountain (yes = 1)

.070

.116

[.2561 (.050)

.0284
[.477] (.0457) (.0522) (.0519)
.350

—.0383

-.0278

-

.040

—.146

—.122

—

[.197] (.035)
West north central
(yes = 1)
East north central
(yes = 1)

West south central
(yes = 1)
East south central
(yes = 1)

.138

.137

(.0579) (.0574)

.103

—.159

[.304] (.026)

—.161

.078
[.269]

.052

—.161

(.0267) (.0265)

—

—.0308
.0265
[.428] (.0219) (.0234)
.241

.122

(.0322) (.0321)

- .0320

(.0233)

— . 230

— .231

(.028)

(.0300) (.0299)

—.164

— .173

-

.168

(.0327)

(

.0328)

[.223] (.032)

— .230

Appendix B South atlantic
(yes
1)

[.329]

Middle atlantic
(yes = 1)
New England (yes = 1)

1969 (yes = 1)

—.0676
(.0249)

—.0716
(.0287)

—.0690
(.0286)

.180

.0213

[.3841

(.0229)

.0217
(.0252)

.0214
(.0251)

.124

.063

—.0823

—.0787

—.0753

[.243]

(.0302)

(.0310)

(.0310)

.059

.0667
(.0359)

.0735
(.0365)

.0702
(.0365)

.0891
(.0360)

.0973
(.0351)

.0923
(.0351)

.0410
(.0357)

.0538

(.0343)

.0498
(.0342)

[.235]

1970 (yes = 1)

.058

[.234]

1971 (yes = 1)

.061

[.238]

1972 (yes = 1)

.067

.0538
(.0349)

.0655

.0606

(.0352)

(.0353)

.0517
(.0345)

.0646
(.0339)

.0611
(.0340)

.0377
(.0343)

.0500
(.0345)

.0471
(.0345)

.0215
(.0334)

.0302
(.0319)

.0272

(.0319)

.0154
(.0336)

.0250
(.0329)

.0217
(.0330)

[.289]

.0374
(.0329)

.0479
(.0321)

.0463
(.0322)

.093
[.290]

.0752
(.0329)

.0797

(.0316)

.0772
(.0316)

.097

.0845
(.0326)

.0860
(.0323)

.0823
(.0324)

.0309
(.0322)

.0342
(.0325)

.0290
(.0326)

.0707

.0189

.0206

[.251]

1973 (yes = 1)

.072

[.258]

1974 (yes = 1)

.074

[.261]

1975 (yes = 1)

.085
[.278]

1976 (yes = 1)

.083
[.276]

1977 (yes = 1)

1978 (yes = 1)

1979 (yes = 1)

.092

[.297]

1980 (yes = 1)

.105

[.3061

Constant

Table 3a: (cont.)

1.000

1.0001 (.0797) (.0847) (.0856)
aThe experience, seniority anc completed job duration coefficients for these
models are reported in Table 4a of the text.

Appendix B
Table 3b:
Additional Coefficients from in (average hourly earnings) Models
Blue Collar Nonunion Samplea
Mean
[s.d.]

Years of
education

11.02
[

Nonwhite (yes = 1)

Married (yes

1)

Disabled (yes = 1)

2.55]
.131

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0449

.0436

.0427

(.0028) (.0029) (.0029)
—.119

—.116

—.113

[.337] (.019)

(.0203) (.0202)

.891
[.311]

.132
(.020)

(.0214) (.0214)

.091

—.0854

—.0855

.109

.106

—.0820

[.287] (.0212) (.0221) (.0221)
Foreman or craft
worker (yes = 1)

[.500] (.013)

Construction
(yes = 1)

[.353] (.028)

Durable manufacturing
(yes = 1)

.263
[.440]

.506

.146

.203

.196

.201

(.0135) (.0135)

.165

.182

.178

(.0321) (.0319)

.279

.286

.285

(.026)

(.0300) (.0297)

.243
(.029)

(.0335) (.0333)

.103
.307
Transportation, communi—
cation, utilities (yes=1) [.304] (.030)

(.0366) (.0363)

Nondurable manufa turing
(yes = 1)

Trade (yes = 1)

.120

Finance, insurance, real
estate (yes = 1)

Services (yes =

.108

[.311]

)

.310

.101

.121

[.325] (.029)

(.0331)

—.0257

.00882

.009

.250

.313

.120
(.0329)

.0254

[.093] (.0681) (.0566) (.0549)

.176

.132

[.381] (.027)
Mountain (yes = 1)

.251

.051

—.042

[.221] (.033)

.139

.136

(.0316) (.0313)
—

.0511
—.0462
(.0294) (.0294)

— .214

West north cent al
(yes = 1)

[.292] (.028)

East no th central
(yes = 1)

[.362] (.0248) (.0222)

West south central
(yes = 1)

.141
[.348]

—.195

—.210

-.202

(.025)

(.0244)

(.0241)

East south central
(yes = 1)

.100

—.235

—.262

—.247

[.299] (.028)

(.0278)

(.0278)

.094

.155

—.195

—.0522

-.199

(.0281) (.0280)
—.0718

—.0635
(.0221)

Appendix B - Table 3b: (cont.)
-

.196

South atlantic
(yes = 1)

[.414] (.024)

Middle atlantic
(yes = 1)

[.301] (.027)

New England (yes = 1)

.219

.101

.040

—.117

—.0352

—.217

—.203

(.0229) (.0230)
—.128

—.124
(.0246) (.0246)

—.0458

-.0303

[.197] (.0356) (.0302) (.0300)
1969 (yes = 1)

.051

.0325

.0304

.0280

[.219] (.0373) (.0363) (.0361)
1970 (yes = 1)

.058

.0598

.0599

.0558

[.234] (.0361) (.0357) (.0358)
1971 (yes = 1)

.056

.0397

.0413

.0355

[.230] (.0364) (.0359) (.0356)
1972 (yes = 1)

.063

.0479

.0534

.0467

[.243] (.0355) (.0365) (.0363)
1973 (yes

1)

.076

.105

[.265] (.034)
1974 (yes = 1)

.07i

.0867

.114

.108

(.0348) (.0347)
.0925

.0869

[.257] (.0347) (.0351) (.0350)
1975 (yes = 1)

.077

.0259

.0338

.0268

[.267] (.0342) (.0351) (.0350)
1976 (yes = 1)

.086

.0837

.0950

.0849

[.280] (.0336) (.0358) (.0358)
1977 (yes = 1)

.093

.112

[.291] (.033)
1978 (yes = 1)

.102

.132

[.302] (.033)
1979 (yes = 1)

.111

.102

[.314] (.032)
1980 (yes = 1)

.105

.0942

.123

.116

(.0345) (.0344)
.146

.138

(.0348) (.0347)
.118
(.0350)
.107

.110
(.0350)
.101

[.307] (.0325) (.0353) (.0352)
Constant

i.ooo

.197

[.000] (.054)

.208

.188

(.0588) (.0559)

aThe experience, seniority and completed job duration coefficients for these
models are reported in Table 4b of the text.

Appendix B
Table 3c:
Additional Coefficients from in (average hourl earnings) Models
All Occupations Nonunion Sample
Mean
[s.d.]

12.96
[ 2.92]

Years of
education

Nonwhite (yes = 1)

.077

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0629

.0610

.0612

(.0020) (.0020) (.0020)
—.131

[267] (.017)
Married (yes = 1)

.893

.101

[.309] (.014)
Disabled (yes = 1)

.069

-.0705

—.128

—.127

(.0173) (.0172)
.0834

.0847

(.0144) (.0144)
—.0627

—.0610

[.253] (.0165) (.0177) (.0177)
Manager (yes

.192

1)

.0619

.0673

.0645

[.394] (.0137) (.0135) (.0134)
Clerical (yes = 1)

.133

-.0680

—.0679

—.0712

[.340] (.0159) (.0162) (.0162)
Foreman, craft worker
(yes =

1)

Operative, laborer
(yes =

1)

.229
[.420,
.223

—.0729

—.0604

—.0652

(.0147) (.0134) (.0134)
—.260

[.416] (.016)

—.240

—.246

(.0162) (.0162)

Construction
(yes = 1)

[.278] (.025)

Durable manufacturing
(yes = 1)

[.421] (.023)

Nondurable manufa turing
(yes = 1)

[.293] (.025)

(.0280) (.0279)

.084
.195
Transportation, communication, utilities (yes=1) [.278] (.025)

(.0298) (.0297)

.084

Trade (yes = 1)

.230

.095

.167

.142

.212

.197

.0589

.160

.159

(.0281) (.0281)
.223

.222

(.0259) (.0258)
.200

.201

.0803

.202

.202

.0794

[.373] (.0236) (.0275) (.0274)
Finance, Insurance, real
estate (yes = 1)

Services (yes =

)

Mountain (yes =1)

.058

.147

[.234] (.028)
.239
[.427]
.046

.0464

.168

.167

(.0318) (.0317)
.0549

.0538

(.0229) (.0265) (.0264)
—.0730

—.0731

—.0718

[.210] (.0228) (.0208) (.0208)
West north cent al
(yes = 1)

.099

—.163

[.298] (.018)

-.169

—.165

(.0183) (.0184)

Appendix B -

Table 3c: (cont.)

West south central
(yes = 1)

[.313] (.018)

—.179
(.0178) (.0177)

East south central
(yes = 1)

—.186
[.263] (.020)

—.199
—.195
(.0198) (.0198)

South atlantic
(yes = 1)

.173
[.378]

—.138

Middle atlantic
(yes = 1)

—.00947 —.0130
—.0122
[.350] (.01653) (.0166) (.0166)

New England (yes = 1)

.110

—.174

.075

—.130
(.016)

—.180

—.134
(.0164) (.0164)

.143

.049

—.0431

-.0488

—.0434

[.2161 (.0223) (.0213) (.0213)
1969 (yes = 1)

.054

.0492

.0495

.0496

[.227] (.0250) (.0241) (.0241)
1970 (yes =

1)

.058

.0674

.0694

.0671

[.234] (.0246) (.0237) (.0237)
1971 (yes = 1)

.059

.0285

.0306

.0281

[.236] (.0245) (.0234) (.0234)
1972 (yes = 1)

.066

.0489

.0536

.0505

[.249] (.0239) (.0236) (.0236)
1973 (yes = 1)

.074

.0732

.0806

.0781

[.263] (.0233) (.0229) (.0229)
1974 (yes = 1)

.073

.0604

.0654

.0637

[.260] (.0234) (.0230) (.0231)
1975 (yes = 1)

.080

.0262

.0283

.0268

[.272] (.0230) (.0221) (.0222)
1976 (yes = 1)

.085

.0530

.0565

.0537

[.278] (.0228) (.0228) (.0228)
1977 (yes =

1)

.092

.0690

.0741

.0731

[.289] (.0225) (.0221) (.0221)
1978 (yes

1)

.097

.108

[.297] (.022)
1979 (yes

1)

.104

.0971

.111

.110

(.0222) (.0223)
.0995

.0975

[.305] (.0220) (.0224) (.0224)
1980 (yes = 1)

.104

.0652

.0668

.0651

[.305] (.0220) (.0227) (.0227)
Constant

i.ooo
.226
[.000] (.046)

.185

.189

(.0470) (.0474)

The experience, seniority and completed job duration coefficients in these
models are reported in Table 4c of the text.

