NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELECTION AND MARKET REALLOCATION:
PRODUCTIVITY GAINS FROM MULTINATIONAL PRODUCTION
Laura Alfaro
Maggie X. Chen
Working Paper 18207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012, Revised May 2017

Previously circulated as "Selection, Reallocation, and Spillover: Identifying the Sources of Gains
from Multinational Production." We thank Ann Harrison, Daniel Lederman, Aaditya Mattoo,
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Matt Weinzierl, Stephen Yeaple, and participants at the World Bank
Structural Transformation and Economic Growth Conference, Columbia Business School
Workshop on the Organizational Economics of Multinationals, Washington Area International
Trade Symposium, Rocky Mountain Empirical Trade Conference, Texas A&M FDI and Labor
Conference, World Bank International Trade and Integration, the Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, the NBER Summer Institute - International Trade & Macroeconomics, the Empirical
Investigations of International Trade (EIIT) Conference, and the Global Fragmentation of
Production and Trade Policy Conference, and Boston College, Georgetown, Southern Methodist
University, Carleton University, U.S. Census Bureau, George Washington University
(international business), George Mason University, University of Brussels-ECARES, and
University of Sao Paulo seminars for insightful comments and suggestions. Funding from the
World Bank Structural Transformation and Economic Growth project is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Laura Alfaro and Maggie X. Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Selection and Market Reallocation: Productivity Gains from Multinational Production
Laura Alfaro and Maggie X. Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 18207
July 2012, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F2,O1,O4
ABSTRACT
Assessing the productivity gains from multinational production has been a vital topic of economic
research. Positive aggregate productivity gains are often attributed to within-firm productivity
improvement; however, an alternative, less emphasized explanation is between-firm selection and
market reallocation, whereby competition from multinationals leads to factor reallocation and the
survival of only the most productive domestic firms. We investigate the roles of the two different
mechanisms in determining the aggregate productivity gains by exploring their distinct
predictions on the distributions of domestic firms: within-firm productivity improvement shifts
the productivity and the revenue distributions rightward while between-firm selection and market
reallocation raise the left truncation of the distributions and shift revenue leftward. Using a rich
cross-country firm-level panel dataset, we find significant evidence of both mechanisms, but
between-firm selection and market reallocation accounts for the majority of aggregate
productivity gains, suggesting that ignoring this channel could lead to substantial bias in
understanding the nature of gains from multinational production.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Maggie X. Chen
Dept. of Economics
George Washington University
2115 G ST, NW, #367
Washington, DC 20052
xchen@gwu.edu

1

Introduction

Assessing productivity gains from multinational production has been a vital topic of economic
research and policy debate. Nations with greater openness to multinational production have
been shown to exhibit, on average, higher aggregate productivity and faster economic growth.
This stylized fact, presented in numerous macro-level studies, is often attributed to positive
productivity spillover from foreign multinational …rms.1 There is, however, a less emphasized,
alternative explanation centering on selection and market reallocation. Greater openness to
multinational production leads to tougher competition in host-country product and factor
markets, which can result in a reallocation of resources within each domestic …rm, from
domestic to foreign multinational …rms, and from less productive to more productive …rms.
These resource reallocations force the least e¢ cient domestic …rms to exit the market, increase
the market share of the most productive …rms, and motivate domestic …rms to become more
specialized at core advantage goods, all of which raise host-country aggregate productivity.
Although all of the above channels imply aggregate productivity gains from multinational
production, they operate at two distinct margins and represent di¤erent sources of productivity gains. Within-…rm productivity improvement, which can arise from productivity spillover,
technology upgrading, or within-…rm resource reallocation, operates at an "intensive margin"
whereby foreign multinational production raises the productivity of individual continuing domestic …rms. Between-…rm selection and market reallocation, in contrast, work at an "extensive margin" whereby foreign multinational competition induces exits of the least productive
domestic …rms and increases the weights of the most productive …rms in aggregate output.
Their implications for domestic economies are also sharply di¤erent: Within-…rm productivity improvement implies domestic …rm productivity growth whereas selection and market
reallocation result in increased market concentration. Distinguishing between these sources
is thus essential for improving our understanding of the mechanisms by which an economy
responds to foreign multinational competition and setting e¤ective economic policies. While
an extensive body of research has assessed the productivity spillover e¤ect of multinational
…rms, little analysis has investigated the role of selection and reallocation in the aggregate
impact of multinational production and how the di¤erent channels— distinctively as well as
1

See, for example, Borensztein et al. (1998) and Alfaro et al. (2004) for macro-level studies and Harrison and
Rodríguez-Clare (2010) and Kose et al. (2011) for recent overviews of the literature on the relationship between
multinational production, productivity, and economic growth. Evidence suggests that multinational production
exerts a positive e¤ect on economic growth conditional on local conditions, such as su¢ cient human capital
stock and relatively developed …nancial markets. At the macro level, the cross-country correlations between
average FDI-to-GDP ratio and average TFP and TFP growth are 0.27 and 0.26, respectively (sources: World
Bank World Development Indicators and Penn World Tables; data: 1980-2005).

1

jointly— in‡uence the potential productivity e¤ects from multinational competition.2
This paper disentangles the roles of within-…rm productivity improvement and between…rm selection and market reallocation in determining the aggregate productivity gains from
multinational production and investigates their relative importance. This cannot be accomplished by simply examining the relationship between multinational production and hostcountry average productivity, as both channels predict a positive relationship. We therefore
utilize a unifying empirical framework motivated by Melitz (2003) and Helpman, Melitz and
Yeaple (2004) to explore the variations in how the two channels in‡uence the distributions of
domestic …rms in dimensions including productivity, employment, revenue and survival. In
this framework, we hypothesize that within-…rm productivity improvement will shift and even
reshape the productivity distribution of surviving domestic …rms. The extent to which each
domestic …rm responds to foreign multinational competition through productivity spillover,
technology adoption, or within-…rm reallocation could depend on their initial productivity
draws, leading to potentially heterogeneous productivity e¤ects. Greater competition from
multinational production, in both factor and product markets, reallocates factors from domestic to multinational …rms and from less productive to more productive …rms, thereby resulting
in a leftward shift in the employment distribution of domestic …rms. Further, when the adverse e¤ects of greater competition dominate, the revenue distribution of domestic …rms will
shift leftward and become more left truncated with a greater cuto¤ productivity for survival.
Note that the within- and between-…rm e¤ects of foreign multinational competition could
also interact with each other. The extent of within-…rm productivity improvement among
surviving …rms may a¤ect the extent of the market reallocation e¤ect. Similarly, multinationals’e¤ects on factor and product prices will in‡uence domestic …rms’abilities to absorb
productivity spillover and innovate as well as their incentives to upgrade productivity.
These hypotheses are evaluated empirically using a rich cross-country …rm-level panel
dataset, drawn from Orbis, that contains comprehensive …nancial, operation, and ownership information for public and private manufacturing companies in over 30 developed and
developing countries for the 2002-2007 period. To account for the endogenous entry decision of multinational …rms, we adopt a …rst-stage speci…cation motivated by the existing
literature examining the entry decision of multinationals as a function of not only all time2
Although the role of selection and reallocation is underemphasized in evaluating productivity gains from
multinational production, its role has been examined when assessing productivity gains from trade liberalization (see Melitz, 2003). An important empirical study in this area, Pavcnik (2002), …nds that of the 19.3
percent manufacturing productivity growth from trade liberalization in Chile during 1979-1986, 12.7 percent
is attributable to reallocation of resources from less to more e¢ cient producers and 6.6 percent to increased
productivity within plants. See Melitz and Redding (2014) for a recent overview.

2

variant country-pair industry factors but also multinationals’ex-ante productivity and their
host-country speci…c …xed-cost shifter re‡ecting, for example, changes in multinationals’real
…nancial constraints to enter host countries. An extensive number of studies including, for
example, Froot and Stein (1991), Blonigen (1997), Klein, Peek, and Rosengren (2002), Desai,
Foley, and Hines (2004), Baker, Foley and Wurgler (2009), and Bilir, Chor and Manova (2014)
show that …rm …nancial constraints and shocks play an important role in their ability to engage in new FDI. Motivated by this literature, we incorporate an interaction between changes
in multinational headquarters’cash ‡ow measured in the host-country PPP value and hostcountry entry cost into multinationals’ investment decisions; multinationals that experience
a positive …nancial shock due to, for example, increased investment returns in headquarters
or an appreciation of headquarter-country currency are expected to have a reduced …nancial
constraint in foreign investments and thus more likely to make new entry especially in host
countries where the marginal value of the …nancial shock is large. But such idiosyncratic …nancial shocks, unlike other …rm characteristics such as productivity or the level of cash ‡ow,
are not likely to be directly correlated with the future productivity growth of host-country
domestic …rms, thereby o¤ering an exclusion restriction for identifying the causal e¤ects of
multinational production.
We …nd that within-…rm productivity improvement and between-…rm selection and reallocation are two signi…cant but distinct sources of productivity gains from multinational
production. The productivity distribution of domestic …rms is shown to shift rightward after
foreign multinational entry, suggesting within-…rm productivity improvement among surviving domestic …rms. In contrast, the revenue and employment distributions of domestic …rms
are found to shift leftward especially at the left tail, as anticipated by the e¤ects of increased
competition and reallocation in factor and product markets. The least productive domestic …rms are most likely to get crowded out of the market and exit, as a result of tougher
selection on domestic …rms which leads to higher cuto¤ productivity for survival and more
left-truncated distributions. Consistent with the labor market competition hypothesis, the
average wage of domestic …rms is found to rise after foreign multinational entry.
When exploring potential sources of within-…rm productivity improvement, we …nd that
foreign multinational competition can in‡uence both innovation and product composition
decisions. Following Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2015) who use patent applications as a
proxy for innovation, we use a cross-country patent application panel dataset obtained from
Orbis and show that new multinational entry leads to a signi…cant increase in domestic …rms’
patenting activities, especially for the lowest productivity groups. Further, we examine the

3

product composition of domestic …rms using Dun & Bradstreet’s WorldBase Database which
reports detailed information on the primary and secondary products of establishments around
the world and …nd that domestic …rms, especially those with the lowest productivity, are more
likely to drop products after facing foreign multinational entry. This result is consistent with
recent theories in the trade literature (e.g., Bernard, Redding and Schott, 2010; Eckel and
Neary, 2010; Nocke and Yeaple, 2014; Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano, 2014) which suggest that
increased foreign competition can motivate domestic …rms to reallocate resources towards
their core-advantage goods and this within-…rm reallocation can constitute an important
mechanism of productivity upgrading.
The evidence also suggests an interdependence between within-…rm productivity response
and between-…rm reallocation. We …nd that domestic …rms experiencing greater productivity
upgrading witness smaller declines in revenue shares. To further disentangle the channels
and their interactions, we also adopt an alternative approach that di¤erentiates foreign multinational competition in a domestic …rm’s product space, technology space, and labor space,
represented, respectively, by the extent of foreign multinational entry in the product space a
domestic …rm operates, in the technologically linked industries, and in the labor market facing the domestic …rm given its industry’s occupational labor structure. We …nd that foreign
multinational entry in a domestic …rm’s product space exerts a negative e¤ect on the domestic …rm’s revenue and employment but an insigni…cant e¤ect on productivity, suggesting that
foreign rivalry in product space leads to primarily a negative market reallocation e¤ect. In
contrast, foreign multinational entry in the technology space raises productivity as well as
employment and revenue, implying an overwhelming productivity upgrading e¤ect. Finally,
foreign multinational entry in domestic …rms’labor space leads to an increase in productivity
suggesting productivity spillover via labor linkages, a decrease in the employment share as
expected from labor reallocation, and overall a positive e¤ect on revenue. These …ndings o¤er
strong further support to the di¤erent mechanisms through which foreign multinational …rms
could in‡uence domestic …rms’performance.
When quantifying and decomposing the aggregate productivity impact of multinational
production, we …nd based on our preferred estimations that between-…rm selection and reallocation alone account for two thirds of aggregate productivity gains from foreign multinational entry, while within-…rm productivity improvement by itself accounts for one third.
These results highlight that a substantial share of productivity gains are channeled through
between-…rm selection and reallocation. Further, since the analysis suggests that within-…rm
productivity gain could also occur through within-…rm selection and reallocation whereby do-

4

mestic …rms respond to foreign multinational competition by reallocating resources to focus
on competitive products, the overall importance of selection and market reallocation can be
even greater when the within-…rm margin is also accounted for. Ignoring the selection and
market reallocation channel could therefore drastically bias our understanding of the origin
and the magnitude of productivity gains from multinational production.
We perform a series of additional exercises, including re-examining the hypotheses using
alternative TFP estimates, using di¤erent data samples such as industries with relatively homogeneous products (to address potential markup issues in productivity measures), industries
with di¤erent levels of skill intensity, and countries with better data coverage, and considering
the role of trade. In all the exercises, we …nd consistent evidence of between-…rm selection
and market reallocation.
Our study is closely related to several strands of the literature.3 First, as mentioned
above, we build on an extensive empirical literature that assesses the existence of productivity spillover from multinational to domestic …rms. One of the earliest contributions is Aitken
and Harrison (1999) who …nd evidence of negative spillover in a panel of Venezuelan manufacturing enterprises for the period 1975-1989 and attribute the result to a market-stealing e¤ect.
That paper soon spawned a large series of empirical studies. Keller and Yeaple (2009), for
example, …nd signi…cant evidence of within-industry positive spillover in the United States.
Similar results are found in Aghion et al. (2015) for a panel of Chinese enterprises in 19982007. Javorcik (2004), exploring spillover through vertical production linkages in Lithuania
between 1996 and 2000, shows that multinational production generates positive externalities
via backward production linkages from multinational a¢ liates to local intermediate input suppliers. Carluccio and Fally (2013) …nd that productivity spillover via backward linkages can
depend on technological incompatibilities between foreign and domestic technologies. Taking
into account endogenous acquisition decisions, studies by Arnold and Javorcik (2009) and
Guadalupe et al. (2012) …nd foreign ownership leads to signi…cant productivity spillover in
acquired plants while Fons-Rosen et al. (2013), exploiting the di¤erence in the amount of
foreign investment by …nancial and industrial investors, …nd the productivity impact of FDI
to be small, mostly between related industries within the same sector.
In contrast to the ample literature on productivity spillover, evidence on the selection and
reallocation e¤ect of multinational production is scarce. A number of studies o¤er related
insights by evaluating the e¤ects of multinational production on domestic wage rates and
…nancial constraints. Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1996) investigate the impact of foreign3
The academic literature of foreign direct investment is vast. See Hanson (2001), Caves (2007), and Harrison
and Rodríguez-Clare (2010) for surveys on the e¤ects of FDI.

5

owned plants on the wages of domestically owned establishments in Mexico and Venezuela
and report an increase in industry wages due to foreign multinational production. Similarly,
Feenstra and Hanson (1997) …nd a higher level of maquiladora activity to lead to a higher share
of total wages going to skilled (nonproduction) workers in Mexico, interpreting their result
as increased demand for skilled labor from foreign multinational …rms. Exploring the e¤ect
of multinational production on domestic …nancial markets, Harrison and McMillan (2003)
…nd that domestic …rms are more credit-constrained than foreign …rms and borrowing by
foreign …rms exacerbates domestic …rms’credit constraints.4 Ramondo (2009), using a panel
of Chilean manufacturing plants, …nds entry by foreign plants to be associated negatively
with the market shares of domestic …rms and positively with the productivity of domestic
incumbents. Kosova (2010), analyzing exit and growth sales of domestic …rms in the Czech
Republic, …nds evidence consistent with crowding out and technology spillover.
Our paper contributes to the above literature by evaluating jointly the distinct roles of
within-…rm productivity improvement and between-…rm reallocation in determining the aggregate productivity gains from multinational production. The existing empirical literature has
traditionally focused on productivity spillovers from foreign multinational to domestic …rms
while the e¤ect of selection and market reallocation— either within or between …rms— has been
much less studied. The main contribution of the paper is to account for the di¤erent mechanisms of productivity gains from foreign multinational competition and, importantly, quantify
their relative importance. Our approach, utilizing intuitive and novel empirical strategies that
explore the distributions of domestic …rms and di¤erentiate competition in product, factor
and technology space, o¤ers a unifying framework for assessing and quantifying the aggregate
and the decomposed productivity gains. The paper shows that the bulk of productivity gains
result from selection and market reallocation. The result provides an important new insight
into a central topic of empirical literature which has mostly centered on the relationships
between multinational activity and domestic productivity without systematically searching
for the mechanisms and forces driving those relationships.
The …ndings of the paper also deliver important implications for policy debates on FDI,
as understanding the sources of potential gains from multinational production is critical to
designing economic policies (Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare, 2010). If productivity spillover
is the primary source of productivity gains, special treatment to foreign …rms, often provided
4

In contrast to Harrison and McMillian (2003), Harrison, Love, and McMillian (2004), using Worldscope data
on 7,079 …rms in 28 countries, …nd FDI in‡ows to be associated with a reduction in …rms’…nancing constraints.
Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2010) note that these contrasting results point to policy complementarities like
those between FDI and local …nancial markets (see Alfaro et al., 2004, 2010).

6

by host countries in the form of tax breaks and …nancial incentives, might be justi…able. But
if productivity gains arise primarily from selection and reallocation as shown in the paper,
it would be important to also improve domestic market conditions, including labor mobility
and credit access, to facilitate the gains from competition and resource reallocation.5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents theoretical hypotheses that
will guide the empirical analysis. Section 3 describes the data and key variables. Sections 4
and 5 report the estimation results and robustness analyses, respectively. Section 6 quanti…es
and decomposes the productivity gains from increased multinational production. Section 7
concludes.

2

The Impact of Multinational Production: Hypotheses

In this section, we present testable hypotheses describing the di¤erent mechanisms through
which multinational production could a¤ect aggregate domestic-…rm productivity in host
countries. Gains in aggregate domestic-…rm productivity can arise from two main sources: (i)
within-…rm productivity improvement among domestic …rms due to, for example, productivity
spillover from foreign multinational …rms, innovation, and technology upgrading; and (ii)
between-…rm selection and market reallocation whereby the least productive domestic …rms
exit the market and factor resources are reallocated from less productive to more productive
domestic …rms. Examining the relationship between multinational production and aggregate
domestic productivity alone would not allow us to distinguish between the di¤erent sources of
productivity gains. We discuss below how to disentangle the di¤erent channels by exploring
the implications of each channel for the distributions of domestic …rms in stylized theoretical
frameworks.

2.1

Framework and Assumption

The impact of multinational production on host-country domestic …rms can be established in
a stylized theoretical framework of heterogeneous …rms and multinational production as seen
5

More broadly, the roles of spillover, selection, and reallocation from tougher competition is an important
subject of inquiry in many …elds of economics. In addition to trade (e.g. Pavcnik, 2002; Melitz, 2003), Combes
et al. (2012), for example, study the role of agglomeration forces (externalities) versus selection in explaining
the productivity advantage of large cities, Bloom et al. (2015) analyze the e¤ects of technology spillover
versus market rivalry in R&D, and Acemoglu et al. (2013) examine how reallocation a¤ects the implications
of subsidies for growth and welfare in a model of …rm innovation with endogenous entry and exit. Our work
also connects to the growing literature that emphasizes the productivity e¤ect of resource misallocation across
establishments (see Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Alfaro et al., 2009; Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta,
2013). Echoing these studies, our paper suggests that the reallocation of capital and labor as a result of
increased multinational production could lead to important productivity gains.

7

in Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Melitz (2003), and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008).6
In this realm of models, consumers may exhibit various types of utility functions (e.g., a
utility function with a constant elasticity of substitution) and there is a spectrum of heterogeneous …rms within a sector each drawing a level of productivity from a given distribution.
To produce the good, …rms incur a marginal cost that diminishes with a higher productivity draw. In addition to serving the home country, …rms may supply a foreign country via
either exports or local production and subsidiary sales. Firms incur an iceberg trade cost
and a …xed export cost, such as the cost to set up and manage a distribution network, when
exporting to a foreign market. If …rms choose to engage in multinational production abroad,
they incur a …xed cost, such as the cost of owning or renting a production facility in addition
to the cost of a distribution network, at each foreign production location. The …xed costs of
exporting and multinational production can be country as well as …rm speci…c. For example,
countries with more regulations may impose greater …xed costs for setting up distribution
networks and production facilities. The …xed costs may also conceivably vary across …rms,
re‡ecting cross-…rm variations in, for example, …nancial constraints and business networks.7
Firms with, for instance, existing business networks in a foreign country might face lower
…xed costs of exporting and multinational production.
Several general assumptions are noteworthy for drawing hypotheses on how foreign multinational competition may a¤ect domestic …rms. First, we assume, as in Helpman, Melitz and
Yeaple (2004), that exporting involves higher variable costs (due to iceberg trade costs) while
multinational production involves higher …xed costs (due to, for example, the need to operate
additional production facilities). Based on this assumption, only the most productive …rms
are able to o¤set the higher …xed costs and …nd it more pro…table to invest in local production
than to export. Thus, multinational …rms, by self selection, are more productive than other
types of …rms.
Second, we assume that the price elasticity of the industry aggregate demand is no less
than one. This assumption ensures that an increase in aggregate productivity, which leads to
a lower aggregate price, does not lower the industry’s aggregate sales. In Section 2.3, we also
discuss the possibility that aggregate industry demand has a price elasticity of less than one
and its implications for the hypotheses.
Third, we assume that each …rm’s productivity can be in‡uenced by both its productivity
6

In an earlier working paper version (Alfaro and Chen, 2015), we present a stylized analytical framework
adapted from Melitz (2003) and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) to illustrate the di¤erent mechanisms.
7
In theoretical modeling, a …rm-speci…c …xed cost shifter also allows two …rms with identical productivity
to di¤er in their export and multinational production choices, a possibility often observed in the data.

8

draw at birth and ex-post factors such as innovation and technology adoption decisions,
within-…rm resource allocations, and productivity spillover from other …rms. The entry of
foreign multinational …rms can thus a¤ect the productivity level of domestic …rms not only
through productivity spillover to domestic …rms, but also by motivating the …rms to raise
R&D, adopt better technologies, and alter product composition.
Fourth, related to the previous assumption, the extent to which domestic …rms respond
to foreign multinational competition through each channel could depend on their initial productivity draws. For example, the magnitude of productivity spillover could be heterogeneous
across …rms depending on the …rms’initial productivity and absorptive capacity. Similarly, the
incentives to raise innovation or alter product composition in response to foreign competition
could vary systematically across the distribution of domestic …rms.
Based on the above framework, we next outline an array of testable hypotheses that are
generalizable to a broad class of theoretical contexts on how the entry of foreign multinational
…rms could a¤ect the productivity, employment and revenue distributions of domestic …rms.

2.2

Within-Firm Productivity Gain

First, we hypothesize that foreign multinational entry could lead to within-…rm productivity
improvement for domestic …rms. As the extent of productivity improvement could be heterogeneous across …rms depending on their initial productivity levels, the domestic productivity
distribution could shift rightward or change shape. This hypothesis is outlined below:
Hypothesis 1 (Within-…rm productivity gain): Foreign multinational entry can lead to
(heterogeneous) within-…rm productivity improvement among domestic …rms, whereby domestic …rms’ new productivity distribution stochastically dominates the previous one.
As discussed in the above subsection, the productivity of each individual domestic …rm
can be in‡uenced by foreign multinational …rms through a variety of mechanisms. As shown
in a large volume of empirical literature, foreign multinational entry could generate positive
productivity spillover to domestic …rms through production linkage, sharing common inputs,
and labor mobility.
But there may also be other sources of within-…rm productivity improvements. For example, domestic …rms may raise innovation or adopt better technologies to increase their
competitiveness against new foreign multinational competition. This e¤ect could vary signi…cantly across domestic …rms depending on their position in the productivity distribution
and distance to the productivity frontier. As shown in Aghion et al. (2009), the entry of a
9

technologically advanced competitor could encourage innovation by incumbents initially close
to the frontier, while exerting no or negative innovation e¤ects on incumbents behind the
frontier that have little hope to win against the entrant.
Domestic incumbents may also respond to foreign multinational competition through resource reallocation within the …rm by changing product composition and reallocating resources
to focus on core-advantage goods. The work by Bernard, Redding and Schott (2010), Eckel
and Neary (2010), Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), and Nocke and Yeaple (2014) shows
that …rms may choose to drop the least competitive products and specialize in their most
competitive products following trade liberalization. This reallocation of resources within …rms
towards their most e¢ cient use could similarly happen as a result of foreign multinational
competition and contribute to within-…rm productivity gains.
We explore these possibilities in Section 5.3 by examining domestic …rms’innovation and
product composition decisions.

2.3

Between-Firm Selection and Market Reallocation

The entry of foreign multinational …rms can also raise competition in both product and factor
markets. As shown in Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), foreign competition due
to trade liberalization results in factor and product market reallocation and tougher selection
among domestic …rms. These implications are similarly applicable to foreign multinational
competition as we discuss below.
Between-Firm Selection As discussed in Section 2.1 and highlighted in Helpman, Melitz
and Yeaple (2004), multinational …rms, by self selection, tend to be the most productive …rms
in each industry. It can be shown in the same theoretical framework that the entry of foreign
multinationals will increase demand in factor— particularly labor— markets and bid up factor
costs. Such entry could also raise competition in product markets and, in a context of variable
markups such as Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), lower domestic …rms’product price. Both of
these e¤ects will consequently raise the productivity threshold required for domestic …rms’
survival, forcing the least productive domestic …rms to exit and making the productivity
distribution of domestic …rms more left-truncated. We refer to this e¤ect as a between-…rm
selection e¤ect and summarize it below:
Hypothesis 2 (Between-…rm selection): Foreign multinational entry raises the cuto¤
productivity for survival and reduces survival rates especially for the least productive domestic
…rms.
10

Between-Firm Factor- and Product-Market Reallocation The increased competition
in the labor market as a result of greater foreign multinational competition will also reallocate
labor from domestic to foreign multinational …rms and from less productive to more productive
domestic …rms. This should lead to a leftward shift in the employment distribution of domestic
…rms, especially at the left tail of the distribution, and an increase in the wage rate. We refer
to this e¤ect as a between-…rm factor reallocation e¤ect and summarize it below:
Hypothesis 3 (Between-…rm factor reallocation): Increased labor demand after foreign
multinational entry shifts the employment distribution of domestic …rms leftward especially at
the left tail and bids up the wage rate.
Taking into account all the e¤ects discussed above, increased multinational competition
will a¤ect domestic …rm revenue in three di¤erent ways. First, within-…rm productivity improvement could a¤ect domestic …rm revenue. When the price elasticity of aggregate demand
is higher than one, an improvement in domestic …rm productivity can increase both the industry’s aggregate sales and individual domestic …rms’revenue.8 When the price elasticity of
aggregate demand is equal to one, the industry’s aggregate sales does not change, but domestic …rms whose productivity improves more than the aggregate productivity can experience
an increase in revenue while the rest sees a decline. Second, as new foreign multinational
entry leads to tougher competition in product markets, domestic …rms’demand and revenue
could be crowded out by more competitive foreign multinational …rms. Third, increased competition in factor markets and an increase in factor prices could force domestic …rms to raise
prices and see a decline in demand and revenue.
These complex and often opposing e¤ects together imply that the net e¤ect of foreign
multinational entry on domestic …rms’ revenue is ambiguous. In the absence of within-…rm
productivity improvement, domestic …rms, especially the least productive domestic …rms,
will likely incur a loss in domestic sales and the revenue distribution of surviving …rms will
shift leftward especially at the left tail. We refer to this e¤ect as the between-…rm revenue
reallocation e¤ect and summarize it below:
Hypothesis 4 (Between-…rm revenue reallocation): Increased factor and product competition after foreign multinational entry shifts the revenue distribution of domestic …rms
leftward, especially at the left tail.
8

Conversely, when the price elasticity of aggregate demand is lower than one, within-…rm productivity
improvement, which lowers aggregate price, will contract aggregate sales and hurt total domestic …rm revenue
even though the impact can be asymmetric across domestic …rms.

11

Interdependence of Within- and Between-Firms E¤ects

It is worth noting that the

e¤ects of foreign multinational competition, both within and between …rms, could be interdependent. For example, …rms receiving a greater productivity spillover could have greater
capacities to innovate and upgrade technology. The extent of within-…rm productivity improvement among surviving …rms may also a¤ect the extent of the market reallocation e¤ect
by allowing …rms to cut prices and raise demand to mitigate the market reallocation e¤ect.9
Similarly, multinationals’ e¤ects on factor and product prices can in‡uence domestic …rm’s
ability to absorb productivity spillover as well as their incentives to upgrade productivity or
adapt product composition. Some domestic …rms may be pushed by foreign multinational
entry to innovate or adjust product mix to raise productivity and escape competition, while
for some other …rms the increased competition weakens their anticipated return and raises
the costs of innovation. We empirically explore these interdependences in Section 5.4.

2.4

Aggregate Productivity

Next consider the impact of greater foreign multinational production on aggregate productivity. To evaluate the aggregate productivity impact, we take into account both domestic
and foreign multinational …rms. As described above, domestic …rms’ aggregate productivity will be a¤ected at two distinct margins. At an intensive margin, domestic …rms could
experience within-…rm productivity gain as a result of positive productivity spillover from
foreign multinational …rms as well as self-upgrading through within-…rm adjustments and resource reallocations. At an extensive margin, the tougher selection on domestic …rms raises
the productivity threshold for survival and reallocates markets and resources towards more
productive domestic …rms. Both of these mechanisms will increase the aggregate productivity
of domestic …rms. When accounting for the productivity of foreign multinational …rms, the
aggregate productivity e¤ect will further increase due to the productivity premium of new
foreign multinational …rms. In Section 6, we will evaluate the relative importance of each of
the above sources in the aggregate productivity impact of foreign multinational production.

3

Cross-Country Firm Financial and Ownership Data

We use a cross-country manufacturing …rm-level panel dataset, drawn from Orbis published
by Bureau van Dijk, that contains comprehensive …nancial, operation, and ownership informa9

Note, however, that when the aggregate demand for the industry has a price elasticity lower than unity,
within-productivity improvement could also lead to lower sales and exits among the least e¢ cient …rms, which
constitute another source of between-…rm adjustments.

12

tion for public and private companies in over 30 developed and developing countries. Bureau
van Dijk is a leading source of company information and business intelligence and is extensively used by empirical …rm-level studies in international trade, foreign direct investment, and
other …elds. Orbis combines information from around 100 sources and information providers.
Primary sources include Tax Authorities, Ministry of Statistics, Provincial Bureau of Legal
Entities, Securities and Investments Commissions, National Banks, Municipal Chambers of
Commerce, and State Register of Accounts. Over 99 percent of the companies included in
Orbis are private. For each company, the dataset reports: a) detailed 10-year …nancial information including 26 balance sheet and 25 income sheet items, b) industries and activities
including primary and secondary industry codes in both local and international classi…cations, c) corporate structure including board members and management, and d) ownership
information, including shareholders and subsidiaries, direct and indirect ownership, ultimate
owner, independence indicator, corporate group, and all companies with the same ultimate
owner as the subject company.
Orbis provides several advantages that are central to our analysis. First, a notable strength
of Orbis is its ownership information, which covers over 30 million shareholder/subsidiary
links and is known for its scope and accuracy. The information is collected from a variety
of sources. The data show full lists of direct and indirect subsidiaries and shareholders, a
company’s degree of independence, its ultimate owner, and other companies in the same
corporate family. We explore the shareholder, ultimate owner, and subsidiary information to
identify (majority- and wholly-owned) MNC activities across countries. Second, the …nancial
data in Orbis consist of a rich array of time-series information enabling us to measure and
compare a …rm’s total factor productivity over time. Third, Orbis provides broad country
coverage, including a wide range of both industrial and emerging economies.
We use four categories of information for each …rm: (a) industry information including
the 4-digit NAICS code of the primary industry in which each establishment operates, (b)
ownership information including each …rm’s domestic and global parents and domestic and
foreign subsidiaries, (c) location information, and (d) non-consolidated …nancial information
including revenue, employment, assets, investment, and material cost.10 A …rm is considered
10

We imposed a number of requirements in cleaning the data. First, we dropped all records that lack revenue,
employment, asset, and industry information. Second, we focused on manufacturing industries only. Third,
we excluded countries with fewer than 100 observations. Last, we restricted the …nal sample to countries
with relatively good coverage of …rm …nancials that are required to estimate productivity. The main countries in the …nal sample include Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Belgium, Bulgaria,
China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Germany, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, South Korea, Spain, Lithuania, Malaysia, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Sweden, Slovenia,
Slovakia, Taiwan, and Ukraine.

13

foreign-owned if it is majority- or wholly-owned by a foreign multinational …rm. There are
about 36,000 foreign-owned subsidiaries in the …nal sample.11
While we believe that Orbis is a very informative and useful data source for answering
the question raised in our paper, we are aware of its limitations. Like most other datasets
that rely on public registries and proprietary sources, Orbis does not cover the population of
businesses across countries. An ideal alternative would be national census data that include
the entire population of …rms. However, such census data are hard to obtain (usually subject
to location and nationality restrictions and requirements) and nonexistent in many developing
countries. The reason for the lack of data is simple: high costs and institutional restrictions
prevent frequent collections of economic census for all the businesses existing in a country.
To assess the extent of coverage, in particular, with respect to small businesses, we compare
the data against several benchmarks including, for example, the Structural and Demographic
Business Statistics (SDBS) from the OECD. We …nd Orbis provides satisfactory coverage
in many of the countries considered. For France, for example, the SDBS dataset reports
that 84 and 91 percent of the enterprises have fewer than 10 and 20 employees, respectively,
in 2007. Orbis reports 80 and 86 percent. The coverage for some countries seems highly
satisfactory. For Sweden, SDBS reports close to 93 percent of the enterprises with fewer than
20 employees while Orbis shows 95 percent. For some other countries, Orbis tends to have
a lower percentage of small …rms. For Spain and Portugal, for example, the percentage of
enterprises with fewer than 20 employees is 91 and 89 percent, respectively, in SDBS and 88
and 77 percent, respectively, in Orbis. The SDBS data does not include data for developing
countries, but the numbers in Orbis seem comparable for some of the countries. For Argentina,
for example, the share of enterprises with fewer than 20 employees was close to 90 percent
(with INDEC showing 82 percent for Buenos Aires). For Latvia, it was close to 78 percent in
Orbis while Eurostat reports 85 percent.
In Section 5, we further address potential issues with the data and data sampling in a
number of ways, including, in particular, repeating our analysis for subsamples of countries
with better data coverage.
Productivity: Estimation Methodology

We use revenue, employment, asset, and

material cost information to estimate each …rm’s total factor productivity, a primary variable
of the paper. In particular, we use …rms’ …nancial data in the 2002-2007 period to derive
11

The subsidiary data used in our paper do not distinguish between green…eld foreign investment and mergers
and acquisitions. However, our primary theoretical hypotheses and empirical approach are not dependent on
the mode of multinational entry.

14

estimates of production function and productivity.12
A key challenge in the measurement and identi…cation of productivity relates to the endogeneity of the …rm’s optimal choice of inputs. Di¤erent estimation measures exhibit di¤erent
advantages and limitations. As shown by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015), the use of
instruments based on lagged input decisions as the source of identi…cation in structural estimation methods such as Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) may be
associated with collinearity problems.13
We considered a variety of productivity estimation methodologies.14 Ghandi et al. (2012),
one of the most recent studies, use a transformation of the …rm’s …rst order condition for
‡exible inputs that does not require …nding instruments for the ‡exible inputs or subtracting
them from output. The transformation enables a nonparametric regression of the ‡exible
input revenue share against all observed inputs to non-parametrically identify the ‡exible
input’s production elasticity and the ex-post shocks. We report our primary results based on
these productivity estimates, but also show in Section 5.2 that the …ndings are qualitatively
similar when other estimation methods such as Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) are used.
We estimate production functions separately for each country group and industry and
obtain the productivity of each …rm based on country group-industry speci…c production
function estimates. Four country groups, namely, high income, upper middle, lower middle,
and low income, classi…ed following the World Bank’s income group de…nition are considered.
In Figure 1, we show that multinational a¢ liate sales and host-country industry TFP exhibit
a positive and signi…cant relationship in both absolute levels and growth rates. Speci…cally,
countries with greater growth rates of multinational activity experience, on average, greater
TFP growth. In the empirical analysis, we divide the 6-year period into two sub-periods,
2002-2004 and 2005-2007, and investigate how new multinational entry a¤ects host-country
TFP growth.15
In addition to the productivity e¤ect, we examine the e¤ects of foreign multinational
12

Revenue, asset, and material cost are de‡ated in the data. We obtained industry-level revenue, asset, and
material cost de‡ators from the EU KLEMS, the OECD STAN database, and some other national data sources.
For countries without industry-level de‡ators, we used national income and capital de‡ators. See Section 5.2
for discussions on the implications of unobserved price information and the robustness analysis.
13
Ghandi et al (2012) show that the methods suggested by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015), and
Wooldrige (2009), which are based on a quasi-…xed assumption on the inputs included in the production
function, mantain the same identi…cation problems.
14
Van Biesebroeck (2008) and Syverson (2011) provide a comparison of several di¤erent productivity estimation methods and show them to produce similar productivity estimates.
15
Table A.1 reports the summary statistics of the main variables. Compared to entry, we observe relatively
few exits of multinational …rms in the data. In the empirical analysis, we therefore focus on the e¤ect of new
entry.

15

competition on domestic …rms’revenue, employment, and survival. We also complement the
analysis with two additional datasets in Section 5 to investigate how foreign multinational
competition might in‡uence domestic …rms’ innovation and product composition decisions.
First, we use a cross-country patent application panel dataset obtained from Orbis which reports information such as patent name, international patent classi…cation (IPC) code, patent
application date, citing document, cited document, application outcome, current owner country code, and inventor country code. Following previous studies such as Aghion et al. (2009),
Bloom et al. (2013) and Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2015), we use the number of patent
applications …led by a domestic …rm as a proxy for innovation. Second, we match the main
data with another worldwide establishment-level database, Dun & Bradstreet’s WorldBase,
which reports, for each establishment, detailed location, 4-digit SIC codes of primary and
up to …ve secondary products, global ultimate owner and headquarters, start year, and basic
information such as employment and sales. Exploring over-time variations in establishments’
product composition, we examine how domestic …rms might undertake within-…rm selection
and reallocation by adjusting their product mix after facing foreign multinational entry.

4

Empirical Strategy and Evidence

In this section, we evaluate the hypotheses outlined in Section 2 and assess empirically the
e¤ects of increased multinational production. Following Section 2, our empirical strategy
investigates the productivity e¤ects of foreign multinational competition at both the within…rm margin and the between-…rm margin. To account for the endogenous entry decision of
multinational …rms, the analysis proceeds in two steps. First, motivated by stylized theories and evidence on the role of …rm productivity and …nancial shocks in foreign investment
decisions, we examine the entry decision as a function of not only all time-variant countrypair-industry factors but also multinationals’ex-ante productivity and changes in their real
…nancial constraints to enter host countries. Multinationals that experience a positive …nancial shock due to, for example, increased investment returns in headquarters or an appreciation
of headquarter-country currency are expected to have a reduced …nancial constraint in foreign investments— especially in host countries where entry cost had inhibited entry and the
marginal value of the shock is large— and thus more likely to make new entry. But such
idiosyncratic …nancial shocks, unlike other …rm characteristics such as productivity or the
level of cash ‡ow, are unlikely to be directly correlated with the future productivity growth
of host-country domestic …rms, thereby o¤ering an exclusion restriction for identifying the

16

causal e¤ects of multinational production. After accounting for the endogeneity of multinational entry, we explore the over-time changes in domestic …rms’distributions to identify the
distinct e¤ects of greater multinational production.

4.1

The Entry Decision of Multinational Firms

We begin our empirical analysis by examining the entry of foreign multinational …rms in the
speci…cation given below:
Pr [ = 1] =
2 ln  

[

1 ln   

 +

+

3 ln  

(1)
   +



+  ]

where  represents the binary decision of a multinational …rm  headquartered in
country  to invest in a given host country ,    is the lagged productivity of the multinational …rm estimated on the basis of headquarters activities in 2002-2004,   
is the change in the multinational …rm headquarters’cash ‡ow measured in the host-country
PPP value,   is a measure of entry cost in the host country, and



is a vector of

country-pair-industry dummies that control for all country-pair-industry factors that could affect multinationals’entry decisions including the possibility that multinationals are attracted
to host countries with higher productivity growth. Because we examine the entry decision in
a single period, the time dimension is suppressed in the …xed e¤ect. In addition, …rm-level
clustering is used to allow for correlations of errors within each …rm. We also consider an
alternative speci…cation which includes in addition a …rm …xed e¤ect

0


to control for all

…rm characteristics including TFP and …nancial shock.
As shown in Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), …rms with a large productivity draw
should be more likely to enter new host countries. Moreover, …rms’ …nancial shock at their
headquarters will in‡uence their …nancial constraints to invest abroad and is also expected to
a¤ect multinationals’ entry decisions. Multinationals that experience idiosyncratic positive
cash ‡ow shocks at headquarters, due to, for example, increased investment returns or an
appreciation of headquarter-country currency, see a decrease of …nancial constraints in foreign
investments and are thus more likely to enter new host countries. But these idiosyncratic cash
‡ow shocks of multinational …rms, in contrast to other multinational characteristics such as
productivity and size, are unlikely to be directly correlated with the future productivity growth
of individual host-country domestic …rms, thereby serving as a suitable exclusion restriction
in the second stage to identify the causal e¤ects of multinational production.

17

The role of …nancial shocks in multinationals’ability to overcome …nancial constraints and
engage in new FDI has been shown in an extensive empirical literature. Froot and Stein (1991)
…nd that a devaluation of a host-country’s currency will increase the volume of M&As by otherwise …nancially-constrained foreign multinational …rms, a …nding that is similarly shown in
Blonigen (1997). Klein, Peek, and Rosengren (2002) examine how FDI can be constrained by
weak conditions in the source-country banking sector and show that Japanese multinational
…rms that are tied to less healthy banks were less likely to invest abroad during the banking
sector crises in Japan in the 1990s. Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004) investigate how poor …nancial institutions restrict multinationals’ access to external capital in some jurisdictions and
lead them to rely more on internal capital markets. Exploring multinationals’source-country
stock market performance, Baker, Foley and Wurgler (2009) …nd that FDI ‡ows increase
substantially with source-country stock market valuations and suggest that FDI ‡ows re‡ect,
in part, increases in low-cost capital available to multinational …rms in the source country.
Erel, Liao and Wisbach (2012) similarly …nd that …rms in countries whose stock market has
increased in value or currency has recently appreciated and …rms that have a relatively high
market-to-book value tend to engage in FDI while …rms from weaker-performing economies
tend to be targets. Bilir, Chor and Manova (2014) evaluate the role of host-country …nancial
development in the operations of multinational …rms and show that host-country …nancial
development increases entry by multinational a¢ liates, due to a …nancing e¤ect that encourages multinational entry and activity in the host country through improved access to external
capital. The above evidence o¤ers strong support to the importance of …nancial constraints
and shocks in multinationals’foreign investment decisions.16
The e¤ect of positive …nancial shocks on entry may, however, vary across host countries
depending on the level of entry cost multinational …rms face. We thus interact the …rm-level
…nancial shock variable with a country-speci…c entry cost variable.17 As in Helpman, Melitz
and Rubinstein (2008), we use country-level data on the regulation costs of …rm entry by
Djankov et al. (2002) measured as the number of legal procedures required to legally start
operating a business.
Table 1 reports the estimation results.18 We …nd that, as expected in Section 2, more
productive …rms exhibit a greater likelihood of entering foreign countries, a result consistent
with, among many others, Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Yeaple (2009), and Chen and
16

See Froot and Dabore (1999) and Foley and Manova (2015) for overviews of the evidence.
We thank a referee for this suggestion.
18
We use a linear probability model to avoid the incidental parameter problem that arises in …xed-e¤ect
maximum likelihood estimators.
17

18

Moore (2010). Further, …rms that experience a positive …nancial shock are more likely to
enter new host countries, especially new countries where the marginal value of the …nancial
shock is su¢ ciently large for overcoming entry cost. These …ndings are robust to the inclusion
of host-country-industry, country-pair-industry, and …rm …xed e¤ects, which control for all
time-variant and time-invariant country-industry and country-pair-industry factors and all
time-invariant multinational …rm characteristics. We also assessed the predictive ability of
the instrument by performing weak identi…cation tests and rejected the null hypothesis of
weak identi…cation.19 Based on the estimates, we then obtain the predicted probability of
entry for each multinational …rm in a given host country and the expected number of new
multinational …rms in each host country, the latter to be used in the following analysis.
Now we move on to evaluate the e¤ect of multinational production on host-country domestic …rms, taking into account the endogenous entry of multinational …rms.20 We …rst
estimate the net e¤ect of new multinational entry on the average productivity of domestic
…rms. Table 2 shows that multinational production exerts, on average, a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the average productivity of domestic …rms, taking into account the endogeneity
of multinational entry.
There are, however, two important considerations behind these estimates. First, comparing the OLS and the instrumented results, we …nd that failure to account for the endogenous
entry of multinational …rms can lead to an over-estimation of the e¤ect of multinational production. According to column (2), a one-standard-deviation increase in the probability of
new multinational entry is associated with a 0.03-standard-deviation increase in average domestic productivity, as opposed to a 0.05-standard-deviation increase according to the OLS
results.21 Second, as described in Section 2, increases in average domestic productivity can
arise from both within-…rm productivity improvement and between-…rm selection and reallocation. Looking at the relationship between multinational production and average domestic
productivity alone does not allow us to distinguish between the two sources of productivity gains. We therefore proceed below to assess their relative importance by examining the
impact of multinational entry on the distributions of domestic …rms in dimensions including
productivity, revenue, employment, and survival probability.
19

See Staiger and Stock (1997) and Stock and Yogo (2005) for references on the weak identi…cation tests and
the critical values for F statistics.
20
Given that …rm productivity and MNC entry are both obtained from …rst-stage estimations, we bootstrap
the standard errors in all the estimations.
21
We also performed the Hausman test on the second-stage regressions and found presence of endogeneity
in the OLS results.

19

4.2

Within-Firm Productivity Improvement

First, consider the potential within-…rm productivity e¤ect of foreign multinationals, which
would shift the productivity distribution of surviving domestic …rms rightward as discussed in
Hypothesis 1. Given that the e¤ects of foreign multinational competition could vary along the
distribution of domestic …rms as discussed in Section 2, we estimate the following equation
by either using a pooled sample of domestic …rms or dividing domestic …rms into four bins
based on quartiles of the distribution of initial productivity:22
ln    () =
where

\ +

   () 

   

+



+



+



(2)

ln    is the log productivity change of domestic …rms  in the  bin of country

 between 2002-2004 and 2005-2007,  is an indicator of multinational entry in country
 (in a given industry), and  represents …rm characteristics including lagged …rm revenue and age. Note that, in the above as well as the following equations, we control for all
time-invariant country-industry factors by essentially taking the …rst di¤erence and exploring
the changes in each outcome variable. In addition, we include separate …xed e¤ects in the
…rst-di¤erenced equations to control for all time-variant country and industry characteristics including macroeconomic factors like economic growth, domestic policies, and exchange
rates and industry factors like factor intensities. Country-industry clustering is also used to
allow for correlations of errors within each cluster. In the above and all the following estimating equations, we account for the endogeneity of  with an instrumented number of
multinational entry \
  obtained from the …rst stage.
Table 3 reports the results. The estimates suggest that a higher probability of new multinational …rms, on average, increases the within-…rm productivity of domestic …rms. An increase
in the probability of new multinational entry by 100 percentage points is associated with an
average 1.5-percent rightward shift of the productivity distribution. This e¤ect is witnessed
throughout the productivity distribution for domestic …rms with di¤erent levels of initial productivity, but stronger at the left tail of the productivity distribution. Domestic …rms with
the lowest productivity are shown to experience the greatest productivity improvement.
22

Lileeva and Tre‡er (2010) similarly assign domestic …rms to four di¤erent bins based on their initial
productivity and document heterogeneous …rm responses to export market access.

20

4.3

Between-Firm Selection

Next, we examine the between-…rm selection and reallocation e¤ects. Section 2 suggests that
the productivity cuto¤ for domestic …rm survival rises after the entry of new multinational
…rms. Consequently, the probability of survival diminishes especially for …rms with low initial
productivity. We examine this hypothesis in the following speci…cation:
Pr [ () = 1] =

h

\
 ()  +

  +



+

+



i



(3)

where the dependent variable  indicates whether a domestic …rm  in the  bin
survived in the domestic market  in the second sub-period 2005-2007. Again, we include
lagged …rm characteristics, vectors of country and industry dummies, and country-industry
clustering to allow for correlations of errors within each cluster.
Table 4 reports the results. We …nd that a greater probability of new multinational production exerts a negative and signi…cant e¤ect on the survival probability of domestic …rms.
Domestic …rms are more likely to exit the market in the presence of new multinational entry.
The tougher selection e¤ect is, as anticipated in Hypothesis 2, particularly strong at the left
tail of the productivity distribution and insigni…cant at the right tail of the productivity distribution. The least productive domestic …rms are most likely to exit after new multinational
entry while the survival rate of the most productive domestic …rms are shown to be una¤ected.
We also consider an alternative speci…cation to examine the between-…rm selection hypothesis by estimating:
ln    =

 

+

0
 

\
  +



+



+

 

(4)

where    is the ex-ante 2002-2004 productivity of …rm  in country  and 
is a binary indicator of whether …rm  survived in the domestic market  in 2005-2007. If
multinational entry leads to tougher selection on domestic …rms,

0


is expected to be positive.

As shown in Table 5, we …nd again signi…cant evidence of a tougher selection from multinational entry. Not only are surviving domestic …rms, on average, more productive than exiting
domestic …rms, the ex-ante productivity di¤erence between the two groups is 19.7 percent
greater when there is a 100-percentage-point higher probability of a new multinational entry.
The selection e¤ect is also re‡ected in terms of the ex-ante revenue di¤erence between surviving and exiting …rms. Surviving …rms are, on average, greater than exiting …rms ex ante,
especially in cases of multinational entry.23
23

Given the expectation that foreign multinational entry will raise the left truncations of the domestic …rm

21

4.4

Between-Firm Factor and Product Market Reallocation

Now we evaluate the between-…rm market reallocation e¤ects. Hypothesis 3 in Section 2
suggests that the increased labor demand by foreign multinational …rms will shift leftward
the employment distribution of domestic …rms especially at the left tail and bid up the wage
rate. We examine this hypothesis by estimating the following equation
 () =
where

\ +   +

 () 



+



+



(5)

 () is the change in the employment share of a domestic …rm  in the th bin.

As shown in Table 6, we …nd that new multinational entry leads to a decrease in the
average employment share of domestic …rms and shifts the distribution leftward. This e¤ect,
again especially strong for the least productive domestic …rms and insigni…cant for the most
productive domestic …rms, lends direct support to the prediction on labor market reallocation.
The least productive domestic …rms su¤er the greatest declines in employment after the entry
of foreign multinational …rms, while the employment in medium-productivity domestic …rms
also falls, albeit not as drastically. A 100-percentage-point increase in the probability of a
new multinational entry is associated with a 4.6-percent decrease in the employment share of
the lowest-productivity group. In sharp contrast, the most productive domestic …rms see a
positive, though statistically insigni…cant, e¤ect on employment shares.
We also consider the average wage rate of domestic …rms. Section 2 predicts an increase
in wage rate as a result of increased labor demand by foreign multinational …rms. To examine
this hypothesis, we compute the average unit labor cost for domestic …rms in each country and
industry. As shown in Table 7, we …nd that a 100-percentage-point increase in the probability
of new multinational entry leads to a 2.9-percent increase in average wage rate.
Now consider the revenue reallocation e¤ect of foreign multinational competition. Hypothesis 4 in Section 2 suggests that when there is insu¢ cient within-…rm productivity improvement, greater multinational production will shift the revenue distribution of domestic
distributions, we also examined how foreign multinational entry a¤ects the cuto¤ productivity and cuto¤
revenue in a given country and industry. There are a number of ways to de…ne cuto¤ productivity (and
similarly cuto¤ revenue) in a country and industry, including the minimum productivity of surviving …rms,
the maximum productivity of exiting …rms, or less strict measures such as the productivity of the bottom
10th-percentile of surviving …rms and the mean productivity of the bottom 10 percent of surviving …rms.
We considered all the above de…nitions and found that a higher probability of multinational entry leads to a
signi…cant increase in the cuto¤ productivity as well as cuto¤ revenue of surviving domestic …rms. This result
o¤ers further evidence on the between-…rm selection e¤ect of foreign multinational competition.

22

…rms leftward, especially at the left tail. We therefore consider the following speci…cation:
 () =
where

\ +

 () 

 

+



+



+



(6)

 () is the change in the revenue share of a domestic …rm  in the th bin.

Table 8 shows that new multinational entry leads to a decrease in the average revenue
share of domestic …rms, especially for the least productive …rms. A 100-percentage-point
increase in the probability of new multinational entry is associated with a 2-percent decrease
in domestic …rms’average revenue share and a 3.6-percent decrease in revenue share for the
lowest-productivity group. The revenue share of the most productive domestic …rms, again,
is not signi…cantly a¤ected. This result suggests that the positive within-…rm TFP e¤ect
of multinational entry is more than o¤set by the negative factor market reallocation e¤ect,
resulting in a reallocation of product market share from domestic to multinational and from
the less productive to the more productive domestic …rms. Table 9 summarizes the above
estimated e¤ects of multinational entry on the various distributions of domestic …rms.

5

Discussion and Sensitivity Analysis

5.1

Data Coverage

The dataset used in our empirical analysis spans over 30 developed and developing countries.
While this enables us to evaluate the productivity gains from multinational production based
on a broad set of countries, the estimates can be a¤ected by the data coverage across countries.
For example, national public registries, an important source of our data, vary in their data
reporting criteria. Some registries impose certain minimum-size criteria on, for example,
revenue, censoring the data on the left tail. Such data censoring issues would make it di¢ cult
to identify the selection and market reallocation e¤ect at the left tails of the productivity,
revenue and employment distributions where there is likely little change over time.
In this subsection, we address possible data sampling issues by focusing on countries
with arguably relatively comprehensive data coverage. We restrict the analysis to the top
5 countries with the largest number of domestic …rms, namely, China, Spain, France, Italy
and Romania. Our earlier results remain qualitatively robust. For example, the productivity
distribution of domestic …rms shifts rightward by 2.1 percent when there is a 100-percentagepoint increase in the probability of multinational entry (the …rst panel of Table 10).

23

5.2

Measure of Productivity

In our main analysis, we estimate …rm productivity using a new methodology developed by
Ghandi et al. (2012). We have also compared our results using other productivity estimates.
Recent literature on production function estimations suggests that the use of instruments
based on lagged input decisions as the source of identi…cation in structural estimation methods
such as Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) may be associated with
collinearity and functional dependence problems. Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015) suggest
an alternative approach that does not su¤er from the functional dependence problems and
produces consistent estimates under alternative data generating processes. In the second panel
of Table 10, we report our results on the productivity distribution using their methodology
and …nd qualitatively similar results. In fact, the …ndings call for an upward adjustment in
the relative importance of between-…rm selection and market reallocation.
As in most empirical work that exploits productivity estimates, we do not observe …rmlevel physical output quantities and prices. This information is especially di¢ cult to obtain
for the large cross-section of countries considered in this paper. We therefore estimate …rm
productivity based on the output value (instead of physical output) produced by each …rm,
given its inputs.24
It is important to note, however, the central, broader point we emphasize in this paper—
that between-…rm selection and reallocation could be an important source of gains from multinational production— is established by exploring various other characteristics— such as revenue, employment, wage rate, and survival— of domestic …rms and thus does not depend on
the measures of productivity. Considering within-…rm productivity improvement as the only
mechanism by which countries realize productivity gains from multinational production would
lead to a biased understanding of both the nature and the magnitude of the gains, even if
physical output or true productivity were observed.
Next, we discuss the empirical implications when the productivity measure is systematically correlated with …rm prices and markups. Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) show that in a
variable-markup setup increased competition should induce a downward shift in the distribution of markups across …rms (even in the absence of labor reallocation). They …nd that,
although only relatively more productive …rms survive (with higher markups than the less
24
Note that even if price or physical output information were observed, the relationship between prices
and markups would still be unclear. Higher prices can re‡ect higher quality, instead of higher markups. De
Loecker (2011) introduces a methodology that uses detailed product-level information to recover the markups
and the output-based productivity of …rms. However, this approach requires speci…c assumptions regarding
the mechanisms through which demand shocks a¤ect prices and productivity.

24

productive …rms that exit), the surviving …rms’ distributions of markups and prices should
shift downward. This prediction suggests that the estimates of within-…rm productivity improvement in our paper, derived on the basis of the shift of the revenue-based productivity
distribution, could be biased downward if the distribution of productivity partly re‡ects the
distribution of markups.
Given the di¢ culty of obtaining the data required for measuring output-based productivity, one of the solutions suggested in the literature is to focus on homogeneous goods. In
industries with relatively homogeneous products, the concern that revenue-based productivity
is systematically correlated with prices or markups is mitigated. The shift of the productivity distribution is more likely to re‡ect changes in productivity. We hence re-estimate the
within-…rm productivity e¤ect for industries that are classi…ed as relatively homogeneous by
Rauch (1999). We …nd the results to remain qualitatively similar (the third panel of Table
10). The within-…rm productivity of domestic …rms improves, on average, by 2.1 percent
when the probability of new multinational entry increases by 100 percentage points in these
industries. The productivity distribution shifts rightward especially for the least productive
domestic …rms.

5.3

Sources of Within-Firm Productivity Improvement

Our analysis so far suggests that domestic …rms tend to experience, on average, a within…rm productivity upgrading. However, this within-…rm productivity upgrading could arise
from various channels. As described earlier, a large volume of empirical literature emphasizes
one particular source, that is, positive productivity spillover from foreign multinational to
domestic …rms. However, there may exist other plausible channels such as domestic …rms’self
upgrading through within-…rm resource reallocation. While the latter possibility has been
explored in the context of trade liberalization, there exists relatively little evidence in the
context of foreign multinational competition.
In this subsection, we illustrate two possible mechanisms by examining speci…cally the
impacts of foreign multinational production on domestic …rms’innovation and product composition. First, we use a cross-country patent application panel dataset obtained from Orbis
which reports information such as patent name, international patent classi…cation (IPC) code,
patent application date, citing document, cited document, application outcome, current owner
country code, and inventor country code. We compute the number of patent applications …led
by each domestic …rm in a given year and use it as a proxy for innovation as in many previous
studies such as Aghion et al. (2009), Bloom et al. (2013) and Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen

25

(2015).25 The …rst panel of Table 11 shows that new multinational entry leads to an increase
in patenting activities; a 100-percentage-point increase in the probability of multinational
entry is associated with a 0.4-percent increase in the number of patent applications.26 This
e¤ect is especially strong for the lowest two bins of domestic …rms.27
Second, we examine how domestic …rms might respond to foreign multinational competition by adjusting product composition, using rich establishment-level product data from Dun
& Bradstreet’s WorldBase Database which reports detailed information on the primary and
secondary products of establishments across countries. As shown in the second panel of Table
11, we …nd that domestic …rms are, on average, 0.2 percent more likely to drop products
after facing a 100-percentage-point higher probability of foreign multinational entry. This
result, similar to the e¤ect on the productivity distribution, is again strongest for the least
productive domestic …rms and consistent with theories in the trade literature (e.g., Bernard,
Redding and Schott, 2010; Eckel and Neary, 2010; Bloom et al., 2013; Nocke and Yeaple,
2014; Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano, 2014), suggesting that foreign multinational competition
motivates domestic …rms, especially those of the lowest productivity, to drop products and
reallocate resources towards more e¢ cient products.

5.4

The Interdependence of Productivity and Reallocation E¤ects

It is worth noting that the within-…rm productivity upgrading and between-…rm reallocation
e¤ects could be interdependent. The extent of productivity upgrading by surviving …rms
can determine the extent of the reallocation e¤ect. Similarly, the competition impact of
25
Although widely used in the literature, patents are arguably a lower-bound measure of innovation. There
can be other forms of innovation and other mechanisms of productivity upgrading that are not captured in the
patent data. We also considered ISO certi…cation data as an alternative measure, which were available only at
the country-sector level for 2009 and onward. Examining the relationship between foreign multinational entry
and host countries’ISO certi…cations in both total and di¤erent ISO categories, we found suggestive evidence
broadly consistent with our main …ndings. For example, a 100-percentage-point increase in the probability of
new multinational entry was found to be associated with 29.3 percent more total ISO certi…cations and 32.7
percent more ISO 9001 certi…cations. The results are available upon request.
26
Similar to our …ndings, Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2015) document prompt patenting responses to
import competition from China. An alternative interpretation of the result is that …rms may simply be applying
for more patents to protect their existing knowledge in response to greater foreign competition. If that is the
case, the average quality of patents is likely to fall. To examine this e¤ect, we followed Bloom, Draca and Van
Reenen (2015) by looking at average citations per patent and did not …nd that is the case.
27
The documented increase in patenting could be attributed to either productivity spillover or self-upgrading
in response to competition threats. The latter response has received growing attention in the context of trade
liberalization. Lileeva and Tre‡er (2010) investigate the e¤ect of U.S. tari¤ cuts on Canadian plants’ export
and productivity growth and …nd lower-productivity Canadian plants that were induced to export by the tari¤
cuts tend to increase labor productivity and product innovation. Examining the impact of MERCOSUR,
Bustos (2011) shows that Argentinean …rms in industries facing higher reductions in Brazil’s tari¤s upgrade
technology faster. Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2015) investigate the impact of Chinese import competition
and …nd that productivity increases among European …rms that are most a¤ected by Chinese imports.

26

multinationals in factor and product markets can in‡uence the incentives of domestic …rms
to innovate or enhance capacity to absorb technology spillover from foreign MNCs.
In this section, we perform several exercises to explore the potential interdependence
between the productivity and reallocation e¤ects of foreign multinational competition. First,
we re-group domestic …rms to four bins according to the extent of within-…rm productivity
upgrading instead of initial productivity levels and examine how the revenue e¤ect might
di¤er across the bins. As shown in Table 12, we …nd that domestic …rms experiencing the
least productivity upgrading witness the greatest declines in revenue shares while domestic
…rms with the greatest productivity upgrading see insigni…cant revenue e¤ects.
Second, we re-group domestic …rms based on their industries’ R&D and skilled-labor
intensities. It is plausible that domestic …rms in R&D intensive and skilled-labor intensive
industries have a greater scope for productivity upgrading and are hence more likely to have
a smaller, partly o¤set reallocation e¤ect. Table 13 shows consistent evidence. The negative
market reallocation e¤ect is signi…cantly weaker in industries whose R&D intensity and skilledlabor intensity are above the median.
While the above exercises o¤er illustrative evidence, we also adopt an alternative approach
to further disentangle the di¤erent mechanisms and their interactions by di¤erentiating foreign
multinational activity in a domestic …rm’s product space, technology space, and labor space.
The …rst measure, foreign multinational entry in product space, is aimed to capture the
degree of foreign multinational competition present in the product space where a domestic
…rm operates, measured by the average probability of new foreign multinational entry across
a domestic …rm’s product mix.
The second measure, foreign multinational entry in technology space, seeks to capture the
degree of foreign multinational entry that has the greatest potential to in‡uence domestic
…rms’ productivity upgrading and o¤set the market reallocation e¤ect. To construct this
measure, we compute a proxy of technology linkage across industries frequently considered in
the productivity spillover literature (see, for example, Ja¤e et al., 2000; Ellison, Glaeser and
Kerr, 2010), using patent citation ‡ow data taken from the NBER Patent Database. The
data, compiled by Hall et al. (2001), includes detailed records for all patents granted by the
United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975 to December 1999.
Each patent record provides information about the invention (such as technology classi…cation
and citations of prior art) and about the inventors submitting the application (such as name
and city). We construct a technology linkage variable, that is,  , by measuring the

27

extent to which technologies in industry  cite technologies in industry e.28 We then compute,
for each domestic …rm, the sum of foreign multinational entry in a domestic …rm’s technologylinked industries, i.e., industries cited by the domestic …rm’s own industry, weighted by the
share of citations.
The third measure, foreign multinational entry in labor space, captures the degree of
foreign multinational entry most plausible to in‡uence a domestic …rm’s labor market and includes foreign multinational activities in industries that share similar labor demand as a given
domestic …rm. Foreign multinational activity in related labor space, on the one hand, is most
likely to exert a labor market reallocation e¤ect on domestic …rms, while, on the other hand,
constituting a possible source of knowledge spillover given the similar labor skill requirements.
We compute a measure of an industry-pair’s similarity in occupational labor requirements,
 0 . Industries with greater similarity in occupational labor structure are
expected to share greater reallocation as well as externality e¤ects in labor markets. We
use the Bureau of Labor Statistics 2006 National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix
(NIOEM), which reports industry-level employment across detailed occupations. As in Ellison et al. (2010), we convert occupational employment counts into occupational percentages
for each industry and measure the correlation of each industry pair  and 0 in occupational
percentages. We then calculate the weighted sum of foreign multinational entry in industries that share similar labor demand to the domestic …rm using industry-pair correlations in
occupation structure as weights.29
Table 14 examines how foreign multinational entry in the above three types of space affects, respectively, the productivity, employment, and revenue of domestic …rms. We …nd that
foreign multinational entry in domestic …rms’product space exerts a negative and signi…cant
e¤ect on domestic …rms’ average revenue share and average employment share, but an insigni…cant e¤ect on domestic …rms’within-…rm productivity. This result suggests that foreign
rivalry in product space leads to primarily a negative market reallocation e¤ect on domestic
…rms. In contrast, foreign multinational entry in domestic …rms’technology space positively
and signi…cantly a¤ects domestic …rms’productivity as well as employment and revenue, implying that productivity upgrading via technology linkages with new foreign multinationals
can o¤set the reallocation e¤ect. Finally, foreign multinational entry in domestic …rms’labor
28
The concordance between the USPTO classi…cation scheme and SIC3 industries is adopted in the construction of the variable.
29
Constructing the industry-relatedness measures using U.S. industry account data is motivated by two
considerations. First, the measures re‡ect standardized production technologies and are relatively stable over
time. Second, the measures require detailed factor demand information and the U.S. industry account data
are more disaggregated than those of most other countries.

28

space leads to a positive e¤ect on domestic …rm productivity, consistent with the knowledge
spillover hypothesis, a negative e¤ect on domestic …rm employment share, as expected from
the labor reallocation hypothesis, and overall a positive e¤ect on domestic …rm revenue share.
These …ndings o¤er strong further support to the three di¤erent mechanisms through which
foreign multinational …rms could in‡uence domestic …rms’market performance.30

5.5

The Role of Trade

Our empirical analysis so far controls for all time-invariant country-industry factors by taking
…rst di¤erences of the key …rm performance measures (for example, productivity and revenue)
between the two sub-periods and all time-variant country factors as well as time-variant
industry characteristics through the use of …xed e¤ects. Still, a possible concern that could
arise is that observed changes in domestic productivity and revenue distributions might be
driven by other factors such as export and import growth. For example, greater import
competition could similarly lead to a leftward shift of the revenue distribution. Increases in
export activity, on the other hand, could shift both productivity and revenue distributions
rightward when there is signi…cant learning by exporting.
We adopted two strategies to address this concern. First, we accounted for the endogeneity
of multinational entry in the …rst stage by instrumenting with multinationals’ ex-ante cash
‡ow shock. Our analysis shows that foreign multinational entry exerts signi…cant within…rm productivity and between-…rm reallocation e¤ects even when we take into account the
potential endogeneity issue. Second, we explicitly controlled for export and import growth
in host-country industries. We obtained cross-country industry-level export and import data
from the UN COMTRADE and computed the export and import growth rates between 20022004 and 2005-2007. We found that controlling for the role of trade slightly lowers the
estimated e¤ect of multinational entry on the productivity distribution.
On a related note, one may consider that di¤erences across horizontal, vertical, and exportplatform FDI might a¤ect the productivity impact of multinational production through the
role of trade. As market reallocation can result from all types of FDI, our main qualitative
30
We also explored how foreign multinational entry in industries with input-output linkages might a¤ect
domestic …rms’within-…rm productivity upgrading. Numerous studies led by Javorcik (2004) …nd evidence of
productivity spillover from foreign …rms to domestic …rms through vertical production linkages. Following Javorcik (2004), we constructed two variables,   and   , to measure, respectively,
the share of a downstream industry’s inputs from an upstream industry and the share of an upstream industry’s
output used in a downstream industry using the 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Accounts published by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. We then interacted the two variables with predicted multinational production
in each industry and compute the weighted sum of multinational production in downstream and upstream
industries, respectively. Our results, consistent with existing studies, suggest signi…cant productivity spillovers
from downstream foreign multinational …rms to upstream domestic …rms and vice versa.

29

point— that market reallocation constitutes an important source of productivity gains from
multinational production— should remain valid. However, we acknowledge that the degree of
product market competition, relationships with domestic upstream and downstream industries, and productivity spillover might depend on the …nal market of foreign multinationals
(see, among others, Markusen and Venables, 1999; Markusen, 2002, for related theoretical
work). As in the case of most cross-country …rm-level datasets, Orbis does not report intra…rm trade data to di¤erentiate between the di¤erent types of FDI. One alternative is to
use input-output tables and industry codes to identify potential production linkages between
MNC headquarters and subsidiaries (as in Alfaro and Charlton, 2009). However, this would
not be able to distinguish export-platform FDI from the rest. Assessing the gains from different types of FDI thus remains an important topic of research that could be advanced by
availability of cross-country intra-…rm trade data.

6

Quantifying and Decomposing Aggregate Productivity Impact

In this section, we quantify the aggregate as well as the decomposed productivity e¤ects of
greater multinational production. Speci…cally, we follow Pavcnik (2002) by decomposing do
mestic …rms’weighted aggregate productivity measure ]
   into two parts: the unweighted


aggregate productivity measure     and the total covariance between a …rm’s share of the
industry output  and its productivity    :


]
 =

P




    =     +

P




( ¬  )(   ¬     )

(7)



Comparing domestic …rms’ weighted aggregate productivity measure ]
   in two periods
yields:


]
 =



 +

P




( ¬  )(   ¬     )

Given that we abstract from new entering …rms in the analysis, the above equation can be
further written as:


]


=




+

P



¬    ¬1

¬ 



+    ¬1



¬    ¬1

¬  


 ( ¬  )(   ¬     )
¬  

30

(8)



The …rst component on the right hand side,    



¬    ¬1

, repre-

sents the contribution of within-…rm productivity improvement (among surviving domestic …rms) to the aggregate domestic productivity and is positive as we show in Section 4.2
that multinational entry induces signi…cant within-…rm productivity improvement. In particular, we …nd that a 100-percentage-point higher probability of multinational entry leads
to, on average, 1.5 percent increase in within-…rm productivity. The second component,


   ¬1



¬    ¬1 , represents the contribution of the selection e¤ect to the aggregate

domestic productivity. Given that in Section 4.3 we …nd that more productive domestic …rms
are more likely to survive after multinational entry and, in particular, the average productivity
of surviving …rms is 19.7 percent higher than that of exiting …rms when the probability of a
multinational entry is 100 percentage points higher, this second term is positive as well. The
P

third component,
 ( ¬  )(   ¬     ), represents the contribution of the market
reallocation e¤ect to the aggregate domestic productivity. In Section 4.4, we …nd signi…cant
evidence of market reallocation as the least productive domestic …rms experience the sharpest
decline in revenue share. To evaluate the magnitude of the reallocation e¤ect, we compute
P

 ( ¬  )(   ¬     ) at the country-industry level and …nd the covariance to

be, on average, 2 percent greater when there is a 100-percentage-point higher probability of
multinational entry.

The above analysis shows that between-…rm selection and reallocation alone account for
two thirds of aggregate productivity gains from foreign multinational entry, while within…rm productivity improvement by itself accounts for one third. These results highlight that
a substantial share of productivity gains are channeled through between-…rm selection and
reallocation. Further, since the analysis also suggests that within-…rm productivity upgrading
could similarly occur through within-…rm selection and reallocation whereby domestic …rms
respond to foreign multinational competition by reallocating resources to focus on competitive
products, the overall importance of selection and market reallocation can be even greater
when the within-…rm margin is also accounted for. Ignoring this channel could therefore
drastically bias our understanding of the origin and the magnitude of the productivity gains
from multinational production.


Finally, we account for the productivity of foreign multinational …rms i.e., ]


and

assess its direct contribution to a host country’s aggregate productivity. By comparing the
productivity of multinational …rms with that of domestic …rms, we …nd that multinational
…rms exhibit, on average, a 23-percent productivity premium compared to domestic …rms.
This, combined with the average market share extracted by foreign multinational …rms after

31

entry, leads to a 3-percent contribution to the aggregate productivity.

7

Conclusion

Assessing productivity gains from greater openness to multinational production has been a
fundamental topic of economic research. A primary challenge in empirical investigations is to
distinguish the sources of productivity gains, including gains from within-…rm productivity
improvement and gains from between-…rm selection and reallocation. However, this task cannot be accomplished by simply examining the relationship between multinational production
and host-country average productivity, as both channels predict a positive relationship. We
therefore utilize an intuitive empirical framework motivated by stylized theories from Melitz
(2003) and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) which explores the variations in how the two
channels in‡uence the distributions of domestic …rms in dimensions including productivity,
employment, revenue and survival.
Using a rich cross-country …rm-level panel dataset, we …nd that within-…rm productivity
improvement and between-…rm selection and reallocation are two signi…cant but distinctly
di¤erent sources of productivity gains from multinational production. The productivity distribution of domestic …rms is shown to shift rightward after foreign multinational entry, suggesting within-…rm productivity improvement among surviving domestic …rms. In contrast,
the revenue and employment distributions of domestic …rms are found to shift leftward especially at the left tail, as anticipated by the e¤ects of increased competition and reallocation in
factor and product markets. The least productive domestic …rms are most likely to exit and be
crowded out of the market, indicating a tougher selection on domestic …rms. Consistent with
the labor market competition hypothesis, the average wage of domestic …rms is found to rise
after foreign multinational entry. Further, we …nd that domestic …rms, especially, those with
the lowest productivity, are more likely to drop products after facing foreign multinational
entry, suggesting that increased foreign competition can also lead to within-…rm selection and
reallocation. Our analysis also shows that within-…rm productivity response and between…rm reallocation could be interdependent. Domestic …rms experiencing greater productivity
upgrading tend to witness smaller declines in revenue shares. When constructing alternative measures to directly capture foreign multinational entry in a domestic …rm’s product
space, technology space, and labor space, we …nd consistent e¤ects of foreign multinational
competition channeled through product rivalry, technology linkage, and labor market.
In quantifying the productivity gains from multinational production, we …nd based on

32

our preferred estimations that between-…rm selection and reallocation alone account for two
thirds of aggregate productivity gains from foreign multinational entry, while within-…rm
productivity improvement by itself accounts for one third. Since the analysis suggests that
within-…rm productivity gain could also occur through within-…rm selection and reallocation
whereby domestic …rms respond to foreign multinational competition by reallocating resources
to focus on competitive products, the overall importance of selection and market reallocation
becomes even greater when the within-…rm margin is also accounted for. These results suggest
that it is critical to take into account the role of selection and reallocation when assessing the
productivity gains from multinational production. Ignoring this source can lead to a biased
understanding of the nature and the magnitude of the productivity gains, with consequent
biases in the design of FDI and industrial policies.
Two potential extensions of our analysis are worthy of particular attention. First, it
might take a longer period to fully realize the e¤ects of multinational production in domestic
economies. Our estimates thus capture the lower bound of the total productivity gains from
multinational production due to the time length of the available data. It would be useful
to investigate the long-run impact of multinational competition when longer time-series data
are available. Second, future work could explore the heterogeneous gains from multinational
production across countries. For example, how might domestic labor-market rigidities and
…nancial markets a¤ect the extent of factor market reallocation and the subsequent productivity e¤ects of multinational production? How might the di¤erent levels of domestic human
capital and technology stock across host countries in‡uence the degree of gains from productivity spillover? Such analysis on the role of economic and institutional characteristics in
determining countries’ gains from multinational production will provide additional research
and policy insights.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nicholas Bloom, and William R. Kerr. 2013. "Innovation, Reallocation and Growth." NBER Working Paper 18993.
[2] Ackerberg, Daniel, Caves, Kevib, and Frazer, Garth. 2015. "Structural Identi…cation of
Production Functions." Econometrica 83(6), 2411-2451.
[3] Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, Luosha Du, Ann Harrison, and Patrick Legros.
2015. "Industrial Policy and Competition." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(4), 1-32.

33

[4] Aitken, Brian, and Ann Harrison. 1999. "Do Domestic Firms Bene…t from Foreign Direct
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela." American Economic Review 89(3), 605-618.
[5] Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Richard E. Lipsey. 1996. "Wages and Foreign Ownership: A Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela and the Unites States." Journal of
International Economics 40(3-4), 345-371.
[6] Alfaro, Laura and Andrew Charlton. 2009. "Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment."
American Economic Review 99(5): 2096-2119.
[7] Alfaro, Laura, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk. 2009. "Plant-Size Distribution and
Cross-Country Income Di¤erences." In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics
2008. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
[8] Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. 2004. "FDI
and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets." Journal of International
Economics 64(1), 89-112.
[9] Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. 2010. "Does
Foreign Direct Investment Promote Growth? Exploring the Role of Financial Markets
on Linkages." Journal of Development Economics 91(2), 242-256.
[10] Alfaro, Laura and Maggie X. Chen. 2015. "Selection and Market Reallocation: Productivity Gains from Multinational Production." Harvard Business School Working Paper,
No. 12-111.
[11] Arnold, Jens and Beata Javorcik. 2009. "Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Direct
Investment and Plant Productivity in Indonesia." Journal of International Economics
79(1), 42-53.
[12] Baker, Malcolm, Fritz Foley, and Je¤rey Wurgler. 2009. "Multinationals as Arbitrageurs?
The E¤ects of Stock Market Valuations on Foreign Direct Investment." Review of Financial Studies 22(1), 337-369.
[13] Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. "Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection." American Economic
Review 103(1), 305-34.
[14] Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, Peter K. Schott. 2010. "Multiple-Product
Firms and Product Switching," American Economic Review 100(1), 70-97.
[15] Bilir, Kamran, Davin Chor, and Kalina Manova. 2014. "Host-Country Financial Development and Multinational Activity." NBER Working Paper 20046.

34

[16] Blonigen, Bruce A. 1997. "Firm-Speci…c Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates
and Foreign Direct Investment." American Economic Review 87(4), 447-465.
[17] Bloom, Nick, Mark Schankerman and John van Reenen. 2013. "Identifying Technology
Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry." Econometrica 81(4): 1347-1393.
[18] Bloom, Nick, Mirko Draca and John van Reenen. 2015. "Trade Induced Technical Change:
The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Di¤usion and Productivity." Review of
Economic Studies.
[19] Borensztein, Eduardo, Jose De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee. 1998. "How Does Foreign
Direct Investment A¤ect Economic Growth." Journal of International Economics 45,
115-135.
[20] Bustos, Paula. 2011. "Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms," American Economic Review
101(1), 304-340.
[21] Carluccio, Juan and Thibault Fally. 2013. "Foreign Entry and Spillovers with Technological Incompatibilities in the Supply Chain." Journal of International Economics 90(1),
123-135.
[22] Caves, Richard. (2007). Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
[23] Chen, Maggie X. and Michael Moore. 2010. "Location Decision of Heterogeneous Multinational Firms." Journal of International Economics 80(2), 188-199.
[24] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga and Sébastien
Roux. 2012. "The Productivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration From Firm Selection," Econometrica 80(6), 2543-2594.
[25] De Loecker, Jan. 2011. "Product Di¤erentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating
the Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity." Econometrica 79(5), 1407-1451.
[26] Desai, Mihir, Fritz Foley and Jim Hines. 2004. "A Multinational Perspective on Capital
Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets." Journal of Finance 59(6), 2451-87.
[27] Eckel, Casten and J. Peter Neary. 2010. "Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in the Global Economy." Review of Economic Studies 77(1), 188-217
[28] Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes ,Andrei Shleifer. 2002.
"The Regulation of Entry," Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1), 1-37.

35

[29] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. "What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns." American Economic Review
100, 1195–1213
[30] Foley, Fritz and Kalina Manova. 2015. "International Trade, Multinational Activity, and
Corporate Finance." Annual Review of Economics 7, 119-146.
[31] Fons-Rosen, Christian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sorensen, Carolina VillegasSanchez, and Vadym Volosovych. 2013. "Quantifying Productivity Gains from Foreign
Investment." NBER Working Paper 18920.
[32] Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras." Journal of International Economics
42(3-4), 371-394.
[33] Froot, Kenneth and Jeremy Stein. 1991. "Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment:
an Imperfect Capital Market Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1191–
1217.
[34] Froot, Kenneth, and Emil M. Dabora.1 999. "How Are Stock Prices A¤ected by the
Location of Trade?? Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189-216.
[35] Ghandi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers. 2012. "On the Identi…cation of
Production Functions: How Heterogeneous is Productivity." mimeo.
[36] Graham, Edward and Paul Krugman. 1991. Foreign Direct Investment in the United
States. Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
[37] Guadalupe, María, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas. 2012. "Innovation and Foreign
Ownership." American Economic Review 102(7), 3594-3627.
[38] Hall, Bronwyn, Ja¤e, Adam and Trajtenberg, Manuel (2001) "The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools." NBER Working Paper 8498.
[39] Hanson, Gordon H. 2001. "Should Countries Promote Foreign Direct Investment." G-24
Discussion Paper Series, 9(9), 23.
[40] Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillian. 2003. "Does Foreign Direct Investment A¤ect
Domestic Firm Credit Constraints?" Journal of International Economics 61(1), 73-100.
[41] Harrison, Ann, Inessa Love, and Margaret McMillian. 2004. "Global Capital Flows and
Financing Constraints." Journal of Development Economics 75(1), 269-301.
[42] Harrison, Ann and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare. 2010. "Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy." In Handbook of Development Economics, edited by Dani Rodrik and
Mark Rosenzweig. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 4039-4214.
36

[43] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, andYona Rubinstein. 2008. "Estimating Trade Flows:
Trading Partners and Trading Volumes." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), 441487.
[44] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen Yeaple. 2004. "Export versus FDI with
Heterogeneous Firms." American Economic Review 94(1), 300-316.
[45] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1403-1448.
[46] Erel, Isil, Rose C. Liao and Michael S. Weisbach. 2012. "Determinants of Cross-Border
Mergers and Acquisitions," Journal of Finance 67(3), 1045-1082
[47] Javorcik, Beata. 2004. "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages." American Economic
Review 94(3), 605-627.
[48] Ja¤e, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Fogarty, Michael (2000) "Knowledge Spillovers
and Patent Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors." American Economic Review
Paper and Proceedings 90(3), 215-218.
[49] Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen Yeaple. 2009. "Multinational Enterprises, International
Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States." Review
of Economics and Statistics 91(4), 821-831.
[50] Klein, Michael, Joe Peek, and Eric Rosengren. 2002. "Troubled Banks, Impaired Foreign Direct Investment: The Role of Relative Access to Credit." American Economic
Review 92(3), 664-682.
[51] Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogo¤, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2011. "Financial
Globalization and Economic Policies." In Handbook of Development Economics, edited
by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 4283-4359.
[52] Kosova, Renata. 2010. "Do Foreign Firms Crowd out Domestic Firms? Evidence from
the Czech Republic." Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4), 861-881.
[53] Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin. 2003. "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
to Control for Unobservables." Review of Economic Studies 70(2), No. 243, 317-342.
[54] Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Tre‡er. 2010. "Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plantlevel Productivity? For Some Plants." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3), 10511099.
[55] Markusen, James. 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
37

[56] Markusen, James and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. "Foreign Direct Investment as a Catalyst for Industrial Development." European Economic Review 43(3), 335-338.
[57] Mayer, Thierry, Marc J. Melitz and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2014. "Market Size, Competition, and the Product Mix of Exporters," American Economic Review 104(2), 495536.
[58] Melitz, Marc. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity." Econometrica 71(6), 1695–1725.
[59] Melitz, Marc and Giancarlo I.P. Ottaviano. 2008. "Market Size, Trade, and Productivity."
Review of Economic Studies 75, 295-316.
[60] Melitz, Marc J, and Stephen J. Redding. 2014. "Heterogeneous Firms and Trade." Handbook of International Economics, 4th ed, 4: 1-54. Elsevier, 4, 1-54.
[61] Nocke, Volker and Stephen Yeaple. 2014. "Globalization And Multiproduct Firms." International Economic Review 55, 993–1018.
[62] Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry." Econometrica 64(6), 1263–1297.
[63] Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants." Review of Economic Studies 69(1), 245-76.
[64] Rauch, James E., 1999. "Networks versus markets in international trade," Journal of
International Economics 48(1), 7-35.
[65] Ramondo, Natalia. 2009. "The E¤ects of Foreign Plants on Industry Productivity: Evidence from Chile." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 11(4), 789-809.
[66] Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental Variables Regression with
Weak Instruments." Econometrica 65(3), 557–586.
[67] Stock, James and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression." In: Andrews DWK Identi…cation and Inference for Econometric Models.
New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 80-108.
[68] Syverson, Chad. 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature
49(2), 326-365
[69] Van Biesebroeck, Johannes 2008. "The Sensitivity of Productivity Estimates: Revisiting
Three Important Debates." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26(3), 321-338.
[70] Yeaple, Stephen. 2009. "Firm Heterogeneity and the Structure of U.S. Multinational
Activity: An Empirical Analysis." Journal of International Economics 78(2), 206-215.

38

Average host-country TFP growth (in natural logs)
-2
-1
0
1
2

2
Average host-country TFP (in natural logs)
-1
0
1
-2

0

5

10
15
MNC affiliate sales (in natural logs)

20

-1

0

1
2
3
MNC affiliate sales growth (in natural logs)

4

Figure 1: The relationship between multinational production and host-country TFP

39

Table 1: The Entry Decision of Multinational Firms (Firm-Country Level)
Dependent
variable:
HQ TFP
Financial shock
Financial shock x
Entry Cost
Host-country-ind FE
Country-pair-ind FE
Firm FE
Obs
R square
F Statistic
Prob>F

(1)
MNC entry
0.002***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.0004)
-0.0003***
(0.0001)

(2)
MNC entry
0.002***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.0004)
-0.0003***
(0.0001)

(3)
MNC entry
–

Yes
No
No
372,274
0.04
28.97
0.00

Yes
Yes
No
372,274
0.05
35.23
0.00

Yes
Yes
Yes
372,274
0.06
50.41
0.00

–
-0.0004***
(0.0002)

Notes: (i) Linear probability (LP) estimates are reported; (ii) standard errors clustered at the
…rm level are reported in the parentheses; (iii) ***, **, and * represent statistical signi…cance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Table 2: Multinational Entry and Change in Average Productivity (Country-Industry Level)
Dependent
variable:
MNC entry

(1)
Change in ave TFP
0.010***
(0.003)

MNC entry (predicted)
Beta coe¢ cients
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

0.05
Yes
Yes
3,751
0.52

(2)
Change in ave TFP

0.026**
(0.015)
0.03
Yes
Yes
3,751
0.52

Notes: (i) Columns (1) and (2) report OLS and instrumented estimates, respectively; (ii)
bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (iii) ***, **, and * represent
statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

40

Table 3: The Shift of Domestic Productivity Distribution

Depdendent var.:
Change in TFP
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
All
0.015***
(0.002)
-0.016***
(0.001)
-0.082***
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
388,006
0.06

(2)
Bin 1 (<25%)
0.021***
(0.004)
-0.072***
(0.002)
-0.181***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
98,183
0.12

(3)
Bin 2 (25-50%)
0.014***
(0.003)
0.019***
(0.001)
-0.073***
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
96,955
0.07

(4)
Bin 3 (50-75%)
0.015***
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.001)
-0.048***
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
97,716
0.06

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)
0.010***
(0.003)
0.002***
(0.001)
-0.027***
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
95,152
0.05

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Table 4: The Survival of Domestic Firms

Depdendent var.:
Survival
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
All
-0.0005***
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.000)
-0.004***
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
407,145
0.06

(2)
Bin 1 (<25%)
-0.0012**
(0.000)
0.015***
(0.000)
-0.009***
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
103,233
0.10

(3)
Bin 2 (25-50%)
-0.0009***
(0.003)
0.005***
(0.000)
-0.003***
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
101,245
0.09

(4)
Bin 3 (50-75%)
-0.0007***
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
-0.002***
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
102,181
0.08

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)
0.0003
(0.000)
-0.0004*
(0.000)
-0.03***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
100,486
0.04

Notes: (i) Linear probability estimates are reported; (ii) bootstrapped standard errors are
reported in the parentheses; (iii) ***, **, and * represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and
10 percent, respectively.

41

Table 5: The Ex-ante Productivity Di¤erence of Surviving and Exiting Firms
Dependent
variable:
Survival
Survival * MNC entry (predicted)
Host-country-industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
Firm TFP (lagged)
0.636***
(0.022)
0.197***
(0.022)
Yes
387,496
0.82

(2)
Firm revenue (lagged)
3.364***
(0.018)
0.243***
(0.016)
Yes
500,797
0.51

Notes: (i) bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Table 6: The Shift of Domestic Employment Distribution

Depdendent var.:
Change in employment share
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
All
-0.023***
(0.005)
-0.028***
(0.002)
-0.026***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
388,702
0.22

(2)
Bin 1 (<25%)
-0.046***
(0.015)
-0.063***
(0.006)
0.010
(0.014)
Yes
Yes
98,497
0.29

(3)
Bin 2 (25-50%)
-0.012**
(0.006)
-0.037***
(0.002)
-0.019***
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
97,088
0.19

(4)
Bin 3 (50-75%)
-0.024***
(0.009)
-0.030***
(0.004)
-0.042***
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
97,839
0.22

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

42

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.029***
(0.002)
-0.025***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
95,278
0.16

Table 7: Changes in the Average Wage Rate of Domestic Firms (Country-Industry Level)

Dependent var.
MNC entry (predicted)
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
Change in ave wage
0.029**
(0.013)
Yes
Yes
3,268
0.42

Notes: (i) Weighted least square estimates are reported; (ii) bootstrapped standard errors are
reported in the parentheses; (iii) ***, **, and * represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and
10 percent, respectively.

Table 8: The Shift of Domestic Revenue Distribution

Depdendent var.:
Change in revenue share
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
All
-0.020***
(0.004)
-0.044***
(0.001)
-0.025***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
407,145
0.20

(2)
Bin 1 (<25%)
-0.036***
(0.012)
-0.036***
(0.004)
-0.028***
(0.010)
Yes
Yes
103,233
0.24

(3)
Bin 2 (25-50%)
-0.011***
(0.004)
-0.039***
(0.001)
-0.011***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
101,245
0.11

(4)
Bin 3 (50-75%)
-0.022***
(0.007)
-0.042***
(0.003)
-0.028***
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
102,181
0.26

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.069***
(0.002)
-0.026***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
100,486
0.15

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

43

Table 9: Estimated E¤ects of Multinational Entry
Variable
Within-…rm productivity (bin 1)
Within-…rm productivity (bin 2)
Within-…rm productivity (bin 3)
Within-…rm productivity (bin 4)
Survival (bin 1)
Survival (bin 2)
Survival (bin 3)
Survival (bin 4)
Productivity di¤ b/w surviving and exiting …rms
Employment share (bin 1)
Employment share (bin 2)
Employment share (bin 3)
Employment share (bin 4)
Revenue share (bin 1)
Revenue share (bin 2)
Revenue share (bin 3)
Revenue share (bin 4)

Est. parameter
0.021
0.014
0.015
0.01
-0.0012
-0.0009
-0.0007
0.0003
0.197
-0.046
-0.012
-0.024
0.003
-0.036
-0.011
-0.022
-0.006

Notes: The table summarizes the estimated e¤ects of multinational entry.

44

Table 10: Robustness: The Shift of Domestic Productivity Distribution

Depdendent var.:
Change in TFP
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
All

(2)
(3)
(4)
Bin 1 (<25%) Bin 2 (25-50%) Bin 3 (50-75%)
Robustness 1: Top Countries
0.013***
0.025***
0.007***
0.006***
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
-0.011***
-0.038***
0.034***
0.022***
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.080***
-0.181***
-0.104***
-0.060***
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
228,829
57,435
57,666
57,648
0.09
0.17
0.13
0.08
Robustness 2: Alternative TFP Estimates
0.008***
0.018***
0.004*
0.004
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.004)
-0.019***
-0.039***
0.016***
0.008***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
-0.061***
-0.174***
-0.078***
-0.038***
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
379,985
95,832
95,335
96,109
0.05
0.12
0.09
0.07
Robustness 3: Homogenous Industries
0.021***
0.107***
0.007***
-0.004
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.003)
(0.009)
-0.034***
-0.115***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.003)
-0.098***
-0.219***
-0.083***
-0.062***
(0.002)
(0.012)
(0.008)
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,170
10,855
10,799
10,874
0.08
0.19
0.09
0.08

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

45

0.010***
(0.003)
0.016***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
56,080
0.06
0.002*
(0.001)
0.007***
(0.001)
-0.019***
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
92,709
0.06
-0.002
(0.003)
0.0003
(0.004)
-0.042
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
10,642
0.07

Table 11: Sources of Within-Firm Productivity Improvement

(1)
All

MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(2)
(3)
(4)
Bin 1 (<25%) Bin 2 (25-50%) Bin 3 (50-75%)
Dependent var.: Patenting
0.004***
0.002***
0.0017***
0.0003
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
0.002***
-0.0003**
0.003***
0.018***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.002)
0.006***
0.001***
0.002***
0.007***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,539,080
367,848
388,641
387,630
0.05
0.08
0.04
0.05
Dependent var.: Dropping products
0.002***
0.003***
0.002***
0.002***
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.001***
0.005***
-0.002
-0.002
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.000
0.001***
0.001*
0.001*
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
836,400
160,244
190,784
213,490
0.08
0.14
0.07
0.05

(5)
Bin 4 (>75%)

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

46

-0.0005
(0.001)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
394,961
0.05
0.001
(0.001)
-0.007***
(0.001)
-0.001**
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
271,882
0.09

Table 12: The Interdependence of Productivity and Reallocation E¤ects

(1)
Depdendent var.:
Change in revenue share
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(2)

Bin 1 (<25%)
-0.023***
(0.000)
-0.088***
(0.003)
-0.026***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
95,224
0.26

(3)

TFP Growth
Bin 2 (25-50%) Bin 3 (50-75%)
-0.021***
-0.003
(0.000)
(0.008)
-0.058***
-0.035***
(0.003)
(0.003)
-0.008
-0.012*
(0.008)
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
93,502
97,088
0.21
0.31

(4)
Bin 4 (>75%)
-0.009
(0.007)
0.011***
(0.003)
-0.043***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
94,171
0.15

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Table 13: Robustness: Technology Intensity and Market Reallocation E¤ects
Depdendent var.:
Change in revenue share
MNC entry (predicted)
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

(1)
Low RD
-0.108***
(0.025)
-0.044***
(0.003)
-0.027***
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
88,713
0.16

(2)
Medium and High RD
-0.020***
(0.004)
-0.042***
(0.002)
-0.027***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
313,075
0.24

(3)
Low Skill
-0.121***
(0.055)
-0.049***
(0.004)
-0.028***
(0.012)
Yes
Yes
57,153
0.24

(4)
Medium and High Skill
-0.016***
(0.004)
-0.042***
(0.002)
-0.025***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
349,820
0.21

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

47

Table 14: Robustness: Foreign Multinational Entry in Product, Technology and Labor Space

(1)

(3)

(4)

TFP

(2)
Change in
emp. share

rev. share

0.0004
(0.002)
3.642***
(0.939)

-0.042***
(0.006)
17.223***
(3.482)

-0.032***
(0.005)
10.700***
(2.823)

-0.019***
(0.005)
-0.061
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
379,818
0.07

-0.028***
(0.002)
-0.026***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
388,535
0.21

-0.044***
(0.001)
-0.025***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
406,972
0.20

Dependent var.
MNC entry (predicted)
–product space
–technology space
–labor space
Lagged revenue
Age
Host-country FE
Industry FE
Obs
R square

TFP

(5)
Change in
emp. share

rev. share

-0.003
(0.002)
3.544***
(0.944)
0.001***
(0.000)
-0.019***
(0.005)
-0.061
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
379,818
0.07

-0.018***
(0.008)
17.901***
(3.485)
-0.005***
(0.001)
-0.028***
(0.002)
-0.026***
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
388,535
0.21

-0.011*
(0.006)
11.310***
(2.826)
-0.004***
(0.000)
-0.044***
(0.001)
-0.025***
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
406,973
0.20

Notes: (i) Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in the parentheses; (ii) ***, **, and *
represent statistical signi…cance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Table A.1: Summary Statistics
Variable
entry dummy
entry sum
survival
TFP change
revenue share change
employment share change

Mean
0.18
0.48
0.99
0.08
-0.001
-0.002

48

Std. Dev.
0.39
1.84
0.04
0.48
0.02
0.02

Min
0
0
0
-9.28
-0.99
-0.99

Max
1
42
1
14.15
0.97
0.99

(6)

