                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WORK RULES, FEATHERBEDDING,
                        AND PARETOOPTIMAL
                   UNION-MANAGEMENT BARGAINING




                        George E. Johnson




                      Working Paper No. 1820




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paoer #1820
                                                  January 1986


                Work Rules, Featherbedding, and Pareto-Optimal
                         Union-Management Bargaining



                                   ABSTRACT


     The recent literature on the economic behavior of unions is dominated by

a controversy over whether or not bargaining is Pareto optimal. If unions

care about employment as well as wages, efficient bargains between unions and

management "should" involve both these variables rather than only wages. In

fact, explicit bargaining over employment levels is virtually unknown. There

is, however, implicit bargaining over employment in the form of rules

concerning the labor/capital ratio, job assignment, work speeds, and the like.

This paper examines a model of "semi-efficient" bargaining in which the union

and the firm bargain over wages and various types of work rules. The results

are compared to the outcomes that are associated with fully efficient

bargaining (i.e, over wages and the level of employment) and bargaining

solely over wages. Of particular interest is the case in which the union and

the firm mutually consent to "featherbedding" agreements (requiring the hirinr.

of workers with zero marginal product). The major conclusion of the paper is

that the outcome of collective bargaining is different in the case of

negotiations over work rules and wages than in both the cases of fully

efficient bargaining and of bargaining solely over wages. In general,

however, the outcome of this "partially efficient" bargaining process is

closer to the outcome of bargaining solely over wages than to that associ:tcd

with fully efficient bargaining over both wages and employment.



                                         George Johnson
                                         Institute of Public Policy Studh's
                                         The University of Michigan
                                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
                                         (313) 763-4390
1. The Issues

       In   the burgeoning literature on the behavior of trade unions there is

considerable controversy about, among other things, what unions and management

bargain about. The conventional approach is to specify that the union and the

firm first negotiate a contract specifying the wage level and structure that

will be in effect for a specified period of time. The firm is then free to

set the values of employment and the other inputs so as to maximize profit.

To the extent that the union cares about employment as well as wages, the

union's bargaining position will depend in part on its perception of the

elasticity of labor demnand. An alternative approach is based on the

recognition that a bargaining outcome that lies on the labor demand curve will

not be Pareto optimal. If the union receives utility from both employment and

wages in excess of opportunity cost, certain combinations of a reduction in

the wage and an increase in employment off the demand curve can make both the

firm and the union better of f. The contract curve between the wage and the

employment level that is derived from efficient bargaining is less negatively

sloped than the demand   curve   and may, indeed, be vertical or upward-sloping.

       Which of these approaches, the demand curve model or the contract curve

model, is more accurate has important macroeconomic implications (see Hall and

Lilien and MacDonald and Solow). The two models also have different

implications concerning the efficiency losses associated with unionism. With

bargaining over both wages and employment the effect of higher union wages is

essentially a reduction in monopoly profit; if the equilibrium is on the

demand curve (as in Johnson and Mieszkowski), union gains cause-a small

decline in GNP but are primarily at the expense of nonunion workers. The

relative validity of the two hypotheses is also crucial to an understanding of

what unions are all about, a question of interest primarily to labor



                                          1
                                        2



economists (but not without public policy implications). Accordingly, there

have been some attempts to test the implications of the two approaches

(Ashenfelter and Brown, Carruth and Oswald, and MaCurdy and Pencavel) for

specific unions.

         For the contract curve model to be superior to the demand curve model,

it must be true that management and unions generally bargain --either directly

or indirectly ——   over employment. In fact, the level of employment is almost
never the subject of explicit negotiation in collective bargaining (see Oswald

(1984)). The usual reason given for this (see Farber (1985) and Ashenfelter

and Brown) is that an agreement on employment must be made conditional on

something, and the employer, who usually has better information about current

product demand and the like, has a strong incentive to cheat. If the union

suspects cheating, it will obviously be reluctant in future negotiations to

trade of f wages for empty promises of employment above profit-maximizing

levels, and it will choose to bargain only over wages --     the   demand curve

model.

         On the other hand, indirect bargaining over employment is fairly common

in the U.S. and other developed countries.3 First, the minimum number of

workers assigned to each machine or operation is sometimes the subject of

labor-management negotiations. Employment is then equal to the negotiated

labor/capital ratio times the amount of capital the firm chooses to use.          In

the extreme, an agreement could specify that the firm must hire more workers

per machine than can conceivably be productive, which is described as

"featherbedding" ("overmanning" in the U.K.). Second, unions and management

often bargain over work intensity —-   the   pace of work, the number of different

functions each worker can be ordered to perform, the number and length of

coffee breaks, and so forth. For a given demand for "efficiency units" of
                                       3


labor, the level of employment will be inversely related to how intensely the

firm is allowed to make its employees work. Compliance with agreements over

the capital/labor ratio and the pace of work are also, unlike the total volume

of employment contingent on the state of prodtict demand, fairly easily

monitored.

       This paper is concerned with the implications of Pareto—efficient

bargaining over certain variables that determine employment indirectly as well

as wages. Is there a presumption that the negotiated capital/labor ratio will

be higher than it would be if the firm could set its value unilaterally? Will

work intensity be higher or lower under unionism? To what extent does the

outcome with bargaining over the labor/capital ratio and/or work intensity

resemble the outcome of an efficient bargain over employment and wages? Under

what circumstances does efficient bargaining yield an outcome of

featherbedding? These are rather obvious questions to a labor economist, but

they have not been addressed in the literature in a straightforward manner.

(An unstraightforward approach to some of these issues is Tauman and Weiss.)

The plan of the remainder of the paper is as follows: Section 2 reviews the

distinction between the demand curve and contract curve models; Section 3

examines the case of efficient bargaining over the capital/labor ratio;

Section 4 looks at featherbedding; Section 5 investigates the determination

of work intensity with and without efficient bargaining; and Section 6

contrasts profit sharing agreements with models of fully efficient bargaining

over employment. Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions.


2. Demand Curve and Contract Curve Models

      Although the distinction between the demand curve (DC) and contract

curve (CC) models of bargaining outcomes is fairly well—known, it is useful
                                                     4



to set out their basic results for purposes of comparison with the work

restrictions models presented subsequently.

           First, a monpolistic firm hires N homogeneous workers (who work an

exogenously fixed number of hours over the unit of time) and rents K units of

capital to produce output level Q. The production function exhibits constant

returns in N and K, and it is assumed initially that its elasticity of

capital—labor substitution is positive and finite. The profit equation for

the firm is


           (1) r = V(Kf(N/K)) —       WN   —   rK,

where V is revenue as a function of output, W the wage rate the firm has

negotiated with the union, and r the rental price of machinery. By the DC

model, the firm and the union first determine W in collective bargaining

negotations, and then the firm chooses N and K to maximize profit given the

negotiated value of W. This implies that air/aN =         V'f'   —   W   and 3ir/3K =

zf']   -   r   are both set equal to zero. The labor/capital ratio (z) is

determined from the single equation in which the ratio of the marginal

products of labor and capital equal the ratio of their prices, f'/(f -                  zf')    =

W/r, and —a(log z)/a(log W) = a, the elasticity of labor/capital substitution.
The effect of a change in W on the level of capital input is then found by

taking the logarithmic total derivative of either of the first order

conditions and solving for d(log K) to obtain


                   a(log K) —
                            -
           (2)     a(log W)
                                a(o-e),

where a =        f'z/f   is the employment elasticity of output and e =      -1/(V'Q/V')       is

the inverse of the absolute elasticity of marginal revenue with respect to
                                                 5



 quantity of output.5 Since N = zK, the absolute wage elasticity of labor

 demand is


                   =   —   a(log N) =
                                      ae + (1—a)ci.
                           a(log   w)



 This is, of course, analogous to the Hicks wage elasticity of demand in a

 competitive industry.

           There is much less agreement on what the union strives to accomplish

through collective bargaining. It has become quite common to assume that the

utility of "the union" is a general function of the negotiated wage,

employment, and the alternative wage                  available to union members. For the

purposes of this paper it is convenient to assume that the union utility

function takes the form



           (4) R = (W—W)N,          t3 >   0.


W -   W    is the rent of the individual union worker -—        the
       a                                                              difference between
the union wage and that of a relevant comparison group of (presumably

nonunion) workers. One special case of (4) is that of j3 = 1, collective rent

maximization, which is the most common assumption in the literature. More

generally, the union cares relatively more about wages or employment as (3l.

A second important special case is that in which the union cares only about

wages, j3=. This would arise if, for example, there were a strict seniority

system governing layoffs and the median union member neither perceives any

danger of losing his job nor cares about the welfare of less senior workers.

(3=   is   also implicit in the "institutionalist" bargaining models of

Ashenfelter and Johnson and Farber (1977) in which the union leadership can
                                              6



only agree to a wage level at least as large as that anticipated by rank-and-

file union members.

       Holding R constant, the reduction in wages that the union would accept

for a unit increase in employment is determined from




       (5) ()      = - 1(a)

which is negative for W >
                                Wa
                                     and   < . If the union had complete power in
the context of a DC bargaining process, it would set W so as to maximize R

subject to the firm's labor demand function. It would, in this circumstance,

continue to raise W so long as > i1(W_Wa)/W unless profit becomes zero and

the firm is in danger of shutting down.

       The problem with the DC model is that at any initial negotiated wage

both the union and the firm could be made better off by an appropriate

agreenient to reduce W and increase N. The iso—profit curve for the firm is

given by



       (6
            (aW — V'f'—W
            'Nir            N


In Pareto—efficient bargaining, the firm and the union will trade off wages

and employment such that the slopes of the iso—profit and iso-rent curves are

equal. Equating (6) with (5), the marginal revenue product of labor in the

contract curve (CC) model is set equal to a weighted average of the negotiated

and alternative wage rates:



       (7) v'f' =     w(i   —   )+W
                                                     7



This, along with the marginal condition for capital, V'(f-zf')=r, allows one

to derive the slope of the contract curve. First, the proportionate effect of

W on the labor capital ratio is



           8     8(log z) —     —       W(j3-l)
                 8(log W)
                                      W(a_l)+Wa'


which is        0 as a     1.       The next step is to derive 8(log K)/a(log W) by

substituting (8) into the total logarithmic derivative of the marginal

condition for capital. Then, since d(log N) =                  d(log   z) +    d(log   K), it follows

that


                 8(log N) ——    —     (l+)(a—l)
                 8(log W)


where i   is    the absolute elasticity of demand in the DC model (see (3)) and

I1=(W_Wa)/Wa is the negotiated effect of the union on the relative wage rate.

If 3 >   1,    which means that the union cares relatively more about wages than

employment, the contract curve has a negative slope. It is less negative than

in the DC model        unless   a =     (the union cares only about wages), in which case

the CC model degenerates to the DC model. When the union cares more about

employment than wages (             < 1),   the contract curve has a positive slope.

         It is useful for subsequent purposes to calculate labor's share of

total cost, s=Wz/(Wz+r). To do this, note that the condition for profit

maximization with respect to K can be rewritten as V'f = V'f'z+r =                          W(l-l/a)    +

W/a+r.     V'f'z equals (7) multiplied by z, so a =                f'z/f   =   Wz/(Wz+r),       where

W is the weighted average of W and W given by (7). The resultant labor cost

share in the CC model is then easily found to be



         (10)      —
                 S —   __________
                                              8



and the labor/capital ratio is



         (11)



                —
                 _a r            (3

                    1—a   W p

It   is straightforward to show that s>a and z>(a/(l—a))r/W, their prof it—

maximizing values, if L3< and j2>O.


3. Efficient Bargaining Over the Labor/Capital Ratio

        For the reasons discussed in Section 1, bargaining over W and N may not

be feasible, but in many instances unions bargain over the nature of the

production function. One fairly common practice is for the union and the firm

to bargain over the number of workers who must be assigned to each machine.

Such an agreement is fairly easily monitored, for the contract specifies that

if a particular machine is used over a certain period it must have X workers

"manning" it.' In contrast to the DC and CC models of the preceding section,

the union and the management first jointly determine W and z, and then the

firm sets K (and hence N = zK) so as to maximize profit. This model (LC, for

labor/capital) is identical in form to the CC model except that z rather than

N is determined in the bargaining process.' The interesting questions

concern how the outcome —-      in    terms of the value of z and the relation between

N and W -- compare with the DC and CC models.

        To derive the contract curve for this model, it is first necessary to

see how the negotiated values of W andz influence the firm's demand for

capital, for this will be taken account of in the bargaining process. The

profit function, (1), may be rewritten as ir=V(Kf(z)) — [Wz+r]K, and the
                                                 9



condition for maximum profit, conditional on the negotiated values of W and z,

is



         (12)        =   V'(Kf(z))f(z)    — [Wz+r] =   0,


subject to the second—order condition that marginal revenue declines with Q.

Differentiating logarithmically and solving for d(log K), the effects of

changes in W and z on K are


         (13) d(log K) = — esd(log W) — (a+(s—a)e)(log z).


s=Wz/(Wz÷r), labor's share of total cost, can no longer be assumed to equal a.

         The next step is to derive the iso—profit and iso—utility functions for

the two parties. The first of these is analogous to its equivalent in the CC

model.


                dW         V'f'-W
                dzir          z


or,   in proportional terms,


         (15) (d(log W)             s—a
                d(log z)17r          s



The second result is obtained by substituting (Wz+r)/f for V' and multiplying

both the numerator and the denominator by z/(Wz+r), and it gives the

proportion by which the firm would require W to change in order to increase z

by a certain proportion. Given the utility function of the form of (4), the

union must formulate its position with respect to W and z with consideration

to how the firm will vary K in response to variations in z and W. The slope

of the union's iso—utility curve is
                                                               10



                                                   +   (log         K)
                                                       a(log z)
       (16) (d(log
                         W)     =-
             d(log                             W       +   8(log         K)
                                                           a(log W)
                                             '3W_Wa

                                    -—   —
                                              1 — a — (s—a)e
                                                       w

                                                   W_Wa


which makes use of (13). It should be pointed out that s must be less than

the smaller of 13(W/(W_Wa))/e and a+(l-a)/e in order for the union's

indifference curve in W-z space to be downward-sloping.                       A sufficient

condition for both parties to be willing to move off the demand curve by

increasing z is that the slope of (d(log W)/d(log z)) < 0 at s=a. This

requires   that j3(1+) >      tae.
      An efficient contract over W and z will be such that the tradeoffs

between the two variables for the firm and the union are equated, as with

point A in Figure 1. Setting (15) equal to (16) and solving for s, the

resultant labor's share of total cost is seen to be



       (17)    s   —
                   —    af3(l+,t)


and the negotiated labor/capital ratio is


       (18) z =
                       () $3—M(1—3)                        a

These are precisely the same values that obtain in the "fully Pareto-optimal"

bargaining under the CC regime (see (10) and (11)).

      The interesting question is the difference in the models concerning the

relation between employment and the negotiated wage. This is most clearly

seen by examining the special case of rent maximization (31). The elasticity

of labor demand in the DC model is flaE+(l—a)o, and the contract curve in the
                                                 11



  kl W                                       Figure   1




 w
                                             A


1lNtL               — — —I




                           I             I
                           I             I
                           I             I
                           I             I




        CC model is zero in this case. In the LC model, z equals its nonunion value

        and is independent of W, so, since N=zK, the absolute elasticity of N with

        respect to W equals —a(log K)/(alog W), which, by (13), is se. For small

        values of u, s is approximately equal to a, so the elasticity of N with

        respect to W in the LC model equals its value in the DC model less the

        capital-labor substitution component, (1-a)c. As u gets large, s-a=a(1—a)/

        (l+at)>O, and the absolute wage elasticity of employment in the LC model

        rises. However, it is less than r if 4u<o/a(e—a), which is likely over the

        plausible range of the parameters. The observed relation between N and W for

        the three models for the rent maximization case is depicted geometrically in
                                         12



Figure 2. The curve for LC model is the closer to that for the CC model the

larger is the proportion of rj accounted for by capital-labor substitution.

For a low value of the elasticity of substitution and/or small fraction of

capital cost to total cost, the LC model yields essentially the same result as

the DC model.


                                      Figure 2

          4J                   I.'     CC.

                 bC.




       The general result concerning the relation between employment and the

negotiated wage is


       (19) - a(log N) =         lM
                3(log   W)   3+(3+a—l)j [3-(1—a)c].

For     (maximization of the net wage rate), this reduces to ?, and the LC
model (as well as the CC model) degenerates to the DC model. In the

neighborhood of i=O, the absolute slope of the N—W relation for the LC model

is between those of the other two models so long as 3 is finite. The N-W
                                           13



 relation has a positive slope at ,O if 13<(l—a)a/i (compared to 13<1 in the CC

model).

          An interesting variant of the LC model is based on the assumption that

unions and management bargain over workers per unit of output rather than per

machine. The collective bargain sets q=N/Q and W efficiently, and the firm

sets Q and K so as to maximize profit. The results of this model are

identical to those of the LC model, the demonstration of which is left to the

interested reader.


4. Efficient Featherbedding

       An important implication of both      the   CC and LC models is that, given

that both   parties   have the requisite information concerning technological

possibilities, they will agree on a capital/labor ratio that makes full use of

all workers hired.     There   is no "featherbedding" in the sense that a fraction

of the work force of the firm will have literally nothing to do. Instead, an

"efficient" contract will be "inefficient" in the sense that management would

prefer to use a more capital-intensive technology but, given the bargaining

process, they do the best they can with the negotiated z.        In, for example,

the case of rent maximization (13=1), the advent of a union with a negotiated

wage above the initial W would mean that the firm would want to increase the
                       a
capital intensity of its production process. Under the LC model,        however,    the

firm and the union agree to retain the original technology,' so the firm can

only minimize the damage of the imposed wage increase by reducing K, N, and Q

by the same proportion (roughly a times the wage increase). Under the CC

model, the firm and the union agree that the employment level will stay at its

original level, so the firm maximizes profit by renting the same K and selling

the same Q at the same price (so all union gains come at the expense of profit

rather than consumers).
                                        14



       The conclusion of the LC model concerning the absence of featherbedding

depends crucially on the assumption that there exists an infinite number (or,

at least, several) technologies available to the firm. Suppose, however, that

there is only one technology in the relevant range. Output is a linear

function of the number of machines in use (K) subject to the constraint that

each machine be operated by no fewer than X workers. There is no increase in

output associated with setting z above X, so the iso—profit curves (in terms

of logarithms) have a slope of —1 for z>X (set a=O in (15)). This means that

in order for the firm to agree to "overmanning" (z>X), the union must be

willing to reduce wages by one percentage point for each percentage point

increase in the labor/capital ratio. The rate at which the union is willing

to sacrifice wages for employment is seen by (16) to be (d(log W)/d(log z)) =

—(1—se)/(3((l+)/.i)—se).    In order for the union and the firm to agree to a

featherbedding arrangement, it must be true that at z=X (i) the union's

indifference curve is downward-sloping (which requires that SE be less than

one) and (ii) -(d(log W)/d(log z))>1. The second of these conditions

requires that <t/(1+), which means that the union must place a much greater

weight on employment than wages in its utility function for featherbedding to

be mutually advantageous.

       The geometry of the featherbedding story is shown in Figure 3. Assume

that the initial equilibrium is at point A, with W=W' and z=X. If the union's

indifference curve were like R' (as would be the case with, for example, rent

maximization), there would be no incentive for the firm and the union to

bargain over z, and featherbedding would not occur. If, however,     were

sufficiently small that the union's indifference curve were very steep at z=X,

as is true for R", there will be featherbedding. Both the firm and the union

are indifferent between points A and B, and the firm would have higher profits
                                         15



with the same level of utility for the union at point C. Obviously a mutuaLly

agreeable bargain over z and W can be struck that yields a higher level of

utility to the union than R" and a profit level between 1r0 and r1.



                                    Figure 3




       (O%VJ




   'l'#J4




                                                            ts1

                            -I.
                                    —-
                                                             ir0




                                    -
                                        St


                          1
       It   is worth stressing that the conditions under which both sides will

agree to the existence of featherbedding are rather stringent. First, there

cannot be a more labor intensive technology available in the relevant range,

for it will always pay both parties to move to it rather than force the firm

to hire useless labor. Second, the workers represented by the union cannot be

a large share of the total cost of the firm (for Se must be < 1; otherwise the
                                         16



union's indifference curve may be upward sloping). Third, the range of

bargaining outcomes must be such that the workers are receiving very large

rents (high values of ). Fourth, the union will only push for featherbedding

when employment is valued much more than wages (a value of 3 much less than

one). This would be most likely for a union representing workers for whom

demand has fallen, say due to an exogenous technical innovation. Two examples

of unions that meet these criteria are those representing railroad firemen and

newspaper typographers. Industrial unions, which represent all production

workers in a firm would, by this model, be less likely to bargain for

blatantly unproductive work rules.


5. Bargaining Over Plonk Intensity

          A second way in which unions and management can bargain indirectly over

employment is by jointly determining the pace or intensity of work. This may

involve the speed of the assembly line, the number of tasks each worker can be

told to perform, the number and length of coffee breaks, and a myriad of other

nitty—gritty issues.1° One way to represent this is to assume that the firm's

output is a linear homogeneous function of capital and efficiency units of

labor services,



          (20) Q =   kf(),
where f has the usual properties and b is an index of the intensity of work

that is either mandated by management or negotiated in collective bargaining.

An increase in b, of course, plays a role in the firm's productive function

that is similar to labor augmenting technical change in models of economic

growth.
                                           17



          Before investigating how b might be treated in the context of union—

management bargaining, it is first necessary to specify how work intensity

would be determined in the absence of unionism. An increase in work intensity
—-   at   least beyond a certain low level below which workers are bored

—-   presumably lowers the overall attractivness of a job and requires a
compensating differential. Let the utility level associated with a particular

job be a function of the wage rate and work intensity, say U=U(W,b),tJw>O, and

Ub<O•" For the set of jobs requiring a given set of human capital

characteristics, the market utility level is a so a firm's choice of W and b

is constrained by the fact that U(W,b) must equal a This means that an

increase in the firm's work intensity requires that the wage must rise by dW/

db=Ub/Uw. In proportionate terms, 8(log W)/a(log b)=y, where y is the ratio

of the absolute elasticity of utility with respect to work intensity to the

elasticity of utility with respect to consumption. 7 should increase with b,

reflecting the rising marginal disutility of bad working conditions relative

to the marginal utility of consumption.

          The profit equation is now (1) with the modification embodied in (20).

Its total derivative with respect to employment, the wage, and work intensity

is


          (21) dir =   (V'bf'—W)Nd(log N) - WNd(log W) + V'bf'Nd(log   b).


For a nonunion firm, the coefficient on d(log N) is zero, so the firm chooses

b such that y=l. This is illustrated in Figure 4. Given that the market

utility level is U0, the firm maximizes profit by setting work intensity at b'

and the wage at W'.

          An increase in the market utility level, reflecting higher average real

wage rates in the economy due to technical progress, can cause the equilibrium
                                      18


                                   Figure 4




                                              UI
                                                           TI




                                                                ii;




                                       I"
level of work effort in the nonunion sector to increase or decrease depending

on whether the positive substitution effect is greater or less than the

absolute value of the (presumably negative) income effect.12 For purposes of

contrasting the determination of b in collective bargaining with that in

nonunion situations, however, it is useful to assume that the equilibrium

value of b is independent of the wage level. (Otherwise, the role of

bargaining in determining b becomes confounded with the effects of the union

on utility per worker.) The most straightforward way to do this is to specify

that (a) the utility is additively separable in W and b and (b) the elasticity

of utility with respect to W is constant. With the (unnecessary but
                                            19



expositionally convenient) additional assumption that the marginal utility of

income is constant, the utility function becomes U=W(b), where =-'b/Ø and

di/db>O.

       How will work intensity compare with its nonunion value if it is

subject to bargaining between the union and the firm? First, it is clear that

there must be an explicit bargain over (or a very clear implicit understanding

about) the value of b if the union is to be able to improve the welfare of its

members. Suppose this were not so and the determination of work intensity

(like the values of N and K) is considered a "management prerogative." Then,

if the initial bargain solely over wages yields an increase from W' to W" (see

figure 4), the firm will increase intensity from b' to b", thus leaving the

utility of each worker at the nonunion level. The firm, of course, suffers a

slight decrease in profit due to the wage increase, but, by making its

employees work harder, the firm minimizes the damage caused by the union.

       To analyze bargaining over work intensity, the union's preferences must

be modified to reflect the disutility associated with work intensity. The

analogue of (4) is



       (22) R =      (W(b)   —   U)t3N,


where Ua is the alternative (nonunion) utility level available to union

members.   t3   is, as in Section 2, an index of the relative importance to the

union of individual utility versus employment. The logarithmic total

derivative of (22) is



       (23) d(log R) =       d(log   N) +        d(log W) -
                                                              W -U   7d(log b).
                                                         20



The nature of an efficient bargain between the firm and the union depends on

which variables are "on the table." First consider the case in which there is

bargaining over N, W, and b, the equivalent of the CC model investigated in

Section 2. The proportionate tradeoffs of N and b for W from the iso-profit

and iso—utility curves are seen by (21) and (23) to be



                  V'bf'     -                                             W   -
a(log W)] —                     W                   18(log W)1 —      -
[a(log   N)J7r          w                           [a(log N)JR



a(log W)1 —— V'bf'                                  1(1og W)1     —
[a(log   b)Jir      W
                                                    [a(log b)JR



By setting the rates of substitution of employment for wages equal for both

parties, the marginal revenue product of labor in contract equilibrium is seen

to be



                                                     a
         (24) V'bf' =                   +
                            W(1—3)              a



where (b)=U/W. Notice that if the bargained level of work intensity

remains at its nonunion level, ct'(b)=(b), and (24) reduces to (7). In

general, however, it will not be true that b=b. Let LL=(U_Ua)/Ua be the

proportionate impact of the bargaining outcome on individual utility. This

implies that the ratio of the marginal revenue product to the negotiated wage

in contract equilibrium is


                 V'bf' —            1       z
         (25)



which is less than one unless the union cares nothing about employment ($3=D)

or if the union has no success in bargaining (=0). Equating the two rates of
                                                21


substitution of work intensity for wages, the value of b in contract

equilibrium is set such that 'y is less than one. Since        increases with b,

the negotiated level of work effort is less than ba

       The reason for this result is that as part of the efficient bargain the

firm must agree to hire more workers than it would choose if it were free to

maximize profit. The loss in profit due to decreasing b is related to the

value of the marginal product of labor, but, since this must be artificially

low, it is relatively less costly for the firm to make concessions with

respect to work intensity than would be true if N were at the discretion of

management. Referring to Figure 4, the value of d(log W)/d(log b) is less

than one for t>O, so the iso—profit curve is tangent to the iso—utility curve

R" at a value of work intensity less than b".

       Now assume that the firm and the union bargain only over W and b, the

equivalent o the DC model in Section 2. The union must now take account of

the effect of variations in both W and b on employment. It is straightforward

to show that


       (26) d(log N) =     —d(log W) + (i—1)d(log        b),



where =ae+(l—a)c. An increase in work intensity raises or lowers N as

The firm is free to maximize ir with respect to N, so V'bf'=W and (d(log W)/

d(log b))—l. The tradeoff between W and b for the union is now



                               T7A   IT 7   —
                                                  1 +1
        27     a(log W)   —          Ua
               (og b)R —
                                              —

                                          a
                                            22



                               1+J2     —   77 + 1

                                 1+11
                                        7        7?




Assuming 12>0 and 13<o', the value of this at 7=1 is greater than one, implying
that both the union and the management can increase their welfare by an

appropriate reduction in both W and b. The solution value of 7 in this case

             which is exactly what it is in the situation in which there is
is 1— ---,
bargaining over N as well as W and b. (This is analogous to the result in

Section 2 that the solution for the labor/capital ratio is identical in the CC

and LC models.) Not surprisingly, for the case in which there is efficient

bargaining over W, b, and z, the solution value of b follows the same rule.13

       The results for models in which there is efficient bargaining with

respect to work intensity suggest that, to the extent that unions derive

utility from employment as well as wage rents (i.e., 3<o), unions and

management will always agree to lower work intensity levels below those that

would maximize individual utility. Three points are worth stressing.

       First, the conclusions of this section are based on the implicit

assumption that the monitoring of an agreement concerning work intensity is

easy and costless. It is in fact not difficult to see how the day—to--day

fulfillment of agreements on number of functions performed per worker, washup

time, and the like could lead to differences in interpretation and conflict.

The management has, as in the CC model, an incentive to cheat on any agreement

about b, for it can still retain its workers because they are receiving wages

in excess of opportunity cost. To the extent that firms can cheat, one would

expect to observe b close to or greater than b, whereas a carefully monitored

agreement on intensity would make b less than b.'4
                                       23


        Second, unlike the model of bargaining over the labor/capital ratio,

 the LC model, bargaining over work intensity is not a device for moving toward

 the outcome associated with fully efficient bargaining over employment as well

as wages. For the case in which there is bargaining over W and b, for

 example, the absolute proportional effect of a wage increase on employment

will be greater or less than    as the labor demand elasticity is 1.

       Third, an important assumption underlying the results concerning work

intensity in this section is that workers receive some utility from a lower b

holding the wage constant. Consider, however, a dimension of work intensity

(such as the width of a paintbrush) that does not require greater effort on

the part of workers. Union insistence on a lower value of b in such a case is

a form of featherbedding, a contractual obligation by the firm to pay for

unnecessary labor. This is represented in the present model by assuming that

.b can take any value up to some maximum (or "normal') level and that7 is zero

in the relevant range. An efficient bargain restricting b below its maximum

level can be struck only if the union is willing to accept a decrease in wages

proportionately greater than the reduction in b. This requires that (27) with

7=0 exceed one, which means that j3>i/(l+). This is the condition for

featherbedding to be mutually agreeable in the case of bargaining over the

labor/capital ratio with o=0; indeed, it is the same model.

       Finally, to this point it has been assumed that each worker is employed

for a fixed number of hours per unit of time. There is no reason, however,

why the union cannot bargain over hours per worker per period (h) as well as

wages and on other variables like z and b. Assume that individual utility is

an increasing function of both consumption and leisure, say U=iti(wh,-h). Given

freedom to choose hours, h will satisfy Wp1—=0. Without fixed costs per

employee, the profit equation is ir=V(Kf(hN/K))-whN--rK, and the firm is
                                         24


indifferent between any combination of N and h such that their product equal

the profit—maximizing level.'5 The union's utility function is now

and, since the firm does not care what h is, the union can set hours

unilaterally. As with the work intensity model, the solution for the labor

supply model is identical when there is bargaining over W and h and N, z, or

nothing else. This solution is




       (28)    —=wl—
                11/2




where 4   is   the elasticity of utility with respect to consumption and ,.i=('-U)/

U. This implies that, given the utility level of individual union members,

hours of work will always be less than each union member would choose freely

at the negotiated wage rate so long as u>O and t3<c'.   This result, of course,

is analogous to that for the intensity model.


6. Profit—Sharing

       The results to this point indicate that negotiations over the labor!

capital ratio and/or work intensity do not yield outcomes that are fully

consistent with the CC model. After the bargain over wages and the other

variable(s), the incentive of the firm is to maximize profit, and, in the

absence of a direct agreement concerning the level of employment, the firm's

decisions will not maximize union utility. This suggests that it may be in

the interest of the union to insist on profit—sharing with the firm so that

both sides benefit mutually from post-bargaining decisions.

      Assume that (as in increasing number of unionized industries in the

U.S.) there is profit—sharing. The firm retains (l—t) of total profit, given
                                              25



by (1), and each worker receives W+y, where y is his share of profits, tir/N.

The union and the firm first negotiate the value of the wage and t, the share

of total profit to be distributed to workers, and then the management is free

to set employment and capital so as to maximize net profit subject to the

negotiated values if W and t (work intensity is assumed to remain constant).

Since the firm's objective is the maximization of C=(l—t),r, employment is not

affected by t and the absolute elasticity of employment with respect to the

negotiated wage is r as in the DC model. Since a7r/aW=—N, the slope of the

iso-profit curve is


              (a(log                   iT/N
        29    ' at W)'c
                        —       —
                                     (1—t)W


The objective of the union is maximization of (4) with W+y replacing W, and

the slope of its iso—utility curve is


               a(log W)    —    —-            f3ir/N
                                    $( 1—t)W+(3—l)


An efficient bargain over W and t yields an outcome such that (29) and (30)

are equal. This implies that



       (31) (—1)t —       (W—W)      = 0.


Let W+y=(l+LL)W, where j   is   now the union relative wage effect including the

profit sharing payment. The solution wage rate conditional on the union's

success in bargaining is


                    w
       (32)   W =   —[—(1—j3)].
                                     26



This implies that for M>O the negotiated wage will be   the alternative wage

as       Since the labor/capital ratio and employment are determined on the

basis of the negotiated wage, employment under profit sharing will be

identical to that in the CC model (see (11)).

       The interesting question raised by this model is why profit sharing in

unionized monopolistic industries is not more common (see Remus for evidence

on its frequency in different countries). First, the firm may not want to

open its books to union representatives who would tend to question certain

expenditures (e.g., the level of management salaries). Second, the incentives

for the firm to cheat (i.e., engage in "creative accountancy") are enormous,

and this would, as in the original CC model, instill reluctance in union

members to give up tangible wage rents for something requiring faith in

management's integrity.1' Third, to the extent that, as in many monopolistic

industries, profits vary greatly over the, business cycle, risk averse workers

may prefer a certain W to an uncertain y. Finally, as with the CC model, the

median union member may not care much about the employment of others, in which

case   is large and a given rent will be realized mainly from W rather than

y.17


7. Summary and Overview

       This paper has investigated, from the viewpoint of conventional static

economic theory, some of the implications of situations in which unions and

management bargain over working conditions as well as wages. The primary

motivation for considering this topic was the dispute in the literature

concerning whether or not the relation between wages and employment in

unionized firms reflects Pareto—efficient bargaining, but questions such as
                                         27



why restrictions on effort and featherbedding exist are interesting in

themselves.

       There are four main conclusions:

       First, if unions and management bargain indirectly over employment by

negotiating the value or the labor/capital ratio or person-hours per unit of

output, the resultant level of employment is between the outcomes of a fully

efficient bargain (informed bargaining over employment and wages) and a

conventional bargain solely over wages. The wage elasticity of employment in

this situation is approximately equal to the Hicks formula at a zero

elasticity of substitution. Labor is fully utilized at the technology that

would prevail if there were no union wage premium.

       Second, featherbedding (the hiring of totally unproductive labor) will

be an outcome of collective bargaining only if there does not exist a

technology appropriate to nonunion wages and if the union values employment

much more highly than wage rents. It is difficult to see how a featherbedding

agreement could exist for a long period of time (except in Britain, where

nothing ever changes), for it is not in the interests of younger union members

to replace older ones as they die off.

       Third, efficient bargaining over work intensity yields the result that

the contract will specify a slower pace of work than would be chosen by an

individual bargain between each worker and the firm. At the same time, the

existence of a wage premium for union workers provides the firm with a great

incentive to cheat by trying to make its employees work harder. Since,

ceteris paribus, value added in the firm depends positively on actual work

intensity, the result that unions sometimes increase and sometimes decrease

productivity (see Freeman and Medoff) is not surprising.
                                      28


       Fourth, a system of profit sharing in which there is efficient

bargaining over both wage rates and the share of profit allocated to workers

will yield the fully Pareto efficient outcome with respect to employment.

This result, however, is mostly of theoretical interest, for, whatever the

reasons, profit sharing agreements are still fairly uncommon.

       It should be stressed that all of the interesting departures from the

conventional demand curve equilibrium model results depend crucially on the

union placing a value on employment relative to individual wage rents. If the

union cares only about rents except in crisis situations (a hypothesis

advanced long ago by Cartter), bargaining will generally be uni-dimensional

and the efficient bargaining controversy moot.
                                        29


                                     Footnotes

         1For a perceptive summary of this literature see Farber (1984).

       2A rigorous exposition of the conventional approach is provided by
Oswald (1982).

       3For a lucid discussion of various union practices affecting
employment indirectly, see Chapter 7 of Rees. Allen provides a lengthy
discussion of restrictive work practices in the construction industry. In
1976 21 percent of union workers were covered by contractual provisions
specifying "crew size" (9 percent in manufacturing and 33 percent in
nonrnanufacturing). These Bureau of Labor Statistics data refer to large
contracts ( 1000 workers) but do not include the railroad and airline
industries, in which this practice is very common. A particularly lucid
taxonomy of various restrictive work practices in Britain (where, following
theclassic film, "I'm All Right, Jack," they are a fine art) is found in the
Royal Commission on Trade Unions.

       4See, in particular, Ashenfelter and Brown, MaCurdy and Pencavel,
Farber (1984), Pencavel, Oswald (1984), and Abowd.

         51f the product demand function has a constant—price elasticity (>
 1), E   is that elasticity.

       'Monitoring problems would arise when radically different technology
becomes available. Then the union has less than full information about
technological parameters and is likely to be (justifiably) suspicious of any
explanations put forward by management.

       7Two early papers, by Simler and Hartman, investigated some aspects of
the LC model geometrically. See also the paper by Weinstein.

       8For a historical discussion of this practice in the British shoe
industry in the early 1900s see Fox.

         'For l<3<o,   the
                       capital intensity of the production process is
increased but not by as much as the firm's engineers would like; for 3<l the
negotiated z would increase,

       '°For descriptions of many such practices in a wide range of industries
in the U.S. -- and a claim that they have become less prevalent during the
recessionary l980s, see "A Work Revolution in U.S. Industry," Business Week,
May 16, 1983.

       ''Recall that it has been assumed that hours of work are assumed to be
fixed. Otherwise, hours of labor supply would be an argument in the utility
function.

       '2The problem is very similar to that of determining the sign of the
uncompensated wage elasticity of labor supply.

       '31n the case of the general individual utility function, the solution
of the bargaining problem must satisfy
                                      30



                  U     r
              —    2.W11    (l+p)
                        L
                   1


where 5 is the elasticity of U with respect to W. This implies that, if >0
and      b is always less than the level that would be chosen in individual
bargains given that utility level.

       14The evidence on whether work intensity is in fact higher or lower in
the union than in the nonunion sector is rather thin. The results of Duncan
and Stafford appear to indicate that certain dimensions of b are higher for
union workers. To answer the appropriate question for present purposes
satisfactorily, however, one must control much more thoroughly than could
Duncan and Stafford for type of job to remove the possibility that the union
dummy variable is simply correlated with onerous jobs.

     15The formulation is more interesting and realistic when fixed costs per
worker, say cN, are included. Then the firm is willing to pay the worker to
increase hours beyond the utility—maximizing level implied by satisfaction of
the individuals marginal condition. The results with this complication,
however, are not qualitatively different from the simpler model.

        ''Hoerr reports a large increase in the use of profit sharing in the
U.S. —- most notably in the auto industry —— during the early 1980s. This
may, however, be attributable to a desire of the relevant companies and union
leadership to reduce /2, an action necessary because of increased international
competition, without incurring the. wrath of militant union members.

       'Weitzman haas argued persuasively that a comprehensive profit—sharing
system similar to the above would have superior macroeconomic properties to
those of the equivalent of the DC model. The main drawback to its adoption,
in his view, is the fact that most of its benefits are external to the
incumbent workers in the firm. To use Weitzmants example, if the typical UAW
worker at GM does not feel threatened by job loss (and derives no utility from
the welfare of other workers), i.e. 3 is large, that union will not push for
public policies to bring about voluntary profit-sharing.
                                   References
Abowd, John, "Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value of the
     Enterprise,'t rnimeo, October 1985.

Allen, Steven, "Union Work Rules and Efficiency in the Building Trades," North
     Carolina State Working Paper No. 51, July 1985.

Ashenfelter, Orley and James Brown, "Testing the Efficiency of Employment
     Contracts," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

_________ and George Johnson, "Bargaining Theory, Trade Unions, and
                Industrial Strike Activity," American Economic Review, 59,
                March 1969.

Cartter, Allan, The Theory of Wages and Employment, Hornewood, IL, 1959.

Carruth, Alan and Andrew Oswald, "Miners' Wages in Post-war Britain: An
     Application of a Model of Trade Union Behavior," unpublished paper,
     December 1983.

Duncan, Greg J. and Frank Stafford, "Do Union Members Receive Compensating
     Wage Differentials?" American Economic Review, 70, June 1980.

Farber, Henry S., "The Analysis of Union Behavior," N.B.E.R. Working Paper
     No. 1502, November 1984.

_________   "Bargaining Theory, Wage Outcomes, and the Occurrence of Strikes,"
     American Economic Review, 68, June 1978.

Fox, Alan, A History of the National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives: 1874—
     1957, Oxford, 1958.

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do?, New York, 1984.

Hall, Robert and David Lilien, "Efficient Wage Bargaining Under Uncertain
     Demand and Supply," American Economic Review, 69, December 1979.

Hartman, Paul, "Union Work Rules: A Brief Theoretical Analysis and Some
     Theoretical Results," Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research
     Association, December 1966.

Hoerr, John, "Why Labor and Management Are Both Buying Profit-Sharing,"
     Business Week, January 10, 1982.

Johnson, Harry and Peter Mieszkowski, "The Effects of Unionism on the
     Distribution of Income: A General Equilibrium Approach," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 84 November 1970.

McDonald, Ian and Robert Solow, "Wage Bargaining and Employment," American
     Economic Review, 71, December 1981.




                                       31
                                       32


MaCurdy, Thomas and John Pencavel, "Testing Between Competing Models of Wage
     and Employment Determination in Unionized Labor Markets," Journal of
•
     Political Economy, forthcoming 1985.

Oswald, Andrew, "The Economic Theory of the Trade Unions: An Introductory
     Survey," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, forthcoming 1985.

__________ "Efficient Contracts Are on the Labor Demand Curve: Theory and
     Facts," Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, Working Paper
     No. 178.

_________    "The Microeconomic Theory of the Trade Union," Economic Journal,
     92, September 1982.

Pencavel, John, "Wages and Employment Under Trade Unionism: Microeconomic
     Models and Macroeconomic Applications," Scandinavian Journal of
     Economics, forthcoming 1985.

Rees, Albert, The Economics of Trade Unions, 2nd   Edition, University of
     Chicago Press, 1977.
Remus, Jean, "Financial Participation of Employees: An Attempted
     Classification and Major   Trends," International Labour Review, 122,
     January—February 1983.

Royal Commission on Trade Unions, Restrictive   Labour Practices, H. M.
     Stationery Office, London, 1967.
Simler, Normal J., "The Economics of Featherbedding," Industrial   and Labor
     Relations Review, October 1962.
Tauman, Y. and Y. Weiss, "Labor Unions and the Adoption of New Technology,"
     unpublished   manuscript, 1984.

Weinstein,   Paul, "The Featherbedding Problem," American Economic Review, 54,
     May 1962.
