NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF FEDERAL POLICY TO INSURE YOUNG ADULTS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE 2010 AFFORDABLE CARE ACT DEPENDENT COVERAGE MANDATE
Yaa Akosa Antwi
Asako S. Moriya
Kosali Simon
Working Paper 18200
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18200

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012

The authors would like to thank three anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments that substantially
improved the paper. We are grateful for helpful comments from Joel Cantor, David Figlio, Seth Freedman,
Robert Kaestner, Genevieve Kenney, Rick Kronick, Alan Monheit, Michael Morrisey, Benjamin Sommers,
and seminar audiences at the Boston University/Harvard/MIT Health Economics seminar series, University
of New Hampshire Economics Department, Urban Institute, U.S. Department of Justice, Virginia
Commonwealth University School of Public Health, University of Pennsylvania, Miami University
Ohio Department of Economics, Purdue University Economics Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Health Economics Brown Bag seminar and the fall 2012 Association for Public Policy Analysis and
Management (APPAM) conference. The authors have no conflicts of interests to disclose related to
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Yaa Akosa Antwi, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Federal Policy to Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care
Act Dependent Coverage Mandate
Yaa Akosa Antwi, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 18200
June 2012
JEL No. I13,I28
ABSTRACT
We study the health insurance and labor market implications of the recent Affordable Care Act (ACA)
provision that allows dependents to remain on parental policies until age 26 using data from the Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Our comparison of outcomes for young adults aged 19-25
with those who are older and younger, before and after the law, shows a high take-up of parental coverage,
resulting in substantial reductions in uninsurance and other forms of coverage. We also find preliminary
evidence of increased labor market flexibility in the form of reduced work hours.

Yaa Akosa Antwi
Indiana University
Purdue University-Indianapolis
425 University Blvd
CA 530
Indianapolis, IN 46202
yakosaan@iupui.edu
Asako S. Moriya
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 E. Tenth Street Room 441
Bloomington, IN 47405
asako.moriya@gmail.com

Kosali Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Rm 359
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu

The earliest insurance expansion provision of the March 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) to
take effect mandated that health plans and insurers that offer dependent coverage allow children
to stay on their parent’s health insurance plans until their 26th birthday (U. S. Public Health
Services Act section 2714). This mandate became effective on the next plan renewal date after
September 22nd 2010. This extension of dependent coverage was an important aspect of the
health reform package, since young adults have historically high uninsurance rates (Levy, 2007).
Full-year uninsurance among young adults, defined in this paper as those aged 19-25 years, was
37 percent based on Current Population Survey (CPS) data for 2008. The comparable statistics
were 18 percent for those aged 12-18 years and 25 percent for those aged 26-35 years.
There are several reasons why the difficulty faced by young adults in obtaining insurance is a
significant economic and social concern. For one, research has shown that uninsurance among
young adults causes large reductions in their use of health care services (Anderson, Dobkin and
Gross, 2012). Second, young adults may find themselves insured by sources that are less than
ideal because of “job-lock” (Madrian, 1994) or imperfections in the market for individuallypurchased coverage. Lack of health insurance is also tied to financial problems (Himmelstein et
al., 2005). For these reasons, allowing young adults to remain on their parents’ health insurance
plans may improve their health care use, their resulting health, their human capital and job
experience accumulation and their finances.
Substantial federal and state public policy attention has been devoted to increasing children’s
health insurance access in the past through Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP), but eligibility for these public plans phases out by age 19 (Anderson, Dobkin,
and Gross, 2012; Levine, McKnight, and Heep, 2011). Insurer mandates to cover older
dependent children past age 18 had been popular among states prior to 2010, albeit in a weaker
form relative to the ACA provision (Levine, McKnight, and Heep, 2011; Monheit et al., 2011).
In this paper, we examine the ways in which the availability of extended parental health
insurance coverage for young adults has affected their health insurance outcomes, as well as the
ramifications of those effects on labor market behavior. Using data from the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP) covering August 2008 to November 2011, we ask how the
ACA provision has affected the insurance rates, insurance substitution patterns and job flexibility
of young adults from the pre-enactment period (August 2008 to February 2010) to the postenactment period (March 2010 to September 2010) as well as the staggered implementation
2

period (starting October 2010). Our empirical design, which uses the federal mandate as a quasiexperiment to estimate differences-in-differences (DD) regressions that compare those in the age
group targeted by the mandate (19-25 year olds) to those slightly younger and older (16-18 and
27-29 year olds) allows for a more comprehensive analysis of the impact of the ACA than
previous efforts.
We make five main contributions to the literature. First, the SIPP monthly data allow us to
carefully trace the effects of the law starting in the post-enactment period through the end of the
staggered implementation, relative to the pre-enactment period. Previous studies have not been
able to separate out these effects. Second, we leverage the rich health insurance details included
in the SIPP to examine uninsurance as well as several different sources of coverage. Most prior
studies have tended to examine private coverage as a whole, rather than examine the opposing
incentives at play for parental versus own forms of private coverage. As a third contribution, we
examine the heterogeneity of impact by considering the expected marginal costs and benefits of
obtaining new coverage (such as availability of parental health insurance, and own health status).
We also conduct a comprehensive analysis of take-up, examining the characteristics of young
adults who remained uninsured even though their parents have employer-sponsored insurance
(ESI). Fourth, we present the first estimates of the effects of the mandate on the labor market
flexibility of young adults, an important objective of the law. Fifth, we consider implications of
our results for future studies on other provisions of the ACA.
We find that the 2010 ACA provision had an immediate impact on parental ESI coverage of
young adults even before implementation officially started in late September 2010. During
March 2010-September 2010, parental ESI rose by approximately 10 percent among young
adults relative to their baseline rate prior to March 2010. Once the period of staggered
implementation commenced, parental ESI among young adults rose by 30 percent (a 7.0
percentage-point increase) on average during October 2010 to November 2011. When examining
partial data from the period after full implementation (October-November 2011) we find that the
rate was 10.2 percentage-points, a 43.6 percent increase over the pre-enactment period. Our
estimate of the average impact of the provision, based on the period after the implementation
began, translates into 2.06 million young adults adding parental ESI as a result of the law. This is
close to the high-range estimate (2.12 million) predicted by the federal government prior to the
law’s implementation.
3

The increase in parental ESI drew from both the uninsured and the otherwise-insured
populations. Our main results show that the average impact of the law post-September 2010,
relative to the pre-enactment period, was a 3.2 percentage-point increase in insurance; the 7.0
percentage-point increase in dependent coverage is associated with decreases of 3.1 and 0.8
percentage-points in own-name ESI and individually-purchased non-group insurance,
respectively. These results translate into a 9.5 percent fall in uninsurance on average during the
period after implementation began. When examining just the last two months of our data, we
find that the full effect is a 2.6 percentage-point increase in any insurance; the 10.2 percentagepoint increase in dependent coverage is associated with decreases of 5.7 and 1.1 percentagepoints in own-name ESI and individually-purchased non-group insurance, respectively. Our
estimate of the average impact of the provision, based on the period after the implementation
began, translates into 938,000 fewer uninsured young adults as a result of the policy. This
estimate is within the range of effects predicted by the federal government prior to the ACA’s
implementation (Federal Register, 2010) which ranged from 0.19 million to 1.64 million. Further
investigation of our take-up effects among individuals for whom we observe parental insurance
status suggests that the ACA erased about one-third of the uninsurance among targeted
individuals with parental ESI.
We also find evidence consistent with increases in dependent-plan coverage among those with
higher marginal benefits and lower marginal costs of obtaining new coverage. For example,
increases in dependent coverage were greater among those whose parents already covered other
dependents, greater for Whites relative to non-Whites, for single individuals relative to married
individuals, and for non-students relative to students. Men and older young adults (aged 23-25)
experienced greater decreases in uninsurance than women and those aged 19-22. We find no
statistically significant difference in the impact of the provision on young adults who reside in
states with or without some form of prior state dependent-coverage mandate. Through
descriptive examination of those who remain uninsured despite the fact that their parents have
ESI, we find that their characteristics indicate lower socioeconomic status. In the concluding
sections, we discuss the broader implications of these results, including implications for future
aspects of the ACA.
Aside from improved health, one of the most significant aims of this law was to “…permit
greater job mobility (for young adults)... as their insurance coverage would no longer be tied to
4

their own jobs or student status…” (p.21, Federal Register, 2010). The ACA presents a
compelling setting to investigate “job-lock.” Our results provide preliminary evidence that young
adults worked fewer hours and were less likely to work full-time jobs following the mandate. It
is possible that the reduced reliance on own-name ESI as a result of the law could result in
increased job mobility in the future as the job market recovers, a topic to be examined with
future data.
I. Background and Motivation
Before moving on to describe our study in more detail, it is useful to place the ACA policy in
the context of earlier state and federal actions regarding insurance markets. The use of privateinsurer mandates has been a popular way for governments to increase health insurance provision
without much new public spending (Jensen and Morrissey, 1999). In these cases, the relatively
small increases in public spending result from shifting compensation packages from wages to
health insurance, which is tax exempt. As noted by Summers (1989), mandates could be justified
on paternalistic grounds as employers and employees may otherwise opt for lower levels of
coverage and later experience remorse. Mandates could also limit the tendency of workers to
choose firms that offer coverage for services they value, which drives up employer costs.
Mandates, however, are not without welfare costs. To the extent that those who benefit from the
greater insurance value conferred by a mandate are not the only ones who pay the additional
costs, mandates create inefficiencies (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012b; Lahey, 2012).
The many differences between recent public policy initiatives aimed at covering younger
children and those covering children over age 18 suggest that results from one policy may not be
generalized to the other. For instance, younger-child coverage expansions are financed primarily
through public funds, while the primary channel for young-adult-dependent mandates is private
coverage, which entails much smaller tax subsidies. Another difference lies in the demographic
groups targeted. Dependent-coverage provisions impact those whose parents have private
insurance, while Medicaid and CHIP policy affects lower-income populations. This has
implications for behavioral effects among those who might already be insured as well as for
those who are uninsured. Among young adults with parents who were privately insured in 2010,
the federal government estimated that only 17 percent were uninsured, while 40 percent were

5

covered by own-name private insurance and 14.9 percent had other forms of coverage such as
Medicaid or TRICARE (Federal Register, 2010).
Broad insurance mandates to cover populations have been enacted and studied in the past at
the state level, most recently in Massachusetts (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012a) and before that in
Hawaii (Buchmueller, DiNardo, and Valletta, 2011), but federal insurance mandates have thus
far focused on mandating that private insurers offer coverage for specific services, such as
minimum maternity coverage (Gruber, 1994) and minimum postpartum hospital stays (Liu, Dow,
and Norton, 2004). These federal insurer mandates have typically occurred after similar laws had
gained traction at the state level.
Even though most states had already expanded dependent coverage for young adults before the
ACA (Levine, McKnight, and Heep, 2011; Monheit et al., 2011), there are several reasons why
studying the impact of the federal expansion of dependent coverage is important. First, state
expansions had led to unclear effects on health insurance coverage for young adults, partly
because the state laws had several restrictions based on age as well as marital, student, prior
uninsurance, and state residency statuses. This is an important area for investigating the relative
strength of federal versus state solutions to similar problems. In addition, Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) regulations prior to March 2010 stipulated that the exclusion of employer health
insurance contributions from taxable income applied only to children under age 19, or under age
24 for full-time students; insurance provided to older dependents would have to be reported as
taxable income. Under the ACA, this section of the IRS code was amended effective March 2010
so that the tax exemption applies to children until they turn 27 years of age, regardless of
whether they are tax dependents (IRS, 2010a, 2010b). Perhaps most importantly, earlier state
laws did not apply to self-insured plans because the Employee Retirement Income and Security
Act (ERISA) exempts them from these regulations. About 57 percent of private sector health
insurance enrollees were enrolled in self-insured plans in 2010 (AHRQ, 2012). Moreover, it is
not clear how well the state provisions were understood by potentially eligible families (Cantor
et al., 2012a) while the ACA provisions were widely publicized. Unlike the heavily qualified
state laws, the federal insurer mandate applies to all children under the age of 26, and therefore
presents a unique opportunity for studying the effect of a targeted insurance expansion on the
coverage and other behaviors of affected individuals.

6

A. Prior State-Level Private Insurance Mandates
Currently, there are on average over 40 private-insurer coverage mandates in each state
(Bunce, 2012). Most mandates target services or providers that should be covered, rather than
coverage of sub-populations. State mandate activity specific to young-adult-dependent coverage,
which started in 1995 with legislation in Utah, yielded the limited provisions described above.
Two papers (Levine, McKnight, and Heep, 2011; Monheit et al., 2011) used CPS data to
evaluate the insurance effects of state laws for dependent coverage but reached different
conclusions. Monheit et al. (2011) find no evidence that uninsurance was reduced, while Levine,
McKnight, and Heep (2011) find a 3 percentage-point drop in uninsurance. There are many small
differences between their approaches: the demographic definitions of the treatment and control
groups differ; they have slightly different characterizations of state laws and samples of the CPS
data; they have somewhat different outcome and control variables; and Levine, McKnight, and
Heep (2011) draw their conclusions from a triple-difference estimate using a within-state control
group, while Monheit et al. (2011) estimate a DD where the within-state control group is
included along with the out-of-state control group.1 Although it is beyond the scope of our paper
to determine the most appropriate approach to this question, the lack of consensus motivates our
need to perform several specification checks with alternative control groups when studying the
federal law.
B. ACA Dependent Care Provision
The dependent coverage expansion of the ACA was implemented in 2010, starting with a
revision of the IRS rules in March. Starting on September 23rd 2010, insurers offering
dependent-coverage policies that included children were required to allow older children to
remain enrolled up to their 26th birthday, as of the next renewal date of the plan. The Veterans
Administration allowed dependent children to remain on parental policies in a manner similar to
other employers (typically allowing older dependents coverage until they were 19 years, or 24
years for full-time students), and Medicaid and CHIP defined children as those under age 19. As
1

Five states (IL, MD, MN, MO, and MT) are included in Monheit et al. (2011) as reform states but not in Levine, McKnight, and Heep
(2011). Four of those states implemented their laws in January 2008. Washington is classified as a reform state in the Levine, McKnight, and
Heep (2011) analysis but not in the Monheit et al. (2011) analysis. Levine, McKnight, and Heep (2011) use ages 19-24 as their base sample while
Monheit et al. (2011) use ages 19-29 as six reform states had extended the affected age beyond 24 years. Private correspondence with the authors
and our own investigations with CPS data suggest that differences are not attributable to any particular difference in approach.

7

mentioned above, recent state laws have changed the availability of parental coverage for older
children, with thirty states implementing some form of the dependent-coverage mandate prior to
the ACA.
While some insurers chose to comply with the ACA dependent coverage provision sooner than
September 2010, insurers and employers could legally wait until the start of the next plan year
after September 22nd 2010.2 Although the plan renewal date could be as late as September 22nd
2011, most employer plans start in January or July, with the vast majority being in January
(Cronin, 2012). Until 2014, grandfathered employer plans in existence as of March 23rd 2010
are still allowed to refuse coverage to age-qualified dependent children whose own employers
offered them health insurance, although it is unknown to what extent this provision is enforced.
An estimated 56 percent of insured workers are in grandfathered plans as of 2011 (KFF 2012).
Other than this stipulation, employer and individual market policies are required to include
children regardless of marital status, student status, co-residence with parents, tax-dependent
status, or other limitations associated with earlier state attempts to expand dependent coverage.3
Employers were required to send written notification of a special open enrollment period during
which newly-eligible children could be added to policies. There was widespread publicity
regarding the new law, including an active “Young Adult Coverage” Facebook page created by
the White House Office of Public Engagement.
There are two published regression-based analyses on the effect of the ACA mandate on health
insurance status (Cantor et al., 2012b; Sommers and Kronick, 2012). Both use CPS data through
2010 (reported in 2011), which does not allow one to separate insurance estimates from early
versus later in the year. This is a drawback of CPS data, as early 2010 represents a pre-policy
time period. A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report (Cohen and Martinez,
2012) contains descriptive statistics showing the number of young adults with coverage through
2011. Using quarterly means from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) spanning 2010
to the first quarter of 2011, Cohen and Martinez (2012) report that the percentage of uninsured
young adults decreased by 3.5 percentage-points, from 33.9 percent in 2010 to 30.4 percent in

2

Health and Human Services Secretary Sebelius requested insurers to implement the provision sooner than September 23rd 2010 in order to
avoid disenrolling and re-enrolling children who would graduate from college in May 2010; several major insurers agreed to this request (Federal
Register, 2010).
3
Tricare also voluntarily added the extension to age 26 for military insurance starting January 2011.
http://www.navy.mil/search/display.asp?story_id=58052

8

the first quarter of 2011. They also show quarterly mean uninsurance rates for all older adults.
Finally, they show means for private coverage, without separating own-name ESI (substitution)
from parental coverage (take-up) effects.
In contrast to the studies above, our paper uses an approach that allows us to discern between
early and intermediate effects of the law, to decompose the effects according to different sources
of health insurance held by young adults and according to the expected marginal costs and
benefits of new coverage, including whether parents have ESI. Our study can also shed some
light on the later-stage effects of the law, as we have two months of post-full implementation
data, whereas most previously published studies present effects for 2010 alone. Finally, in
addition to analyzing the effects of the ACA mandate on the health insurance choices of young
adults, our paper also provides the first examination of whether labor market behavior is
affected.
II. Hypotheses
Our first hypothesis is that, given several health insurers announced intentions to act before the
actual implementation date, we should expect that impact of the law was visible prior to
September 2010. However, the hypothetical direction of anticipatory behavior is not always
clear. For example, Alpert (2012) finds that seniors reduce their use of certain medications in
anticipation of Medicare Part D implementation. Thus it is possible that young adults would
reduce their insurance coverage in the period between enactment and implementation due to their
anticipation of imminent eligibility for new health insurance coverage.
We next test whether we observe insurance effects consistent with predictions from a very
simple conceptual framework of health insurance and labor market behavior. We hypothesize
that effects will be concentrated among families with lower marginal costs for adding dependents
on parental employer health insurance policies, and among those with higher marginal benefits—
e.g. those in worse health. In our simple conceptual framework, young adults derive utility from
insurance coverage I, job match t, which is a function of whether they have access to outside
sources of health insurance, and from consuming a composite good Y. They maximize U(I,Y,t)
constrained by the available set of insurance choices, including access to dependent health
insurance through parents, their health status, and human capital.

9

Through the ACA policy change, some young adults whose parents have an employer policy
could be added as dependents for low marginal costs. Shifting from uninsured to insured status
increases the utility of the formerly uninsured young adults, particularly those in worse health.
Utility also increases for those who switch away from their current insurance source toward
coverage under their parents’ policy if the current source is inferior in cost and quality or if
parental coverage would allow them to consider future job changes or decrease their work hours
free of the worry of losing ESI. Even if there is an increased cost to parents for adding young
adults in terms of higher premiums or lower wages in the long run, these costs may not always
come out of the dependent’s pocket. Thus, we anticipate reductions in own-name individual and
employer coverage. It is unclear whether there are advantages to dropping public health
insurance, as cost sharing is typically very low in public insurance. There are few avenues to
public coverage for the population targeted by this provision. However, if the quality of public
insurance is perceived as sufficiently inferior, there could also be substitutions away from public
insurance. In their study of the impact of state dependent-coverage laws on young adults, Levine,
McKnight, and Heep (2011) find suggestive evidence of this “reverse crowdout” phenomenon,
whereby expansion of private coverage substitutes for public coverage.
We expect that the availability of parental insurance affects insurance choices primarily for
those whose parents already had access to ESI prior to the law, as it is likely to be prohibitively
expensive for most parents to change jobs in search of new coverage for older dependents. But
parents may decide to add offered ESI, and we test this empirically. Furthermore, if the parent
already has a full-family policy that covers younger children, the marginal cost of adding an
older child is close to zero. By law, insurers are not allowed to charge more for the newlyeligible dependents due to their age than they already do for other dependent children.
In summary, we hypothesize that the ACA could lead to a reduction in uninsurance among
young adults starting before the implementation of the law. We expect that dependent coverage
through parental policies could increase partly as a result of young adults opting for the new
coverage in place of other sources of coverage for which they pay more. Coverage increases
should be largest among those with lower marginal costs for adding extra dependents to existing
employer policies and among those in worse health, for whom coverage offers higher marginal
benefits. We also expect that, for targeted young adults who hold jobs primarily for health

10

insurance benefits, the flexibility created by the mandate will act as encouragement to drop out
of the labor force, switch jobs, or switch from full-time to part-time work.
III. Data
We investigate the impact of the ACA dependent coverage mandate using data from the SIPP
2008 panel. The SIPP is a household-based nationally-representative longitudinal survey of the
civilian non-institutionalized population, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The 2008 panel
interviewed approximately 50,000 households for four years, starting in September 2008. In any
given month, interviewers visit one-fourth of the sample to collect retrospective responses for the
last four months. Data are released roughly nine months after collection, making the survey a
valuable tool for the early evaluation of recent public policies. We use data from August 2008 to
November 2011 including the latest wave of SIPP data that has been released. The 2008 panel is
well-timed for the evaluation of the dependent coverage provision, since it contains data
covering the period prior to the March 2010 ACA enactment, from March 2010 to the September
2010 start of implementation, and at least an additional year of data after September 2010.
SIPP offers several advantages for our purposes. First, it contains point-in-time insurance
questions, which allow us to investigate differential responses to the law following enactment
and implementation. The SIPP also allows us to distinguish ESI own-name coverage from ESI
dependent coverage; we expect the two to move in opposite directions, but in some other data
sets private insurance is reported as just one category.
Second, the SIPP follows individuals longitudinally, as long as they do not move into military
barracks or become institutionalized. This allows us to gather more information on them than
would be obtained from cross-sectional surveys. When a young adult moves out of his or her
parents’ household, the survey continues to follow both parties. We determined that for about
two-thirds of all 19-25 year olds, we have contemporaneous parental health insurance
characteristics even for the post-reform period. Most but not all of this subsample are currently
sharing the primary address with their parents. This subsample of data allows us to estimate the
impact of the provision on young adults aged 19-25 years whose parents have ESI. Because
those with whom we can match parental information are likely not a representative sample, we
consider these data in a separate analysis rather than in our base model. Our base sample consists
of observations for those aged 16-29 years, except for 26 year olds who are not clearly in either
11

the treatment or the control group. To reduce recall bias, we only use data collected on the most
recent reference month of the wave, although we estimate models with all months as a
specification check. We create binary dependent variables to indicate having any insurance,
dependent ESI from parents, own ESI, own-name non-group individual coverage, and public
coverage.4 As with all longitudinal surveys, there is a concern about attrition and non-response
during follow-up rounds. The SIPP program goes to considerable effort to maximize follow up,
and sampling weights are produced to reduce the influence of attrition on estimates, but concerns
regarding nonresponse bias may still persist. We use survey weights in all results presented.
IV. Method
Estimating the effects of the policy requires a strategy that can isolate the impact of the ACA
on the insurance coverage of young adults from contemporaneous changes in health insurance
markets. Since the policy’s effects are delineated by age, our main identification strategy is to
use a control group of younger (16-18 year olds) and older individuals (27-29 year olds), relative
to our treatment group of 19-25 year olds. This strategy rests on the assumption that the control
group will account for other time-varying factors that would have led the treatment group to
experience different insurance rates after reform. Those in the older control group may be more
similar to young adults when it comes to making their own insurance and employment choices.
However, the younger control group may reflect the changing circumstances of employer
dependent coverage, which has been decreasing in generosity over time (Vistnes et al., 2012),
thus we test the sensitivity of results to the choice of control group.
While the post reform suitability of the control group is an untestable assumption, there are
several ways to test the extent to which treatment and control group insurance rate trends were
similar in the pre-reform period. In Figure 1, we plot unconditional insurance coverage rates for
control and treatment groups in order to visually examine the period before and after the ACA
enactment. This figure shows that while there is generally a similar pattern prior to the ACA
passage, the two lines diverge sharply following the law’s enactment. Relative to the control
group, the treatment group insurance rates start to increase from the time of enactment, although
4

Even though the law also applied to non-group coverage that parents bought, we did not create a separate column for this form of coverage
as it is relatively rare. We also did not separate out spousal dependent coverage, although in a robustness check we tested whether this form of
coverage was affected. Because these two forms of insurance are not separately identified, the coefficients across the columns will not add up to
the uninsurance coefficient.

12

the larger increases happen after the third quarter of 2010. The insurance rate of the control
group on the other hand does not experience dramatic changes, but increases in the fourth quarter
of 2011, which could reflect the impact of national labor market improvements. We perform a
formal statistical test for equality of trends using data from August 2008 to February 2010. We
estimate a model with indicators for having any health insurance coverage or dependent
coverage through a parent as dependent variables. This model uses the same control variables as
our main model, which we describe below, except that the key variable of interest is an
interaction between the linear time trend and the treatment group dummy instead of the usual
differences-in-differences variables. We conclude from our results included in Appendix Table
A1 that although the control and treatment groups have very different levels of insurance
coverage, there is no statistically detectable difference in their trends prior to the policy change,
conditional on control variables included in the model.
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
In Figure 2, we plot coverage under dependent policies by age group and time. This shows that
the age profile of dependent insurance changed markedly for those in the 19-25 age range, as we
move from enactment to implementation and beyond. However, a simple visual inspection of the
data is unlikely to reveal the causal effects of the ACA; for example, the mid-year dip in
insurance rates for the treatment group in Figure 1 may be due to college graduation and loss of
insurance, which does not affect the control group. Figure 2 provides a strong visual
confirmation that the law had a direct and large impact on the parental ESI coverage rate of our
treatment group. To estimate the effects more precisely, we estimate the DD regression model
below:

,

where Yigst represents insurance coverage or labor market outcomes for individual i in age range
g, state s and time t, Xigst represents other individual-level factors that affect insurance,
Implementt represents a dummy for the period after staggered reform enactment commenced in
13

September 2010 through the latest period of data available, November 2011, and Treatg
represents a dummy for being in the 19-25 age range (relative to those aged 16-18 and 27-29).
The interaction of Implementt and Treatg captures the average impact since staggered reform
implementation started, by comparing insurance coverage during this period relative to coverage
during the months before enactment, among the treatment group relative to the control group. In
later specifications, we break this period down further.
[Insert Figure 2 Here]
To examine the anticipatory changes in insurance coverage that happened after enactment
(March 2010) but before implementation began (September 2010), we add a dummy variable,
Enactt, and its interaction with the treatment dummy variable. The Xigst vector includes an
indicator for age, gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, student status, household income as a
share of federal poverty line, and its squared term. This vector also includes monthly linear
national and state-specific time trends, the monthly state unemployment rate, and an interaction
of the treatment dummy variable and the state unemployment rate.5 We also include dummy
variables for year and calendar month in τt, state fixed effects in ζs to account for differences by
state in dependent coverage laws prior to the ACA, and we cluster standard errors at the level of
the state.
Following the earlier literature in dependent coverage laws (e.g. Levine, McKnight, and Heep,
2011), we use linear probability models due to the ease of interpretation and computation of
marginal effects of interacted variables in models with clustered standard errors. As an
alternative, we also estimated our main models using a logistic regression specification with
standard errors calculated as suggested by Ai and Norton (2003). We estimate model (1) first for
all targeted young adults and their control group, and then separately for those with different
self-reported health statuses and other demographic characteristics to explore the heterogeneous
impact of the law.
Even if it appears that past trends in insurance do not differ between control and treatment
groups, a DD method does not guarantee that trends in the control group will capture all other
unobserved factors that could affect the treatment group’s insurance status, absent the policy
5

We have also estimated models that used a one year lag of the unemployment rate, in case the unemployment rate in the state may be
affected by the ACA provision, but find the results to be unaffected.

14

change. For example, job opportunities might have worsened for young adults relative to others.
We lessen this concern somewhat by choosing a control group consisting of both older and
younger age groups relative to the treatment group and allowing the state monthly
unemployment rate to be correlated with the treatment group dummy. We address this further
with a triple difference strategy estimated among the subsample of individuals matched to
parental information. Those young adults whose parents do not have ESI are unaffected by the
law directly, but are arguably likely to experience the same exogenous health insurance trends.
We considered two alternative estimation strategies which we concluded were inappropriate
for this situation. For one, we investigated the possibility of using a regression discontinuity
approach. Unfortunately, we found the discontinuity in insurance rates at the top end of the age
distribution of 26 years or at age 19 did not change substantially enough to enable an RD design.
This is visible in Figure 2. Another potentially attractive approach is to use states with prior
dependent coverage mandates as a control group for the impact of the federal law. However, this
approach presents several challenges since state laws were substantially weaker than the federal
law, and it is not possible to tell which young adults in a state are affected by the federal law but
were not affected by prior state laws. For example, even if a prior state mandate covered nonstudent unmarried young adults between the ages of 19-22 years, more than half of these cases
would be self-insured plans exempt from the law.
V. Results
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for our sample of 16-29 year olds. We first show the
statistics for the full sample, and then break them down by treatment group (19-25 year olds)
versus the two age groups included in the control category (16-18 year olds and 27-29 year olds).
On average during our time period, there are similarities as well as large differences between the
groups in level terms. As noted earlier, uninsurance rates tend to be highest among those in the
treatment-group age range. From Table 1, we see that 67.8 percent of 19 to 25 year olds have
insurance of any kind compared to 87.0 percent and 69.3 percent for 16 to 18 year olds and 27 to
29 year olds respectively. Race and ethnicity are similar across the groups. Notice also that since
education and employment progress with age, older young adults are more likely to be employed
and are better educated than those who are younger. Finally, younger adults are more likely to
describe their health status as excellent.
15

[Insert Table 1 Here]
Our main DD results from Equation (1) presented in Table 2 show the effects of the law’s
implementation period as well as the anticipatory response of young adults and insurers prior to
implementation. Since the two different policy dummy variables featured in this table are
mutually exclusive, each result tells us the average effect on insurance rates during that phase of
the policy, relative to before the March 2010 enactment date. Below the regressions results in
Table 2, we show the mean insurance rates by control and treatment groups, before enactment in
March 2010 and after implementation in September 2010. In anticipation of the implementation
of the law, the results presented in the first row show that dependent health insurance coverage
for young adults increased by 2.4 percentage-points (10.2 percent relative to the base) relative to
the control group; this increase is offset by a 1.7 percentage-point decrease in ESI coverage in
own name. There is a marginally significant 1.1 percentage-point decrease in governmentprovided health insurance as well. During this initial period, we also find no statistically
significant change in individually-purchased coverage or in uninsurance rates. Thus, these
anticipatory responses to reform led to an increase in dependent coverage but did not translate
into overall gains in health insurance coverage.
[Insert Table 2 Here]
The second row of Table 2 shows our DD estimates of the implementation of the ACA
provision. We find that it led to a 3.2 percentage-point reduction in uninsurance for 19-25 year
olds, relative to the control group, after conditioning on all other variables in the model. This
represents a 9.5 percent reduction in the rate of uninsurance for young adults, as their
uninsurance rate was 33.5 percent (100-66.5) prior to ACA enactment. Focusing on the later
columns of Table 2, we find a 7 percentage-point increase in dependent coverage, a 0.8
percentage-point reduction in non-group insurance and a 3.1 percentage-point reduction in ownname ESI. These results imply that with an estimated 29.5 million young adults in the US
(Federal Register, 2010), about 938,000 young adults gained health insurance on average in the
period after implementation began, as a result of the mandate. As a comparison, this estimate of
overall gains in health insurance is between the 0.65 million mid-range and the 1.64 million

16

high-range estimates anticipated by the federal government prior to the implementation of the
law (Federal Register, 2010).6
In Table 3, we estimate an alternate specification in which we study the timeline of the law in
more detail. We split the post-September 2010 dates into three segments: October 2010-February
2011; March 2011-September 2011; and October 2011-November 2011. The first period
captures the bulk of plan anniversary dates, since it encompasses January 2011. The second
comprises the remainder of the implementation period, and the third represents a period after all
plans were expected to comply. As the rotational structure of the SIPP leads to only a fourth of
our sample being interviewed each month, only half the sample is represented in the last period.
Although this is a random half of the sample, we are conservative in our use of equation (1) as
our main specification where the post-implementation period is captured by one dummy
variable.
[Insert Table 3 Here]
As expected, Table 3 shows successively higher average take-up rates in the later time periods,
relative to pre-enactment. The full-implementation effect on parental ESI coverage is now 43.6
percent, corresponding to a 10.2 percentage-point increase. This translates into 3 million adults,
and is higher than the high-range federal estimate of 2.12 million (Federal Register, 2012). The
estimated results on uninsurance, however, are sensitive to the time periods chosen for
comparison. The full implementation effect here shows a 2.6 percentage-point decrease in
uninsurance, while the largest effect occurred toward the middle part of 2011, at 3.2 percentagepoints, although the three estimates are not statistically different from each other. It is
noteworthy that this 3.2 estimate for mid-2011 is similar to the 3.5 percentage-point estimate in
Cohen and Martinez (2012), which takes a different approach but uses data as of mid-2011.
The reduction in other forms of coverage in Table 3 increases over time, with individual
coverage dropping by 1.1 percentage-points (nearly one-third drop from the initial level; roughly
324,500 individuals) and own-ESI dropping by 5.7 percentage-points (close to 28 percent of the

6

The federal estimates were made using 2004-2006 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Household Component (MEPS-HC). They projected
low, mid and high estimates for the number adding parental insurance and the number of newly insured young adults, depending on three take-up
scenarios. These are 0.7, 1.24 and 2.12 million, and .019, .65 and 1.64 million respectively. They assume no changes will occur in own-name
employer insurance or government provided insurance, and that the number who might switch from own-name non-group policies to parental
policies is 0.55 million at most (but do not provide a range for this estimate).

17

pre-ACA level; roughly 1.68 million individuals) at the end of the implementation period,
relative to before the passage of the ACA. Thus our estimate of the full impact of the provision,
based on the two months of post-full-implementation data available in the SIPP, translates into
778,800 young adults fewer uninsured as a result of the policy. As with our Table 2 estimate,
this also falls within the scope of the mid- to high- range estimates anticipated by the federal
government (Federal Register, 2010).
A. Heterogeneity of Effects
Although Table 2 presents results for all young adults, we expect there to be heterogeneity in
the impact of the law along several dimensions. First, we estimate our main results by age (19-22
years and 23-25 years separately), gender, race/ethnicity, marital status (married versus nonmarried) and student status (full-time students versus others) and perform statistical tests of the
difference between each pair. These demographic dimensions are associated with different
circumstances that might affect the availability of parental insurance as well as take-up and
substitution behaviors. As Table 4 indicates, we find evidence that the increase in parentalemployer-dependent coverage was statistically significantly higher for Whites, non-married
individuals and non-students than for their counterparts. A larger increase in dependent coverage
for Whites is consistent with patterns of higher availability of (parental) ESI (KFF, 2009).
[Insert Table 4 Here]
Married young adults are more likely to be financially independent of parents than single
young adults, which possibly explains the lower rise in dependent coverage observed for them.7
Since full-time students had greater access to parental employer health insurance due to prior
IRS laws, the difference in take-up we estimate between the two groups is not surprising. We
find no statistically significant differences in parental employer dependent coverage by gender
and age. However, men experienced statistically significant greater reductions in uninsurance
than women; the coefficient for men (0.042) was about twice as large as that for women (0.020).
This is a meaningful result given the high rate of uninsurance among young men.
7

We also tested whether married young adults are likely to drop their spousal coverage as a result of the law. It is plausible that young adults
might find it advantageous to switch from family coverage to single coverage if one spouse is able to obtain insurance as a dependent on his or
her parents’ policy. In unreported tables, we find no evidence to suggest that spousal health insurance decreased, even when we restricted the
sample to only married individuals.

18

Correspondingly, young adults aged 23-25 were not statistically significantly different in their
change in dependent coverage relative to those who were 19-22 years of age, but experienced
greater reductions in uninsurance than their counterparts.8
Another dimension along which differences could occur is state of residence. Although the
ACA is unprecedented in its expansion of dependent coverage, most states had passed similar
laws of varying strength prior to the federal law. We tested separate models in Table 4 for states
that had passed some form of law prior to the ACA date of March 2010.9 We find that although
the effect of the ACA appears slightly larger in states that had not passed reforms relative to
states that had passed reforms, the difference between them is not statistically significant. As
noted earlier, state level provisions are far weaker than the federal dependent care provision, thus
it may not be surprising that these differences are not more pronounced. In fact, it could well be
that the unobserved factors that lead some states and not others to adopt state laws might also
lead to a smaller reaction to the broader-reaching federal law in states that chose not to pursue
any prior action.
We also present results in Table 4 that test the extent to which the law affects populations who
may have greater demand for parental coverage due to their health status. The SIPP does not
contain measures for the presence of chronic conditions, thus we separate our sample by the selfreported 1-5 health status variable. The best health recorded is “Excellent,” followed by “Very
Good,” “Good,” “Fair,” and “Poor.” Roughly 60 percent of young adults reported that their
health status was less than “Excellent,” so we use this as our indicator for higher health care
demand. When we test the sensitivity of this classification using other cutoffs for health status
(such as Excellent and Very Good versus the rest), we find qualitatively similar results. Among
those in excellent health, we estimate a larger coefficient on the dependent coverage measure,
but the percentage effect is smaller because the base coverage rate (not shown in the table) is
smaller among those in worse health relative to those in excellent health. Formal statistical tests
of the two coefficients across the specifications for dependent coverage and for coverage from
any source indicate they are not significantly different from each other. Testing for differential

8

DD tests by age also restricted the control groups correspondingly. Treatment group individuals aged 19-22 used control group individuals
aged 16-18 while treatment group individuals aged 23-25 used control group individuals aged 27-29.
9
In classifying states by prior laws, we follow details collected by the National Conference of State Legislatures at
http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/health/mandated-health-insurance-benefits-and-state-laws.aspx, reading the state statutes to resolve any
conflicts in state classifications in prior literature. Our final state classification matches Cantor et al, (2012a).

19

insurance behavior according to additional measures of health status and other demographic
factors that signal demand for health insurance deserves further exploration as more ACA
provisions are introduced.
B. Triple-Differences Strategy (DDD)
An advantage of the SIPP over other data sets is the greater availability of information
regarding parents’ health insurance characteristics, even in cases where children do not reside
with their parents. However, we are not able to match anyone who did not reside with their
parents at the start of the panel. Appendix Table A2 lists the fraction of young adults for whom
we are able to identify whether their parents have ESI, post March 2010. This is 67 percent for
the treatment group ages; there is also a substantial fraction of the control group for whom this
information is available. Using data on this subset of individuals for whom parental information
is available, we implement a DDD estimation strategy and present results in Table 5. We define
the affected group as those whose parents have ESI (and are in the relevant age range) and use
young adults whose parents do not have ESI as a further control group. Note that the entire effect
of the law on dependent insurance comes only from those whose parents have ESI, as the
dependent variable is otherwise zero.
[Insert Table 5 Here]
Since parental information is not known for all young adults, we consider the specification in
Table 2 to be our main approach. There are two other reasons we do not consider the DDD as our
base approach; parents’ own coverage may be affected by policy, and there may be selection
involved in whether a young adult lives with his or her parents. For example, when we
statistically test health status differences between the groups, we find that 54.9 percent of those
for whom we have parental information describe their health as less than “Excellent” while 65.9
percent of those for whom we have no parental information do so. Before proceeding to the
DDD, for comparison, we first estimate the DD model we use for our main results on the
aforementioned subsample. Compared to Table 2, in Appendix Table A3 we find no statistically
significant difference for any source coverage and dependent coverage, but a statistically
significantly smaller reduction in own-name ESI.

20

The DDD results in Table 5 show a higher increase in dependent coverage through parents (9.6
percentage-points; this difference is statistically significantly different from the DD estimate in
Table 2), a marginally statistically significant reduction in own-name individual coverage, no
statistically significant result on own ESI, and a 6.7 percentage-point increase in coverage from
any source. Given that the baseline uninsurance rate among the treatment group is 20.7 percent
(fourth row from the bottom of Table 5), this indicates that the ACA reduced uninsurance among
the targeted population by about one third. Later in the paper, we study the characteristics of the
remaining two-thirds of this targeted population, and possible implications of the grandfathered
plan rules. The implied take-up effects among the uninsured here are comparable to estimates
from other expansions although they are for a very different context; Gruber and Simon (2008)
find that the CHIP expansions during 1996-2002 were associated with an overall take-up of 7
percent across all children, but nearly one-third for uninsured children.
One possible confounding factor in our DDD analysis is that parents may themselves seek ESI
once they are able to retain older dependents on their policies, if such coverage is more valuable
to them. If this is the case, then our DDD control and treatment groups would change in
composition along with the policy and contaminate the study design. We approach this
possibility in two ways. First, we re-estimate Table 5 using information on parental health
insurance plans from the start of the panel, before the law began. We find that the results were
statistically identical to the current Table 5 (except for one coefficient in the fourth column,
which is not statistically significant in Table 5). However, since this potentially introduces
measurement error, we use current parental information in Table 5 but formally test whether
parents’ health insurance decisions were affected. In Appendix Table A4, we test whether there
is evidence of greater access to ESI after the enactment of the ACA provision among parents of
young adults aged 19-25 with the corresponding control group and explanatory variables as our
main DD model in Table 2. Our results indicate no evidence of such an effect.
With the richness of the parental information available in the SIPP we are able to extend our
analysis in two additional ways. One is to explore take-up by asking questions about those young
adults who remain uninsured despite their parents having ESI. We find that even in the last wave
of the SIPP data (August-November 2011), by which time the law had been virtually fully
implemented, 429 young adults, or 13.1 percent, have parents with ESI but remain uninsured
(out of a total of 3,270 whose parents have ESI during that time period), while 2,055 young
21

adults are on their parents’ employer policies during this time period. In Table 6 we compare the
characteristics of these individuals, testing the statistical significance of the sample differences in
the last column. From this exercise we see that the two groups are very different along many
dimensions that suggest lower socioeconomic status among those who remain uninsured. The
uninsured are more likely than those on parental ESI to be older, male, African-American or
Hispanic, not full-time students, in worse health, to have lower family income, and live apart
from their parents.
[Insert Table 6 Here]
Even within the group of young adults with access to parental health insurance, there are
differences in the marginal costs of adding a young adult to an insurance plan, based on the type
of coverage held by parents. If a parent holds a single policy that covers only him- or herself and
perhaps a spouse, the cost of adding a young adult dependent may be high, as that involves
shifting to a family health insurance policy. On the other hand, a parent who already holds a
policy that covers other children should face almost no marginal cost in employee premiums to
add a young adult, since the ACA specifically forbids insurers from pricing young adults
differently than already covered dependents. We investigate this by looking at young adults who
a) had parents with ESI four months prior to the ACA enactment; b) were not on the parents’
policy at that time; and c) whose parents hold ESI in the current month. Defining this as the “at
risk” population, we consider in Appendix Table A5 the probability that they added parental
coverage by the last four months of our data (August to November 2011) according to whether
their parents initially had family or non-family coverage. We find that of the 242 whose parents
had family coverage initially, 39.2 percent obtained parental coverage after the law, while only
28.0 percent obtained parental coverage among those with non-family coverage.
Although the difference tends toward the expected direction, one might expect the differential
to be larger. We also estimate this in the form of a regression and found that adding covariates
does not change the results much. Although it is beyond the scope of our paper to explore the
take-up differentials fully, we discuss two possibilities that could be explored in future work.
One possibility is that using characteristics of parental policies two-and-a-half years prior may
introduce measurement error, as many parents may have had to move children on and off
policies as children age and change employment and school enrollment statuses, and this
22

measurement problem may cause the two statistics to be closer together as we see here.
Unreported calculations suggest that the shorter the time period between measuring parental
insurance plan characteristics and child insurance, the larger the difference between the single
and family take-up rates. The other possible theory relates to why these rates are not higher in
both cases; the rule that grandfathered plans may refuse coverage for young adults who are
offered coverage through their own employer (even if they do not accept that coverage) may be a
limiting factor, and can be tested when more plans lose their grandfathered status. The federal
government estimates that about 18 percent of uninsured young adults whose parents have ESI
have an ESI offer themselves (Federal Register, 2010).
C. Robustness Checks
We estimate several additional models to check the robustness of our results. We estimate
models in which we assume falsely that the reform took place in different months prior to March
2010, using data from the period before the ACA enactment. That is, for each of the 17 months
between August 2008 and January 2010, we re-estimate Table 2 assuming a placebo date for the
ACA law and create a distribution of the results from the replications. We examine the mean and
standard deviation of the estimates obtained in Appendix Table A6, relative to the values
obtained in Table 2. We find that the placebo tests produce results which are close to zero and
are relatively far away from the estimated effects in Table 2. Only two out of a possible 85
estimates are statistically significantly different from zero at even the 5 percent level. This
indicates that the results we obtain in Table 2 do not result by chance because trends in treatment
and control groups might have been different prior to the law.
Second, we investigate whether the results recorded in our main Table 2 are robust to
clustering standard errors at a more aggregated level (year-quarter level) than the state level,
following the example in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008). In this specification, the lefthand variable is the ratio of those with each insurance type calculated at year-quarter level for
treatment and control groups. This reduces the number of observations to 28, and we cluster at
year-quarter level for 14 clusters. Using dummy variables for the enactment period (March to
September 2010) and another for the period following the start of implementation (October 2010
and onwards), a treatment group dummy and an interaction of these as right hand side variables
as in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008), we show in Appendix Table A7 that adjusting the
23

level of clustering and using wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure do not meaningfully affect the
statistical significance of the results.
Third, we investigate the impact of estimating marginal effects using a logistic regression,
although for ease of interpretation and convergence, and to follow prior literature, we use linear
probability models for our main results. We discover that when we use state time trends, our
logit models fail to converge. We are also unable to use sample weights in our logit models.
However, when we estimate the models without state time trends and without weights, the results
we obtain are fairly close qualitatively to the corresponding linear probability model estimates.
Fourth, we explore whether results are sensitive to our choice of control group and treatment
group ages. Because of added avenues for public health insurance through the CHIP
Reauthorization Act of 2009, which led some states to expand coverage, older teens may not be
an ideal control group for young adults. But older young adults aged 27-29 are also not ideal
since the effect of the recession may have been less damaging for them than for the treatment
group and because they are not able to serve as a control for trends in dependent coverage that
might result from rising health insurance premiums. In unreported tables, we find that the
outcomes are fairly unchanged when using different control group ages, except that 1) the effect
on own-name ESI is slightly smaller (different only at the 5% level) when only the older control
group (ages 27-29) is used and it is slightly larger (different only at the 10% level) when only
the younger control group is used and 2) the effects on any source coverage is larger when only
the older control group is used and it is smaller when only the younger control group is used
(these differences are statistically significant).
Finally, in exercises also not reported in tables, we found that the results we observe in Table 2
are not statistically significantly different both when we remove states that passed state
dependent coverage laws during August 2008 to February 2010, and when we remove
Massachusetts from the sample due to prior comprehensive state health reform.
D. Impact of the Mandate on Labor Market Outcomes
A potential implication of the availability of new insurance coverage for young adults is that it
could affect labor market behavior. The availability of health insurance could influence the
decision of young adults to work full-time or part-time, their job choice, their propensity to
change jobs and whether they enter or exit the job market (Madrian, 1994; Currie and Madrian,
24

1999; and Gruber and Madrian, 2002). As a result of eased “job-lock”, we expect to see young
adults leaving full time employment altogether, or shifting from full-time to part-time work,
moving toward types of employment that do not provide health insurance. Our data allow us to
investigate the effects of the federal mandate on whether young adults report working, whether
they report working full-time (30 hours or more), their weekly work hours, and their rate of job
turnover. We also examine the impact of the mandate on their work schedule flexibility by
evaluating the probability that young adults have work hours that vary from week to week.
Our results, starting with the first column of Table 7, show no statistically significant evidence
that the mandate affected the probability of employment of young adults. Since the receipt of ESI
is usually tied to full-time work, we examined this measure next and find that the law is
associated with a reduced prevalence of full-time work by close to two percentage-point (roughly
5.8 percent) during the period after implementation began, relative to pre-ACA enactment. We
also find statistically significant evidence for a reduction in hours of work (about a 3 percent
reduction); these effects are statistically weaker when we examine log hours as the dependent
variable. We next examine whether there is evidence of increased rates of employer or job status
change, but find no statistically significant evidence in either column 5 or 6. We do find,
however, some evidence of increased likelihood of reporting that one’s job hours vary from
week to week. As a robustness check, we excluded the younger control group (aged 16-18 years)
and estimate the same specification as Table 7. We find that the magnitudes and significance of
the effects are statistically similar, which suggests that our results are not driven by 16-18 year
olds among whom labor market attachment is very low. Note, however, that our aim is to
provide suggestive evidence on labor markets and not to conduct the same extensive robustness
testing as we do above for our insurance outcomes. Thus, these results should be interpreted with
caution.
[Insert Table 7 Here]
Overall, our limited analysis of the labor market impact of the ACA on young adults suggests
that the mandate affected the intensive rather than the extensive margin of employment. Even
though the decreases in full-time employment and work hours seem small, they are economically
meaningful in the context of prevailing job market conditions. One possible reason that we might
not see greater evidence of job mobility is that the economic downturn has been particularly
25

harsh on young adults’ ability to move between jobs since they have less human capital
accumulation than the average worker (Danziger and Ratner, 2010). Future research should
conduct more in-depth analysis of the labor market impact of the mandate.
VI. Discussion and Conclusions
We present estimates, using data spanning August 2008 to November 2011, on the health
insurance and labor market impact of the 2010 ACA young adult mandate. Our main estimates
from a DD model compare outcomes of those aged 19-25 years to those who are slightly older
(27-29 years) and slightly younger (16-18 years), during different time intervals. Our results
show that the law had an impact on insurance rates even prior to the start of its formal
implementation in September 2010. During the implementation period, we find a steady rise in
parental ESI, with the average effect after implementation began showing 2.06 million young
adults being insured by the policy. Our corresponding central estimates regarding the number of
newly insured young adults (938,000) falls between the middle and high range estimates put
forward by the federal government prior to ACA implementation. Because the federal estimates
were made by assuming that all plans would be grandfathered in 2011, our finding of a reduction
in own-name ESI in our paper highlights the importance of understanding assumptions used in
federal predictions of ACA effects. Further investigation of this take-up effect suggests that the
ACA erased about one-third of the uninsurance among targeted individuals with parental ESI.
Exploring the heterogeneity of impact, we find that those likely to have lower marginal costs
and higher marginal benefits regarding the new coverage avenue are more likely to opt for
parental coverage. We find no evidence that parents’ own coverage was affected by the ACA
law. We also show that among those with parental health insurance, there is greater take-up
where the marginal cost of adding a dependent to a family policy is lower, although on the flipside there appears to be a substantial number (13.1 percent) of young adults remaining uninsured
despite their parents having employer policies. This is possibly due to the fact that grandfathered
plans are allowed until 2014 to refuse parental insurance to young adults with ESI offers as well
as the fact that the individual mandate is not yet enforced.
This paper provides one of the first comprehensive analyses of an important early provision of
the ACA. Based on data from the early release program of the National Health Interview Survey
(Cohen and Martinez, 2012), reports have already established that a large number of young
26

adults gained coverage between September 2010 and June 2011. Using difference-in- difference
regressions, a different data set and a longer time period, our analysis confirms the finding of
substantial increases in the coverage of young adults as a result of the ACA provision, but also
points to a number of new findings on other outcomes; for example, Cohen and Martinez (2012)
do not estimate the number of young adults who added parental coverage.
Many other insurance-related changes are scheduled to be implemented in coming years, and it
is important to understand the ways in which the young adult provision might interact with them.
We describe here a simplistic exercise to consider the implications for those whose parents do
not have ESI, had two other insurance provisions scheduled for 2014 taken effect during the last
four months covered by our data. Using our subsample of matched individuals, we find that
among those whose parents do not have ESI, 32.9 percent have incomes below 133 percent of
federal poverty level (FPL), the level of income that would potentially qualify for expanded adult
Medicaid. The corresponding statistic among those whose parents have ESI is 14.9 percent. We
also find that a further 53 percent of children whose parents do not have ESI have incomes
between 133 percent and 400 percent of FPL and could qualify for some form of subsidy on the
state exchanges. The comparable statistic among children of the employer-insured is 26.1
percent.
What these calculations suggest is that, for one, those who are not affected by the young adult
dependent provision will be differentially affected by the later insurance expansions. Those who
signed up for parental coverage might also be affected, to the extent that they might choose a
newly subsidized form of coverage after 2014. If exchange subsidies entice young adults to enter
the individual market, this might help to alter the risk pool since the ACA effect of removing
young adults from the individual market may have worsened the risk pool, although the welfare
effects are not clear without taking into account the insurance rating mechanism in place in a
state or the size of the individual market relative to the number of young adults who exited to
parental policies. Future changes in the labor market could affect young adults’ ability to take
advantage of reduced “job- lock” and move to new jobs. Enforcement of the individual mandate
could also affect the take-up decisions of those young adults who remain uninsured despite their
parents being insured.
Regardless of the precise future path of the young adult parental ESI option, the changes that
have already taken place are substantial enough that several more outcomes should be examined,
27

such as use of health care; health; financial wellbeing; and social outcomes, such as
intergenerational relationships. A full welfare analysis of this provision would also consider how
the costs of new coverage were distributed within a firm and the value of reduced “job-lock” for
young adults.10
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 2011. “Percent of Private-Sector
Enrollees That Are Enrolled in Self-Insured Plans at Establishments That Offer Health
Insurance by Firm Size and Selected Characteristics,” (Table I.B.2.b.1), 2010 (July 2011).
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Insurance Component Tables. Generated using
MEPSnet/IC. <http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/MEPSnetIC.jsp> . Accessed on
September 20, 2012.
Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton. 2003. “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models,”
Economics Letters, 80 (1): 123–129.
Alpert, Abby. 2012. “The Anticipatory Effects of Medicare Part D on Drug Utilization”.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2161669.
Anderson, Michael, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. 2012. “The Effect of Health Insurance
Coverage on the Use of Medical Services,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
4(1): 1-27.
Buchmueller, Thomas C., John DiNardo, and Robert G. Valletta. 2011. “The Effect of an
Employer Health Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for
Labor: Evidence from Hawaii,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4): 25–51.
Bunce, Victoria C. 2012. Health Insurance Mandates in the States 2011. Council for Affordable
Health

Insurance

(CAHI)

Executive

Summary.

Available

at

http://www.cahi.org/cahi_contents/resources/pdf/MandatesintheStates2011ExecSumm.pdf
(last accessed on January 27, 2013).
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based
Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,

10

The
Kaiser
Family
Foundation
estimates
the
premium
impact
to
be
about
1
percent
in
2011.
(http://www.kff.org/pullingittogether/upload/Methodology-for-Estimating-the-Effect-of-the-Affordable-Care-Act-on-the-Average-Premium-fora-Family-of-Four-in-2011.pdf)

28

90(3): 414–427.
Cantor, Joel C., Dina Belloff, Alan C. Monheit, Derek DeLia, and Margaret Koller 2012a.
“Expanding Dependent Coverage for Young Adults: Lessons from State Initiatives,” Journal
of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 37(1): 99-128.
Cantor, Joel C., Alan C. Monheit, Derek DeLia, and Kristen Lloyd. 2012b. "Early Impact of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults." Health Services
Research, 47(5) 1773-1790.
Cohen, Robin A., and Michael E. Martinez. 2012. “Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of
Estimates From the National Health Interview Survey, January-September 2011,” National
Center

for

Health

Statistics

Issue

Brief.

Available

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/health_policy/HI_08_to_June11_YoungAdults.pdf

at
(last

accessed on January 27, 2013).
Cronin, Christopher. 2012. “Annual Health Insurance Decisions, Uncertain Health Transitions,
and Within Year Medical Care Consumption.” Unpublished.
Currie, Janet, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1999. “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. 3309–3407.
North Holland, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Danziger, Sheldon, and Ratner, David. 2010. “Labor Market Outcomes and the Transition to
Adulthood.” The Future of Children 20(1): 133-158.
Federal Register 2010. “Group Health Plans and Health Insurance Issuers Relating to Dependent
Coverage of Children to Age 26 Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Interim
Final Rule and Proposed Rule.” Federal Register 75(92): 27122-27140 (May 13, 2010)
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American Economic
Review, 84(3): 622-41.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Madrian, Brigitte C. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature.” In Health Policy and the Uninsured, ed.
Catherine McLaughlin. 97-178. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd-Out Ten Years Later: Have Recent Public
Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics
27(2): 201–217
Himmelstein, David U., Elizabeth Warren, Deborah Thorne, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2005.
29

“MarketWatch: Illness and Injury as Contributors to Bankruptcy,” Health Affairs.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 2010a. “Tax-Free Employer-Provided Health Coverage Now
Available

for

Children

under

Age

27,”

Available

at

http://www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=222193,00.html (last accessed on March 27, 2012 ).
Internal

Revenue

Service

(IRS)

2010b.

“Notice

2010-38,”

Available

at

http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-10-38.pdf (last accessed on March 27, 2012).
Jensen, Gail A., and Michael A. Morrissey. 1999. “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and
Mandated Benefit Laws,” Milbank Quarterly 77(4): 425-459.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2012. “Employer Health Benefits 2011,” Available at
http://ehbs.kff.org/pdf/2011/EHBS percent202011 percent20Chartpack.pdf Ex 15. Accessed on
September 20, 2012.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2009. “Role of Health Coverage for Communities of Color,”
Available at http://www.kff.org/healthreform/upload/8017.pdf. Accessed on September 20,
2012.
Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2012a. “The Impact of Health Care Reform on
Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts.” Journal of Public Economics
96(11): 909-929.
Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2012b. “Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform.” NBER Working Paper 17933.
Lahey, Joanna N. 2012. “The Efficiency of a Group-Specific Mandated Benefit Revisited: The
Effect of Infertility Mandates,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 31(1): 63–92.
Levine, Phillip B., Robin McKnight, and Samantha Heep. 2011. “How Effective are Public
Policies to Increase Health Insurance Coverage among Young Adults?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 129-156.
Levy, Helen. 2007. “Health Insurance and the Transition to Adulthood,” In The Price of
Independence: The Economics of Early Adulthood, ed. Sheldon Danziger and Cecilia Elena
Rouse. 84–106. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Liu, Zhimei, William H. Dow, and Edward C. Norton. 2004. “Effect of Drive-through Delivery
Laws on Postpartum Length of Stay and Hospital Charges,” Journal of Health Economics
23(1): 129–155.
Madrian, Brigitte C. 1994. “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is there
30

Evidence of Job-Lock?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1): 27-54.
Monheit, Alan C., Joel C. Cantor, Derek DeLia, and Dina Bellof 2011. “How Have State Policies
to Expand Dependent Coverage Affected the Health Insurance Status of Young Adults?”
Health Services Research, 46(1) Part II: 251- 267.
Sommers, Benjamin D., and Richard Kronick. 2012. “The Affordable Care Act and Insurance
Coverage for Young Adults.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 307(9): 913-914.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits,” The American
Economic Review, 79(2): 177-183.
Vistnes, Jessica, Alice Zawacki, Kosali Simon, and Amy Taylor. 2012. “Declines in EmployerSponsored Insurance between 2000 and 2008: Examining the Components of Coverage by
Firm Size,” Health Services Research, 47(3): 919-938.

31

FIGURE1. PERCENTAGE OF YOUNG PEOPLE WITH ANY INSURANCE COVERAGE BY TREATMENT AND CONTROL GROUPS
Note: Sample weighted estimates from 2008 SIPP panel, using data from August 2008 to November 2011. The first vertical line indicates the first
quarter of 2010 when the ACA was passed, the second vertical line indicates the third quarter of 2010 when the dependent coverage mandate was
implemented, and the third vertical line indicates the first quarter of 2011 when most new insurance plan years start after the implementation of
the mandate. The estimate for a quarter averages insurance reported as of the three interview months contained in that quarter. We use only the
data from October and November 2011 to plot the fourth quarter of 2011since the data for December 2011 is not available in SIPP currently.

32

FIGURE 2. PERCENTAGE OF YOUNG PEOPLE COVERED BY EMPLOYER SPONSORED HEALTH INSURANCE AS PARENTS’ DEPENDENTS
Note: Sample weighted estimates from 2008 SIPP panel, using the period from August 2008 to November 2011 as indicated by trend lines.

33

TABLE 1. DEMOGRAPHIC, SOCIOECONOMIC AND INSURANCE CHARACTERISTICS

Health insurance status
Indicator: covered by any health insurance (HI)
Indicator: covered by employer HI as a parent's
dependent
Indicator: covered by own employer HI
Indicator: covered by individually purchased HI in own
name
Indicator: covered by government HI
Employment status
Indicator: employed
Indicator: unemployed
Demographic characteristics
Age
Indicator: white
Indicator: African-American
Indicator: Hispanic
Indicator: married
Education
Indicator: student
Indicator: less than high school
Indicator: high-school graduate
Indicator: some college
Indicator: college graduate
Health status
Self-reported health is less than “excellent"
Number of person-month observations
Corresponding number of unique persons

All
observations

Age,
16-18

Age,
19-25

Age,
27-29

0.727

0.870

0.678

0.693

0.267
0.198

0.523
0.024

0.264
0.189

0.019
0.393

0.028
0.158

0.011
0.256

0.032
0.127

0.036
0.129

0.569
0.080

0.253
0.063

0.628
0.089

0.754
0.076

22.22
0.602
0.136
0.190
0.180

17.02
0.575
0.146
0.200
0.013

21.96
0.613
0.135
0.183
0.140

28.01
0.604
0.127
0.195
0.435

0.419
0.257
0.272
0.333
0.113

0.885
0.770
0.178
0.051
0

0.361
0.098
0.325
0.452
0.113

0.084
0.103
0.245
0.347
0.223

0.585
150,997
28,853

0.486
39,886
9,618

0.596
78,212
16,803

0.663
32,899
8,441

Note: Sample weighted estimates from the 2008 SIPP, using data from August 2008 to November 2011. Throughout the paper, we use
only the 4th reference month within a wave to reduce recall bias. The “All observations” column refers to those aged 16 to 29 years,
except for 26 year olds.

34

TABLE 2. EFFECT OF ACA ON COVERAGE OF YOUNG ADULTS 19-25 YEARS: MAIN DD RESULTS

Any source

ACA enactment effect
(March-Sep, 2010)
ACA implementation
effect (October 2010-)

Employer
dependent
coverage
(through
parents)

Individually
purchased
insurance in
own name

Employer
own
coverage

Government
provided

-0.0018
(0.0064)

0.0239***
(0.0055)

0.0025
(0.0031)

-0.0173***
(0.0053)

-0.0106*
(0.0054)

0.0318***
(0.0074)

0.0702***
(0.0069)

-0.0080***
(0.0023)

-0.0312***
(0.0060)

-0.0025
(0.0058)

Dependent variable
means
Treatment, before ACA
enactment
0.665
0.234
0.035
0.204
0.123
Control, before
0.781
0.280
0.023
0.208
0.182
Treatment, after ACA
implementation
0.702
0.307
0.026
0.171
0.133
Control, after
0.783
0.263
0.023
0.210
0.200
Notes: (1) Number of observations is 150,997. (2) Cells of the table contain: coefficients, and standard errors in parentheses.
Coefficients in the first row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group (19-25 years old) and a dummy variable
for the period after ACA enactment but before implementation (March-September, 2010); coefficients in the second row are from the
interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group and a dummy variable for the period after ACA implementation (October 2010
and onwards). (3) Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All regressions are weighted using person-level weights. (4) Data:
pooled waves of the 2008 SIPP panel. We use the data for period from August 2008 to November 2011. The population is young
adults aged from 16-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Only 4th reference month
observations from the SIPP are used in the regression. (5) Dependent variables—column 1: indicator variable that equals 1 if
individual is covered by health insurance from any source and 0 otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals 1 if individual is
covered by employer health insurance as a dependent of a parent and 0 otherwise; column 3: indicator variable that equals 1 if
individual is covered by individually purchased insurance in own name and 0 otherwise; column 4: indicator variable that equals 1 if
individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and 0 otherwise; column 5: indicator variable for any type of
government-provided health insurance. (6) Other regressors are an indicator for the period after ACA enactment but before
implementation, an indicator for the period after ACA implementation , an indicator for each year of age, year-specific fixed effects,
month-specific fixed effects, time trend, state fixed effects, gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, student status, household income as a
share of federal poverty line and its squared term, monthly unemployment at state level, interaction of unemployment and an indicator
for treatment group. (7) Means of dependent variables are obtained for treatment and control groups before ACA enactment (before
March 2010) and after ACA implementation (after September 2010).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

35

TABLE 3: EFFECT OF ACA ON COVERAGE OF YOUNG ADULTS 19-25 YEARS: THREE POST-ACA TIME PERIODS, DD
RESULTS

Any source

ACA Enactment Effect
(March-Sep, 2010)
ACA first
implementation effect
(Oct 2010-Feb 2011)
ACA second
implementation effect
(Mar-Sept, 2011)
ACA postimplementation phase
(Oct-Nov, 2011)

Employer
dependent
coverage
(through
parents)

Individuallypurchased
insurance in own
name

Employer
own coverage

Government
-provided

-0.0016
(0.0065)

0.0237***
(0.0055)

0.0025
(0.0031)

-0.0172***
(0.0053)

-0.0103*
(0.0055)

0.0249**
(0.0099)

0.0488***
(0.0075)

-0.0039
(0.0026)

-0.0223***
(0.0072)

0.0008
(0.0069)

0.0323***
(0.0089)

0.0718***
(0.0078)

-0.0086***
(0.0026)

-0.0277***
(0.0069)

-0.0087
(0.0057)

0.0264**
(0.0109)

0.1020***
(0.0141)

-0.0110**
(0.0051)

-0.0571***
(0.0134)

-0.0080
(0.0128)

Dependent variable
means
Treatment, before ACA
enactment
0.665
0.234
0.035
0.204
0.123
Control, before
0.781
0.280
0.023
0.208
0.182
Treatment, between
ACA passage and
implementation
0.665
0.257
0.037
0.185
0.126
Control, between
passage and
implementation
0.780
0.263
0.023
0.208
0.204
Treatment, during ACA
earlier implementation
period
0.688
0.285
0.028
0.177
0.135
Control, earlier
Implementation
0.777
0.266
0.021
0.204
0.199
Treatment, during ACA
later implementation
period
0.709
0.315
0.024
0.173
0.131
Control, later
implementation
0.783
0.263
0.023
0.210
0.202
Treatment, during ACA
post implementation
period
0.713
0.336
0.026
0.153
0.133
Control, post
implementation
0.795
0.256
0.028
0.220
0.200
Notes: See Notes to Table 2. The only difference stems from the use of three dummy variables (instead of one)
to define a post-implementation effect. The dummy variable for Oct 2010-Feb 2011 captures the effect of the
law after most plan anniversary dates, Mar-Sept 2011 captures the cumulative effect of the law for plan
anniversary dates through September 2011. The dummy variable Oct-Nov 2011 captures the effect of the law
after all plans are in compliance with the federal provision.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

36

TABLE 4. EFFECT OF ACA ON COVERAGE OF YOUNG ADULTS 19-25 YEARS: DD RESULTS BY SUBGROUPS
Employer
dependent
coverage
(through
parents)
19-22 years old
-0.0183*
0.0227***
0.0190*
0.0622***

Any
source
by Age group
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

Employer
dependent
Any source
coverage
(through
parents)
23-25 years old
0.0117
0.0153***
0.0414***
0.0759***

Employer
dependent
Any source coverage
(through
parents)
Difference
-0.0300**
0.0074
-0.0224
-0.0137

Female
0.0264***
0.0700***

Difference
0.0144
-0.0051
0.0227**
-0.0011

by Gender
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

0.0059
0.0423***

Male
0.0213**
0.0689***

-0.0085
0.0196*

by Race/Ethnicity
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

0.0021
0.0339***

White
0.0216***
0.0873***

Non-white
-0.0085
0.0253**
0.0286**
0.0420***

0.0105
0.0053

by Marital status
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

0.0066
0.0097

Married
0.0055
0.0220***

Non-married
-0.0068
0.0220***
0.0309***
0.0733***

Difference
0.0134
-0.0165*
-0.0213
-0.0513***

Others
0.0182***
0.0763***

Difference
-0.0215*
-0.0072
-0.0497*** -0.0423***

by Student status
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

Full-time students
-0.0174**
0.0110
-0.0016
0.0340***

0.0041
0.0481***

by Health status
ACA enactment effect
ACA implementation effect

"Excellent"
-0.0023
0.0293***
0.0274***
0.0780***

Less than "excellent"
-0.0043
0.0195**
0.0354***
0.0673***

Difference
-0.0037
0.0453***

Difference
0.0020
0.0098
-0.0080
0.0107

States that enacted
States that never enacted
Difference
by State law status
laws
laws
ACA enactment effect
-0.0025
0.0226***
-0.0033
0.0284***
0.0008
-0.0058
ACA implementation effect
0.0291**
0.0687***
0.0339***
0.0737***
-0.0048
-0.0050
Notes: (1) Sample weighted estimates from 2008 SIPP panel data, using from August 2008 to November 2011.
(2) Dependent variables—columns 1 and 3: indicator variable that equals 1 if individual is covered by health
insurance from any source and 0 otherwise; columns 2 and 4: indicator variable that equals 1 if individual is
covered by employer health insurance as a dependent of a parent and 0 otherwise. (3) Other regressors are the
same as those listed in Note (6) under Table 2, except that a demographic variable used to define subgroups is
not included. (4) Columns 5 and 6 show the differences in effects between subgroups on the coverage through
any source and employer health insurance coverage as a dependent, respectively. We obtain significance levels
for the differences by testing the equality of coefficients using Seemingly Unrelated Regression methods. (5)
See Notes (2)-(4) under Table 2.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

37

TABLE 5. EFFECT OF ACA ON COVERAGE OF YOUNG ADULTS 19-25 YEARS: DDD RESULTS USING PARENTAL
INFORMATION

Any source

ACA enactment effect
(Mar-Sep, 2010)
ACA implementation effect
(Oct, 2010-)

0.0392***
(0.0139)
0.0669***
(0.0235)

Employer
dependent
coverage
(through
parents)
0.0135
(0.0089)
0.0961***
(0.0104)

Individually
purchased
insurance in
own name
0.0052
(0.0070)
-0.0131*
(0.0067)

Employer
own
coverage
-0.0121
(0.0110)
-0.0245
(0.0147)

Governmentprovided
0.0320*
(0.0177)
0.0132
(0.0216)

Dependent variable means
Among those whose parents
do not have ESI
Treatment, before ACA
0.435
0
0.031
0.104
0.215
enactment
Control, before
0.658
0
0.017
0.064
0.479
Treatment, after ACA
0.461
0
0.032
0.103
0.234
enactment
Control, after
0.684
0
0.017
0.075
0.499
Among those whose parents
have ESI
Treatment, before ACA
0.793
0.525
0.032
0.154
0.054
enactment
Control, before
0.912
0.715
0.015
0.075
0.081
Treatment, after ACA
0.857
0.603
0.021
0.145
0.056
implementation
Control, after
0.903
0.674
0.017
0.100
0.083
Notes: (1) Number of observations is 91,743. (2) Cells of the table contain: coefficients, and standard errors in
parentheses. Coefficients in the first row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group (1925 years old), a dummy variable for the period after ACA enactment but before implementation (MarchSeptember, 2010) and a dummy variable that indicates that a parent has employer sponsored insurance;
coefficients in the second row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group, a dummy
variable for the period after ACA implementation (October 2010 and onwards) and a dummy variable that
indicates that a parent has employer sponsored insurance. (3) Data: pooled waves of the 2008 SIPP panel. We
use the data for period from August 2008 to November 2011. The population is young adults aged from 16-29
(except for the removal of 26 years olds) for whom parental information is available. Only 4th reference month
observations from the SIPP are used in the regression. (4) Other regressors are a dummy variable that indicates
that a parent has employer sponsored insurance, and its interactions with a dummy variable for the period after
ACA enactment but before ACA implementation, with a dummy variable for the period after ACA
implementation, and with a dummy variable for each year of age, and with year fixed effects, and all the
variables included in the DD regressions in Table 2. (5) Means of dependent variables are obtained for
treatment and control groups before ACA enactment (before March 2010) and after ACA implementation (after
September 2010) for those whose parents do not have ESI and those whose parents do have ESI. (6) See also
Notes (3), (5), under Table 2.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

38

TABLE 6: CHARACTERISTICS OF UNINSURED (BUT ELIGIBLE) YOUNG ADULTS
Employer
dependent
coverage
(through parents)

Uninsured

Employment status
Indicator: employed
0.545
0.565
Indicator: unemployed
0.070
0.154
***
Demographic characteristics
Age
21.07
21.99
***
Indicator: female
0.487
0.371
***
Indicator: white
0.725
0.483
***
Indicator: African-American
0.090
0.173
***
Indicator: Hispanic
0.105
0.261
***
Indicator: married
0.018
0.053
***
Education
Indicator: student
0.613
0.267
***
Indicator: less than high school
0.032
0.086
***
Indicator: high-school graduate
0.285
0.429
***
Indicator: some college
0.565
0.442
***
Indicator: college graduate
0.109
0.037
***
Income
Family income as the ratio to federal poverty level
5.114
3.028
***
Health status
Self-reported health is less than “excellent"
0.448
0.594
***
Living arrangement
Indicator: live with their parents
0.955
0.915
***
Number of observations
2,055
429
Note: Data: the latest wave available from the 2008 SIPP panel (August to November 2011). The population is
young adults (19-25 years old) whose parents had employer-sponsored health insurance. The last column
indicates the level of statistical significance of the sample differences.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

39

TABLE 7. EFFECT OF ACA ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOME OF YOUNG ADULTS 19-25 YEARS: DD RESULTS

ACA
enactment
effect (MarSep, 2010)
ACA
implementati
on effect
(Oct-, 2010)
Dependent
variable
means
Treatment,
before ACA
enactment
Control,
before
Treatment,
after ACA
implementati
on
Control,
after

Hours

Log of
hours

Probabili
ty of
changing
employe
rs or job
status

Probabili
ty of
changing
employe
rs

Probabilit
y of
having
hours that
vary

-0.0154**
(0.0058)

-0.474**
(0.233)

-0.0268
(0.0208)

-0.0042
(0.0042)

-0.0017
(0.0046)

0.0141***
(0.0047)

-0.0058
(0.0062)

-0.0221***
(0.0066)

-0.807***
(0.258)

-0.0475**
(0.0213)

0.0063
(0.0046)

0.0044
(0.0037)

0.0122**
(0.0059)

0.651

0.383

23.3

2.27

0.167

0.103

0.524

0.306

17.8

1.73

0.112

0.063

0.080

0.602

0.340

20.4

2.04

0.149

0.099

0.099

0.481

0.293

16.0

1.56

0.088

0.053

0.066

Probabil
ity of
being
employe
d

Probability
of working
full time

-0.0015
(0.0062)

0.099

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 150,997 in the first, second and seventh columns, 137,841 in the third and
fourth columns, and 120,301 in the fifth and sixth column. Observations in which individuals report work hours
that vary are excluded in the regressions on hours and log of hours (columns 3 and 4). (2) Data: pooled waves of
the 2008 SIPP panel. We use data for the period from August 2008 to November 2011. The population is young
adults aged from 16-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Only
4th reference month observations from the SIPP are used in the regression. (3) Dependent variables—column 1:
indicator variable that equals 1 if individual is employed and 0 otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that
equals 1 if individual works full time (twenty hours or more per week) and 0 otherwise; column 3: number of
hours per week individual works; column 4: log of number of hours per week individual works; column 5:
indicator variable that equals 1 if individual has work hours that vary and 0 otherwise. (4) See Notes (2),(3), (6)
and (7) under Table 2.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

40

