                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MANAGING LICENSING IN A MARKET FOR TECHNOLOGY

                                           Ashish Arora
                                          Andrea Fosfuri
                                          Thomas Roende

                                        Working Paper 18203
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18203


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2012




We would like to thank participants in seminars at Ludwig Maximilian University (Munich) and University
Autònoma Barcelona and at the CIE Network Workshop (Copenhagen), CRES Conference on the
Foundations of Business Strategy (St. Louis), Druid Conference, Markets for Technology Workshop
(Madrid), REER Workshop (Atlanta) and SEI workshop (Zurich) for valuable comments on earlier
drafts. All remaining errors are ours. Thomas Rønde gratefully acknowledges final support from the
Danish Social Science Foundation (FSE Research Unit on Open Innovation Search and Centre for
Industrial Economics Research Network). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ashish Arora, Andrea Fosfuri, and Thomas Roende. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing Licensing in a Market for Technology
Ashish Arora, Andrea Fosfuri, and Thomas Roende
NBER Working Paper No. 18203
July 2012
JEL No. L2,L24,O32

                                               ABSTRACT

Over the last decade, companies have paid greater attention to the management of their intellectual
assets. We build a model that helps understand how licensing activity should be organized within large
corporations. More specifically, we compare decentralization—where the business unit using the technology
makes licensing decisions—to centralized licensing. The business unit has superior information about
licensing opportunities but may not have the appropriate incentives because its rewards depend upon
product market performance. If licensing is decentralized, the business unit forgoes valuable licensing
opportunities since the rewards for licensing are (optimally) weaker than those for product market
profits. This distortion is stronger when production-based incentives are more powerful, making centralization
more attractive. Growth of technology markets favors centralization and drives higher licensing rates.
Our model conforms to the existing evidence that reports heterogeneity across firms in both licensing
propensity and organization of licensing.


Ashish Arora                                          Thomas Roende
Fuqua School of Business                              Copenhagen Business School
Duke University                                       Department of Innovation and Organizational Econom
Box 90120                                             DK-2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                 thr.ino@cbs.dk
and NBER
ashish.arora@duke.edu

Andrea Fosfuri
University Carlos III de Madrid
Dpt. of Business Administration
C/Madrid, 126
28903 Getafe, Madrid
Espana
fosfuri@gmail.com
1.             Introduction
        There is increasing empirical evidence that markets for technology have become sizable in
the last two decades (Robbins, 2006; Athreye and Cantwell, 2007; Arora and Gambardella, 2010).
These growing markets imply that firms now consider licensing as an important option for fully
profiting from their own intellectual property. Indeed, many firms have embraced a more open
policy of actively licensing their internal technology to others and earn millions of dollars in
revenues worldwide through licensing activities (The Economist, 2005).1
        Although licensing is growing in importance, there is also widespread evidence that a large
number of potentially value-enhancing deals are not consummated (e.g. Razgaitis, 2004;
Gambardella, Giuri, and Luzzi, 2007). LES data reveal that even when a potential licensee has been
identified, only for a third of the cases are negotiations started, and fewer than half of those
negotiations are completed (Razgaitis, 2004).
        In addition to the usual problems of incomplete contracts, LES data indicate that agency
problems—internal conflicts among stakeholders—are an important reason for the failure of
valuable deals to go forward. Consistent with this, Gambardella et al. (2007) report that large firms,
which arguably suffer more from agency problems, are more likely to experience underlicensing.
        Case studies of companies such as IBM, Dow, Being, Motorola, Xerox, and Procter &
Gamble, which are acknowledged to be active licensors of internal technology, suggest that how
licensing is managed and organized within the firm can explain some of the heterogeneity in terms
of unexploited licensing opportunities (Kline, 2003; Phelps and Kline, 2009; Davis and Harrison,
2001; Sterling and Murray, 2007). Three stylized facts emerge from these case studies: 1) In firms
that license extensively, licensing is typically handled by a specialized business unit (often treated
as an independent business); 2) licensing is incentivized in various ways (licensing revenues are
typically shared with operating units); 3) there is often a marked (discrete) jump in licensing
revenues when firms remove licensing authority from the business units and manage it centrally.
        Inspired by these empirical regularities, this paper develops a parsimonious model to
analyze how firms should organize their licensing activities. Our analysis rationalizes
underlicensing as a byproduct of decentralized licensing decisions and investigates how licensing
propensity can be increased by centralizing licensing authority in a specialized unit. Even though
the papers on markets for technology and the so-called “open innovation” paradigm have been
flourishing, the relationship between inter-organizational innovation strategy and firms’ internal
organization has rarely been addressed by previous literature. Managing licensing within a large
1
 For instance, Eastman Kodak has reportedly targeted earning $250-$350 million per year from licensing its
digital imaging technology since 2008, and has received $550 million and $400 million from Samsung and
LG respectively over the past year (Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2010, online edition).

                                                                                                             2
corporation can indeed be complex as it involves several divisions or business units, each of which
is likely to use distinct technology. A key challenge is whether these units should be left to handle
licensing on their own, or whether licensing should be centralized at the corporate level. In this
paper we focus on two factors that condition this decision: differences in information, and
differences in incentives. Decentralization exploits local information not available to centralized
decision makers, but decentralized decisions may not be the best interests of the shareholders.
         Specifically, in our model the management of the firm decides whether to delegate the task
of searching for potential licensees and the authority to execute licensing deals to the business unit
in charge of manufacturing the product, or to centralize licensing activity in a specialized licensing
unit.
         Licensing generates an up-front fee but dissipates production profits in the longer run due to
competition from the licensee (rent dissipation). The business unit is best able to assess whether a
potential deal will enhance overall profits, but it has an interest in protecting the rents accruing from
production because its incentives are anchored to production-based performance. The management
of the company addresses this agency problem by installing an incentive scheme that shares with
the business unit the associated licensing revenues. The agency cost can be reduced by centralizing
licensing activities, whereby the management of the firm acquires information about licensing
revenues. The business unit still has superior information about the rent dissipation from licensing,
and thus the management of the firm can consult it on a deal-by-deal basis. Consulting the business
unit is costly because the unit must be induced to reveal its private information, but consultation can
save the firm from value-destroying deals.2
         The model produces several interesting results and testable empirical implications. First,
when the business unit is in charge of licensing, it forgoes valuable licensing opportunities because
the rewards for licensing are (optimally) weaker than those for product market profits. This
distortion is stronger when production-based incentives in the company are more powerful, which,
in turn, makes centralization of licensing more attractive. Second, licensing decisions are delegated
to the business unit when the potential downside from licensing is large relative to the revenue.
Third, growth of markets for technology favors centralization and is accompanied by higher
licensing rates.
         We then extend our basic model to account for three important aspects: 1) we endogenize
production-based incentives; 2) we consider the case of multiple business units; 3) we allow for
correlation between revenues and rent dissipation from licensing. We show that when production-
2
  Licensing might sometimes be used for strategic reasons, such as to facilitate collusion, block entry, or
establish a technology standard. Although we do not discuss them, licensing will tend to be centralized in
these cases.

                                                                                                              3
based incentives are endogenized, they are adjusted downward when most licensing deals are
delegated to the business unit. Accounting for negative spillovers from licensing across business
units results in the unexpected finding that spillovers may make decentralization more appealing,
not less. Finally, correlation between the revenues from licensing and the rent dissipation does not
necessarily lead to more centralization. Not surprisingly, if greater correlation implies that the
revenues from licensing constitute a more precise signal of the rent dissipation, licensing tends to be
more centralized. However, if greater correlation arises from greater covariance between licensing
revenues and rent dissipation, the information of the business unit might become more relevant and
decentralization will increase.


2.             Related Literature
        The study of inter-firm licensing has become an important research area, as evidenced by
the many articles that examine motivations behind technology licensing (Arora and Fosfuri, 2003;
Rockett, 1990; Gallini, 1984), the factors enhancing or limiting licensing activity (Fosfuri, 2006;
Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2005; Teece, 1986; Gans and Stern, 2003), and the optimal design of
licensing contracts (Kamien and Tauman, 2002; Gallini and Wright, 1990). However, little attention
has been devoted so far to the analysis of how a firm should organize for efficiently managing its
licensing business.
        There is a large literature in economics and corporate finance on the delegation of authority
in organizations, which we will briefly review here. Mookherjee (2006) provides a comprehensive
review. Team production theory (e.g., Radner and Marschak, 1972), which pioneered the formal
study of how authority should be delegated in organizations, ignored incentive problems, focusing
instead on the differences in information available to divisions and headquarters. Team production
theory holds that authority should be delegated to divisions if the information available to them
cannot be communicated to headquarters quickly and cheaply.
        However, it was readily recognized that superior information also provided power, and that
the incentives of divisions might diverge from those of the firm itself. Our work falls within the
literature that considers the question of delegation of authority in contexts where there are
information differences and divergence of incentives.
        Dewatripont and Tirole (1999) show that the bundling of tasks with conflicting
objectives—such as licensing and production—increases the cost of incentive provision and calls
for a separation of tasks. In this paper, we explore the implications of this general insight in a
context where bundling is efficient because the business unit can search more effectively and
because it has superior information about the payoff from a given deal.

                                                                                                       4
        Riordan and Sappington (1987) analyze a model where the principal may reduce the agent’s
informational advantage by doing one of the tasks in the firm herself. However, unlike production
and licensing, the tasks are independent, and organizational structure only matters if there is
correlation between the (hidden) costs of performing the tasks. This results in adifferent
organizational problem compared to our model where the management needs to consult the
business unit in order to manage licensing optimally.
        When we extend our basic model to two business units, it becomes closer to a recent paper
by Garicano, Gertner, and Dessein (2010), who analyze a model with two business units that can
create negative externalities for each other. The externalities increase the cost of incentive provision
and call for centralized decision-making in their model, whereas we find the opposite result. We
compare our results to those of Garicano et al. (2010) more carefully in Section 5.


3.             A Model of Licensing: Assumptions and Notations
The firm
        The firm consists of a risk-neutral management unit (henceforth, HQ) and a risk-neutral and
wealth- and-credit-constrained business unit (henceforth, BU). There are two main activities to be
performed: production, which the BU is in charge of, and licensing, which can be decentralized to
the BU or centralized in a specialized licensing unit in the HQ (see below). We model production as
reduced form since our primary interest is the internal organization of licensing. The firm has a
technology that is currently employed by the BU to produce and generates an expected gross profit
of , absent licensing. We abstract from the R&D process that has generated such technology but
discuss this issue in subsection 4.3.2.

Licensing
        The technology used by the BU can also be licensed to other firms. We assume that there is
a probability q of finding a potential licensee where q parameterizes the size of the market for
technology. Each deal differs along two dimensions: the value that it generates for the licensee and
the extent to which it destroys profits in the product market for the licensor. The value the potential
licensee obtains from the licensed technology is          where      is a random variable uniformly
distributed on 0,    . The realized value of    is denoted by w. This formulation is consistent with
the notion that the technology developed by the firm has many applications, and its value depends
on the potential licensee. Rent dissipation is parameterized by , a random variable whose realized
value is denoted by x. Rent dissipation arises primarily because licensing increases the competition
the licensor faces in the product market (Arora and Fosfuri, 2003), i.e., after licensing production


                                                                                                       5
profits are           . We assume that         is uniform on 0,         and that      and      are independently
distributed. We shall relax the latter assumption in Section 5. Note that c parameterizes the extent of
rent dissipation as greater c implies higher expected costs from licensing.
           We assume that            , which implies that for any w, there are deals that destroy value. This
assumption sidesteps some uninteresting special cases, but our results hold even if it is relaxed.
           We assume that searching for potential licensing deals is costly. The technology must be
marketed, and employees need to scan and monitor the external environment. We assume that the
BU can search for licensees at a lower cost than the HQ due to its better knowledge of the
technology and the market. For the sake of simplicity, the search cost of the BU is set equal to zero
whereas the search cost of the HQ is ,  > 0.
Information structure
           We assume that w can be observed both by the BU (always) and the HQ (only when the
licensing is centralized).3 However, although the distribution of            is public knowledge, only the BU
observes . As discussed earlier, the BU is directly involved with the manufacturing and
commercialization of the final product, and so is better equipped to evaluate the degree of
competition from the licensee. The key is that it is not possible to contract upon x because, for
instance, rent dissipation materializes over time and cannot be distinguished from other factors
influencing profits, such as changing market conditions. Further, we assume that the licensee
receives a take-it-or-leave offer. This takes bargaining out of the equation. It follows that all
inefficiencies in the licensing decisions are caused by agency problems inside the firm. In
subsection 4.3.2 we discuss how the introduction of bargaining would affect our findings.
Payoff structure
           We analyze linear contracts, which are simple, robust, and optimal inside our framework. A
fraction      of the production profits is paid as bonus to the BU, for instance, to alleviate an
(additional) agency problem at the production stage. In addition, the HQ assigns a fraction θ of the
licensing revenue to the BU when the latter has licensing authority. All payments from the HQ to
the BU must be non-negative, which rules out the option of “selling the firm” to the BU manager.
           A different interpretation is that  is the share of production profits that the BU managers
appropriate in the form of perks such as expensive meals or air travel in corporate jets (Jensen and
Meckling, 1976; Fama, 1980). Also, managers might like being the boss of a larger outfit because
of greater job safety and better career opportunities, or they might simply dislike having to lay




3
    It is plausible that by dealing with the licensee the HQ can infer its willingness to pay for the technology.

                                                                                                                    6
workers off. If   is interpreted as a non-monetary benefit, it is assumed that it comes at the same
cost to the firm that a monetary benefit would.
         In the baseline model we treat  as exogenous. The endogenous production bonus is
addressed in the extensions section.
         The HQ and the BU are risk neutral. The BU maximizes the sum of the payoff from
production,  , and licensing, w, net of the cost of licensing,  . Notice that the opportunity cost of
licensing to the BU is  because licensing reduces production profits. We assume that the BU
earns rents from its activities, and these exceed the outside option. In other words, the participation
constraint of the BU does not bind. The HQ maximizes the residual part of the profit from
production, (1 - ) , plus the net revenue from licensing, (1 - )w, minus the cost of licensing, (1 -
) . 5
Organization of licensing
         In our setting w and x are measured at the deal level, while all other variables, such as c and
z, are at the firm or technology level. Therefore, w and x determine whether a particular deal goes
through or not, whereas the other parameters jointly determine how licensing is organized.
         We solve the model under two different organizational solutions for the licensing activity.
First, we analyze the fully decentralized solution in which the BU both searches and decides on
licensing. This case provides intuition that carries over in the rest of the paper. In particular, it
shows the reason for the chronic underlicensing. Second, we consider the solution in which the HQ
takes over the licensing activity and centralizes the search for potential licensees. As the BU has
better information about the rent dissipation effect from licensing, the HQ submits some deals for
approval to the BU.
         Later in our discussion, we shall refer to the case of large firms with multiple BUs and
technologies. Provided that each licensing deal only affects one BU, our findings below can be
straightforwardly extended to such companies. The organization of licensing when the profit
dissipation is experienced by more than one BU is analyzed in Section 5.
The timing of the game
         At t = 0, R&D efforts result in a new technology and the production incentives  are
established. At t = 1, the HQ chooses the organizational form for the licensing activity and the

5
 If the participation constraint of the BU were to bind, the HQ would internalize the payoff of the BU fully.
The HQ would therefore maximize total profits (profits from production plus licensing) and the agency
problem would disappear. Assuming that the participation constraint binds in some but not all states of the
world would give rise to more case distinctions, but it would not change results qualitatively. The HQ may
also put greater weight on production revenues than on licensing revenues, e.g., to keep the current workforce
or to increase managerial entrenchment. This would exacerbate the distortions that we find in the organization
of licensing, but again it would not change our results qualitatively.

                                                                                                            7
licensing bonus θ to the BU. At t = 2, production and licensing take place. At t = 3, rent dissipation
from licensing unfolds. We focus primarily on stages t = 1 to t = 3 in the analysis below and
discuss stage t = 0 in subsections 4.3.2 (R&D efforts) and 5.1 (endogenous ). The game is solved
backward in order to find the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.


4.                  Solving the Model
4.1.                Decentralization: The BU searches and decides on licensing
            The licensing activity is fully decentralized and the HQ only chooses the share θ of the
licensing revenue that is assigned to the BU in case a deal is consummated. Foreseeing that the BU
will license only if w/  x, the HQ solves the following problem:

                    Max     1     γ               1     θ w            1   γ x    dx dw.                   (1)

            Using     ∼    0,    and    ∼    0,   , the HQ’s problem can be rewritten as:

                    Max     1     γ          2         1           .                                       (2)
                                                               ∗
            Maximizing profits with respect to        yields                .6 HQ profits are equal to Π

    1   γ π               . The probability of licensing conditional on a potential licensee being found is
        ∗

                                 . This leads to the following proposition:

Proposition 1. When the BU is in charge of licensing: (i) Licensing incentives are lower than
                                  ∗
production incentives, i.e.             ; (ii) The gap between production and licensing incentives
                                                                       ∗
increases with the level of production incentives, i.e.,                    0; (iii) The probability of licensing

conditional on a potential licensee being found decreases with the level of production incentives,

i.e.,                0.

4.1.1.              Discussion
            Note first that result (i) in Proposition 1 holds under more general conditions. For instance,
it does not depend on the specific distribution chosen for                 and   (see Appendix A1) and also holds
when monetary production incentives are endogenous (see subsection 5.1). The intuition for the
result is that HQ acts like a monopsonist, who restricts the quantity of licenses by setting too low a
licensing bonus. Choosing  =  would maximize total value; however, the HQ can obtain a larger


6
 It is easy to show that this is also the optimal licensing bonus if the bonus could be made contingent on w.
This implies that the linear bonus scheme derived above is fully optimal.

                                                                                                                    8
fraction of rents from licensing by reducing . Some marginal deals are lost in exchange for a
reduction in the payment to the BU across the consummated infra-marginal deals.7
           Part (i) of Proposition 1 is important because it shows the problems firms face in opening to
the market for technology. The widespread complaints of business units that licensing revenues do
not flow fully back to the business-unit are consistent with this result. Part (i) also suggests why
licensing revenues earned by units are treated as lower quality earnings. It is sometimes argued that
licensing revenues are treated as “poor quality” because they can disguise poor product market
performance. Instead, our analysis suggests that discounting licensing revenues is optimal because it
increases the amount of profit that remains in the corporate coffers.
           Part (ii) suggests that the distortion of licensing incentives is more pronounced if
production incentives are high-powered. The intuition is that stronger production incentives
necessitate stronger licensing incentives, thereby increasing the infra-marginal gain from distorting
the licensing bonus downward. Hoskisson, Hitt, and Hill (1993) report that large diversified firms
tend to use financial controls to manage their business-units rather than strategic metrics. Thus,
insofar as large, diversified industrial companies are more likely to use high-powered incentives, we
expect the complaints about insufficient rewards for licensing to show up more often for these
firms.
4.2.              Hybrid solution
           This solution can be thought of as a situation in which the HQ takes over the licensing
activity by creating a specialized licensing unit.. For instance, Glaxo has created a specialized
licensing unit, while Microsoft handles licensing at the company’s headquarters. Similarly, Du Pont
has created a licensing unit that coordinates with the relevant BU in executing deals (Sterling and
Murray, 2007). Once the HQ observed a potential deal, it can decide to go forward with licensing or
can choose to delegate the decision to the BU about that particular deal. The BU is offered a share,
, of the licensing revenues for the deals that are sent for its approval (notice that with  = 0 the BU
vetoes all deals). There is no revenue sharing for the BU if licensing deals are not submitted for
approval. The HQ exploits the additional information about licensing revenues from licensing by
making the BU participation in the decision contingent on w. Let          be the value of the revenues
from licensing such that any deal for which                the HQ does not seek the approval of the BU.
Instead all deals such that             must be approved by the BU. The HQ maximizes the following:

                  Max   ,       1                      1    γ       d d

                            γ
                  +                 1         1   γ        d d      σ.                        (3)

7
    We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this intuition.

                                                                                                          9
        Using       ∼       0,         and     ∼       0,   we obtain:

                max     ,         1                                                           σ.           (4)

        Notice that                 0 implies that θ∗             . In other words, the optimal level of licensing
                            θ

incentives, *, is exactly the same we had above in the fully decentralized case. Thus, again,
licensing incentives to the BU are set at a suboptimal level by the HQ. Replacing * in (4) and
                                                                                                                 ∗
maximizing profits with respect to                 , we find the following solution in the relevant range (          z):

          ∗
                1                       1              0.                                                  (5)

                            ∗
        Notice that             can be interpreted as the extent of decentralization of licensing authority
                                        ∗                                                                             ∗
within the firm. The larger                 is, the greater the number of deals that are handled by the BU. As
                                                                                                       ∗
approaches z, the hybrid model approaches the decentralized solution. Notice that                          0 and
  ∗                                                                      ∗   ∗                     ∗
       0. HQ profits are equal to Π                     1   γ π                                            σ. We can

state the following:

Proposition 2. Other things equal, a larger share of deals is delegated to the BU in the hybrid
model when: a) production incentives are weak ( is low); b) rent dissipation is large (c is large);
c) revenues from licensing are small (z is small).
        The intuition for this proposition is rather straightforward. Delegating authority to the BU is
costly because the HQ has to pay a share θ of the revenues from licensing. First, this share increases
with production incentives, which increases the cost of consulting the BU. Second, the cost of
centralizing licensing arises from the signing of value-destroying deals, i.e., those deals for which
the rent dissipation may (with some probability) exceed the revenue. The probability that rent
dissipation is larger than the revenue from licensing increases with c and falls with z. Hence, it
becomes relatively more important to use the BU’s private information about x for high values of c
and low values of z.
Corollary 1. The hybrid solution delivers greater rates of licensing than the decentralized solution.
                                   ∗
        Notice for                     there is the same amount of licensing in the hybrid solution and the
                                                   ∗
decentralized solution, but for                        the hybrid solution results in unambiguously more licensing.
This is consistent with the observation that firms that aggressively license their intellectual property
create a licensing unit that reports to the headquarters. Indeed, Marshall Phelps, who oversaw
IBM’s licensing division during the 1990s, when its licensing revenues increased from a very




                                                                                                                     10
modest level to over $1 billion a year, centralized what had hitherto been a de facto decentralized
licensing system.8


4.3.              The choice of the organizational mode for licensing
          In the previous section we investigated the factors that explain which licensing deals are
submitted for approval to the BU within the hybrid model. We now move the analysis from the deal
to the technology (firm) level; i.e., should the HQ leave the licensing activity entirely to the BU or
not?9
          Although we lack systematic data, anecdotal evidence indicates that firms differ in how
they organize licensing. Davis and Harrison (2001), in their study of IP management practices,
classify Dow and Du Pont as decentralized, whereas IBM and Litton are characterized as
centralized. Other firms, such as Lockheed, are said to have hybrid licensing structures.
          Notice that the hybrid model can replicate the full decentralization of licensing activity by
           ∗
setting        z. However, because the BU has a lower cost of searching for licensees, we cannot
conclude that the hybrid solution dominates the decentralized model.
          Let Π       Π     q∆ , ,        σ, where

∆ , ,             3       3 1                                                   . If ∆ , ,         , then the

hybrid solution is preferred to full decentralization.

Proposition 3: Other things equal, the parameter space under which the hybrid solution dominates
the decentralized one expands as:       decreases,     increase, z increases, and c decreases for         small

enough.
Proof: See Appendix A2.
          The hybrid solution is less likely to be observed if q is small and/or search costs are large,
production incentives are relatively weak, z is small, and c is large. While the comparative statics
with respect to is straightforward, the others can be intuitively understood (see Appendix A2 for
                                                                                                           ∗
the formal proof) by noting that the hybrid solution is relatively less profitable, the smaller is             (or




8
  This was heralded by a famous email from the newly installed CEO, Lou Gerstner, who declared that
“Intellectual property assets such as patents belong to IBM, not to the individual units … Negotiations
concerning intellectual property with companies outside IBM are the responsibility of the Intellectual
Property and Licensing staff” (Phelps and Kline, 2009, page 31).
9
  Firm level and technology level are interchangeable here.

                                                                                                               11
                                                                                ∗          ∗
the greater is the set of deals that are submitted for approval), and that           0,         0, and
     ∗
         0.10

4.3.1.           Discussion
          Proposition 3 identifies the conditions under which licensing activity is fully decentralized.
In the case of a multi-technologies company, this proposition refers to the technology level; that is,
which technologies are decentralized and which ones are assigned to the corporate level. This
proposition produces several testable implications.
          First, if q parameterizes the development of the market for technology (it is easier to find
partners in thicker and more efficient markets), our findings suggest that the hybrid model becomes
more widespread when markets for technology develop. This directly follows the assumption that
the BU can search at a lower cost. Indeed, if we extend the model slightly to include a fixed cost of
searching for the BU as well (but lower than the cost for the HQ), then the implication is that as q
increases, firms become more open to licensing, i.e., they invest resources in the search for potential
licensees, but licensing remains decentralized. As q increases further, the firm will switch from
decentralized to hybrid. As greater centralization implies higher probability of licensing, a related
implication is that changes in how licensing is organized within firms feed back into the market for
technology and contribute to its further development.
          Empirical testing will require measuring q, which is not straightforward. However, there are
some hints of how q varies across industries, countries and over time. Markets for technology are
more developed in the chemical industry, biotechnology, software and semiconductor industry
(Arora, Fosfuri and Gambardella, 2001), in the U.S. versus Europe, and have increased over time
(Arora and Gambardella, 2010). If so, our theory predicts that we should see a trend toward
centralization of licensing over time in these industries, especially in the U.S.
          Second, as noted earlier, if large industrial companies are more likely to use financial
measures to manage their business units (Hoskisson et al., 1993), we should expect a greater
centralization of licensing in these firms, accompanied by an increase in licensing. Measuring the
extent of production-based incentives is difficult. However, insofar as firms in the U.S. and Europe
increase their reliance upon such incentives over time, they should also centralize licensing, which
is consistent with the anecdotal evidence from firms such as IBM, Du Pont, and Procter & Gamble.

10
  Starting from very large values of  and small values of c, an increase in c can expand the parameter space
where the hybrid solution dominates. Decentralized licensing leads to a severe agency problem for such
parameter values, because the BU experiences most of the rent dissipation. Hence, an increase in c increases
the HQ’s cost of inducing the BU to license in the decentralized solution more than it increases the cost of
taking uninformed decisions (regarding x) in the hybrid solution. However, for c large enough the cost of
uninformed decisions dominates, leading to non-monotonicity in c for large values of . See Appendix A2.

                                                                                                            12
Putting together these arguments, our model suggests that large firms heavily underlicense when
markets for technology are underdeveloped. However, as markets for technology become more
efficient, they end up centralizing their licensing activities, which in turn further boosts technology
transactions.
         Third, we should observe decentralization of licensing when licensing deals are more likely
to generate rent dissipation. This is, for instance, the case when the potential licensee competes in
the same product market of the licensor. One can argue that general-purpose technologies are
characterized by less rent dissipation. “A more general technology allows a larger degree of
transferability of skills across the different sectors of the economy” (Aghion, Howitt, and Violante,
2002). Thus, Proposition 3 implies that the more specific is the technology, the more likely it is that
a firm will confer the licensing authority to the BU. Consistent with this, Palomeras (2007) finds
that firms are more likely to license patents with greater generality through an online market for
technology, yet2.com. Using an online market to sell technology is akin to removing the authority
over licensing decisions from the BU, because such patents are typically offered to any bidder
willing to pay the required licensee fees.
Fourth, we should observe that decentralization is associated with lower licensing rates. This result
is supported by a recent empirical paper by Arora, Belenzon, and Rios (2011) who study the
organization of R&D in American corporations. They find that narrow and incremental patents are
more likely to be given to business units to manage. Interestingly, they also report that firms that
decentralize the management of their patent portfolio experience faster sales growth. Since
licensing cannibalizes sales in the product market, this finding is consistent with lower licensing
propensity under decentralization. This is supported by direct survey evidence as well. A recent
survey of US patent holders by Jung and Walsh (2010) finds that patents where the inventor is from
the manufacturing unit (rather than central R&D) are less likely to be licensed. Because Arora et al.
(2011) find that patents from R&D units are more likely to be controlled by HQ rather than the BU,
these findings indicate that patents controlled by BU are less likely to be licensed.


4.3.2.          Additional implications and ramifications of the model
         Our model can also be reinterpreted as one in which the management of the firm has to
decide how to allocate the responsibility for bringing in external technology between two units: an
R&D unit that is normally in charge of developing technology internally, and a central unit
specialized in licensing in external technology. The R&D units may be best placed to identify and
evaluate external technology, but may exhibit the Not-Invented-Here syndrome (Allen and Katz,
1982). The Not-Invented-Here syndrome, where firms are said to be guilty of ignoring promising

                                                                                                        13
external technology in favor of internal development, is believed to be pervasive. Thus, if R&D
units were in charge of locating and acquiring external technologies, external technology
acquisitions may be rare. For instance, a typical licensing arrangement between a pharmaceutical
company and a biotech firm will involve the pharmaceutical firm paying for the biotech firm’s
development costs. In turn, this will be charged against the R&D manager’s budget, requiring the
R&D manager to cut one or more internal projects. The R&D division, not surprisingly, may view
the deal less favorably than the sales and marketing division. Mindful of this, companies shift the
in-licensing authority away from the R&D unit to a downstream division. For instance, Eli Lilly
does not restrict itself to drugs developed in-house but instead allows its products divisions to
source them externally. In other words, the R&D units in Eli Lilly do not have the authority to veto
in-licensing by the product division.12 Similarly, Glaxo has formed a central group for in-
licensing.13 Thus, with some small adjustments our model can also inform the important question of
how to balance incentives between the internal development of technology and the monitoring and
acquisition of extra-mural R&D, an issue that has recently become hot within the open innovation
literature.
           We have ignored the technology generation stage of the model. However, including an
R&D stage would not substantially change our main findings. For instance, assume that the
expected value of a technology depends positively on the effort exerted by the BU. The
consideration of a technology generation stage might affect the allocation of licensing authority.
Indeed, as Aghion and Tirole (1997) point out, allocating the formal decision right to an agent
increases her incentive to invest in the relationship. Decentralization of authority implies greater
rewards for the BU and thus ex ante more incentives to expend effort in the development of the
technology. A symmetric argument would apply if the relevant effort is that of the HQ. Extending
this reasoning a step further, one should observe that business units tend to develop more focused,
narrower technologies, while general-purpose technologies are developed centrally. Indeed, an
implication of Proposition 3 is that more incremental, narrow technologies are typically
decentralized, and thus the BU will have more incentives to exert effort in their development.
           Finally, in the analysis above, we have assumed that both the BU and the HQ are able to
fully extract the licensee’s willingness to pay w. Consider a variant of the model where bargaining
leads to a split of the gains from trade among the parties involved (formal calculations are available
from the authors upon request). In particular, the licensor (either the BU or the HQ) obtains a share
 of the bargaining surplus and the licensee obtains a share 1 - . Suppose also that while the BU

12
     Interview with Peter Johnson, VP, Eli Lilly, (17 May, 2011).
13
     See http://www.gsk.com/about/downloads/busdev-brochure.pdf.

                                                                                                       14
and the licensee observe x due to their direct knowledge of the industry, the HQ does not. Notice
that this slightly more general setup nests the base model for  = 1.
         Consider first the decentralized solution where the BU searches for and negotiates with a
potential licensee. Denote the licensing fee L. The minimum fee that the BU is willing to accept is
LMin =  x/ and the maximum fee that the licensee is willing to pay is LMax = w. Hence, as above,

there is licensing if and only if w  x/. However, the licensing fee is now L∗                     , which

is increasing in       and decreasing in . For   < 1, the HQ has thus an additional incentive to distort 
(further) downward in order to induce the BU to drive a tougher bargain with potential licensees.
         Consider instead the hybrid solution. If the HQ negotiates with the licensee, there will be
licensing if and only if w  E(x) = c/2, and the resulting licensing fee is     ∗
                                                                                             1       1
     .14 By centralizing the licensing decision, the HQ saves licensing bonus but 1) it makes less

informed decisions and 2) it loses the ability to leverage the BU’s bargaining power through a
reduction in . The weaker the bargaining position of the licensor (i.e., the lower is ), the greater
the benefit from delegating the negotiations to the BU. The extent of delegation is therefore

decreasing in      (       0), implying that we should observe more decentralization and lower

licensing bonuses in situations where the licensor is in a weak bargaining position.


5.              Extensions
         There are three aspects of our model that we have simplified to make it tractable and obtain
useful insights: 1) we have assumed that production incentives are exogenous; 2) we have assumed
that the firm has only one BU; 3) we have treated         and   as independently distributed. We shall
relax these assumptions below. These three extensions are key for pursuing the main goal of this
paper; that is, to understand how licensing is managed in large companies. The first extension
captures changes that might occur in a company across time, when the whole incentive system ends
up adapting to functioning markets for technology. The second extension is important because large
companies are very likely to have several divisions and business units. The third extension focuses
on the potential implications that correlation between revenues from licensing and rent dissipation
might have for the allocation of licensing authority within the firm. We focus on the hybrid case
only, and to simplify the algebra, but without any loss of generality, we set q=1 and =0.


14
  The licensee observes x, but unlike, for example, the bargaining game of Farrell and Gibbons (1989), this
piece of information can never be transmitted to the HQ as “cheap talk” because the two parties have
opposing interests: The licensee would always claim x to be whatever results in the lowest possible licensing
fee. For this reason, the licensee’s information about x cannot influence the bargaining outcome.

                                                                                                           15
5.1.                   Endogenous monetary incentives to the BU
                 Thus far we have assumed that production incentives are exogenous, dictated by norms and
routines inside the firm. It is plausible that changing incentives in relational contracts is a slow
process, with considerable inertia. Thus, in the short run, even if there are licensing opportunities
out there in the market, production incentives do not immediately reflect this. However, in the
longer run incentives may adapt to the changed circumstances. Below we analyze the main
implications of allowing production incentives to be a choice variable.
                 Assume that production profits depend upon the effort exerted by the BU. We assume that
this effort cannot be monitored by the HQ, and thus, the BU is provided a share of profits, . A
simple way of capturing this is to represent the gross profits from production as                                       , so that the
profits available to the HQ (net of the share given to the BU) are 1                                             . We assume that the
gross profit from production increases as the BU gets a higher share of it, but the firm’s net profit is
maximized for some intermediate value of .15
5.2.1.                 Endogenous monetary incentives to the BU: No market for technology
                 As a benchmark, we start with the case in which licensing is not an option. The HQ
maximizes profits from production, that is: max                              1        . Let no_mft be the share of profits
from production assigned to the BU that maximizes the profits from production when the firm is
does not consider licensing or there are no licensing opportunities. The corresponding first-order
condition is
                             1                      0.                                                                       (6)
5.2.2.                 Endogenous monetary incentives to the BU: Hybrid model
                 The HQ solves the following program:

                                                                                          γ
max        , ,          1                            1       γ       d d                        1                   1    γ      d d .


Proposition 4: The solution to the HQ’s problem when production incentives are endogenous is
                         ∗                               ∗
                   ∗                  ∗                                 ∗         ∗                    ∗
given by                     ∗   ,          1            ∗       1          for               z, and           is the solution to

                                                                 ,                                     ,
       1                                                                                                           0.         (7)


15
     Specifically,                   0, 1          is concave in γ, and 1                     is maximized for some γ ∈ (0,1).
                                            
We will also assume that                                     0 and sufficiently large to ensure that  > 0 is chosen by the HQ.
A simple case where these assumptions are satisfied is where the gross profit is linear in the BU’s effort, and
the cost (to the BU) is quadratic in effort.

                                                                                                                                         16
Proof: See Appendix A3.
Proposition 4 has several interesting implications, which are summarized in the following corollary.
Corollary 2: With a functioning market for technology, the HQ adjusts production incentives
according to the extent of decentralization of licensing authority. If licensing authority is highly
decentralized for           _
                                     (   ∗
                                             is close to z), then production incentives are set below the

production incentives absent a market for technology, i.e.,                     _
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                              . If licensing authority is

highly centralized for              _
                                             (   ∗
                                                     is close to 0), then production incentives are set above the

production incentives absent a market for technology, i.e.,                     _
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                              . Furthermore, licensing

incentives are always less powerful than production incentives, i.e., ∗                         ∗
                                                                                                     .
Proof: See Appendix A3.

        The second part of Corollary 2 confirms our previous finding that licensing incentives are
less powerful than production incentives even when both are chosen by the HQ. The first part of the
corollary adds some interesting insights. It shows that when licensing authority is mostly
decentralized at the business unit level, production incentives are distorted downward in the
presence of an active market for technology. The intuition for this result is that production
incentives make it more expensive for the HQ to incentivize the BU to license. A small reduction in
 away from     _
                      has no first-order effect on production profits, but increases the licensing

payoff by allowing the HQ to decrease . Thus, production incentives are optimally muted when the
BU has authority over most licensing deals.
        Instead, when licensing authority is mostly centralized at the corporate level, production
incentives are distorted upward in the presence of an active market for technology. The intuition
                                                                 ∗
behind this result is that for deals such that                       , the share of the rent dissipation borne by the
BU is increasing in . By increasing production incentives there is a marginal decrease in (net)
                                                                     ∗
production profits and in licensing profits for                          , but these are compensated by a reduction in
                                                                 ∗
the rent dissipation experienced by HQ for
                  ∗
        Since         0, the testable prediction is that we should observe a negative relationship

between the extent of decentralization of licensing authority and the power of production incentives.


5.2.            Two BUs
        Large companies are likely to have several divisions or business units. Our model above
would apply mutatis mutandis to a multidivisional company whose business units are independent
from each other. However, when licensing by a BU affects the profits of other divisions, the

                                                                                                                            17
organization of licensing raises new issues. The information relevant for licensing is now
distributed across the organization, and more BUs have to be involved in the decision-making
process. The BUs are unlikely to agree on every licensing deal, and the HQ has to decide how to
translate the information and opinions received from the BUs into decisions.16
        Consider a model with two BUs, BUA and BUB. It is helpful to imagine one single BU
being split into two, identical in all ways except in how they experience rent dissipation. The two
BUs produce total gross profits of     if there is no licensing. If there is licensing, the value of a deal
is w. The total rent dissipation is x, but it does not affect the two units equally. With 50%
probability, BUA experiences a loss of L x and BUB experiences a loss of H x where L <½ and L
+ H = 1. Symmetrically, with 50% probability BUB experiences a loss of L x and BUA experiences
H x. Let BUi get a share i of the licensing revenue, i  {A, B}. Since the BUs are symmetric,
without loss of generality, we focus here on symmetric bonuses, A = B  .

        The HQ approves directly all deals for which              , while it consults the BUs for           .
We consider a simple procedure whereby the BUs are asked simultaneously whether they approve
licensing or not. In Appendices A4 and A5 we show that it is a weakly dominant strategy for BUi,
which would experience profit dissipation j x from licensing, to approve a deal if and only if
                                                                 
            , i  {A, B} and j  {H, L}. Moreover, as long as            , so that a positive fraction of
                                                                

deals are rejected by the BUs in equilibrium, the optimal rule is one where both BUs must veto a
deal for the deal to be rejected (unanimity rejection). The intuition is that in view of the insufficient
licensing under decentralization, it is optimal to leave the licensing decision to the BU most willing
to license.


Proposition 5: Under the unanimity rejection rule, profits with two BUs are strictly greater than
                                                                               ∗                       ∗
profits with only one BU. Further, the HQ sets a lower licensing bonus             and sets a higher
when there are two BUs instead of one. Also, the probability of licensing remains unchanged.
Proof: See Appendix A6.
        Decentralization results in underlicensing. With two BUs the HQ can effectively
decentralize the licensing decision to the more willing BU, thereby lowering the (incentive) cost of
licensing. Indeed, if the rent dissipation were symmetric across the BUs, the profits with one BU
and two BUs would coincide. This proposition is a simple application of the Theory of Second

16
  For instance, Eastman Chemicals had a proprietary polyester technology that was used by its polyester
division to serve the final market. However, when the company licensed the polyester technology to Huls, the
photography business objected because Huls was owned by AGFA, which competed in photographic films
(personal interview with Cecil Quillen, ex-General Counsel, Eastman Kodak, 4/1/2010).

                                                                                                            18
Best—the distortion of licensing incentives under decentralization is partially offset by the
distortion due to negative spillovers. The HQ exploits the fact that the BU experiencing low rent
dissipation does not consider the other BU when approving a licensing deal. Hence, the negative
spillover on the other unit reduces the incentive cost of inducing licensing. This contrasts, for
example, with Garicano et al. (2010), where intra-organizational externalities increase incentive
costs, because the surplus-maximizing HQ optimally induces the BUs to internalize the
externalities.
          The analysis has the interesting implication that the HQ relies more on the private
information distributed across the organization when there are multiple BUs, which can be
interpreted as increased decentralization. However, this does not make a centralized licensing unit
less valuable to the HQ. Indeed, unlike the one BU case, the HQ may prefer to centralize search
           ∗
even if             , because a BU searching for licensees would have an incentive to suppress
deals that were unfavorable to it but eventually would be approved by the other BU.17

5.3. Correlation between w and x
          So far we have assumed that w and x are independently distributed (abusing the notation,
we drop the tildes in this subsection). However, it is plausible that the revenue from licensing and
the rent dissipation are correlated. One might suspect that correlation between w and x favors
centralization of licensing authority as the HQ is able to observe w and thus learn about x. This
intuition is only partially correct. The effect of correlation on the allocation of licensing authority
depends on the underlying reason for correlation between licensing revenue and rent dissipation.
          Theoretically, correlation between w and x could go either way. The two may be positively
correlated because deals that bring more value to the licensee, because the licensee is a more
efficient firm, also increase the competitive pressure that the licensor faces. That is, differences in
productivity across potential licensees might be a source of positive covariance between w and x.
On the other hand, differences in the product (or geographical) location of the potential licensee
might generate a negative covariance between w and x. A greater distance in the product (or
geographical) space between the licensee and the licensor would reduce product market
competition, and thus would create greater returns to both the licensee and the licensor. To model

this correlation in a tractable way, we assume that                                , where is uniformly



17
  "One business unit may feel it's fine to license a technology, but another may disagree and believe its
success depends on keeping that technology exclusive, … That's why … we established a separate
intellectual-property holding company. " (Gene Partlow, vice president of Boeing's intellectual property
business, quoted in Kline, 2003)

                                                                                                            19
distributed between –c and c, with density 1/(2c).18 This formulation nests the base model analyzed
thus far in which α           0 and b=1/2. Notice that α and b do not affect the unconditional mean of x. In

this formulation, α is the covariance between w and x and                |                 , so that a decrease in b

increases the precision of the signal regarding x that the HQ receives from observing w.
           A useful observation before proceeding is that higher correlation might imply either a
higher α or a lower b.19 Intuitively, when greater correlation stems from a higher α we expect that
the information of the BU becomes relatively more important as higher revenue deals are associated
with higher expected rent dissipation. Instead, when greater correlation implies greater precision we
expect that the information of the BU becomes less relevant. We explore this intuition more
formally below. Analytical proofs for the general case are not feasible, but we analyze the limit case
of  → 0 and b → where the model approaches the baseline model.

Proposition 6: For the limit case of  → 0 and b → and              ∗
                                                                             :
                                                                                 ∗
     i)        The extent of decentralization increases with b i. e. ,               0 .

     ii)       For             √2    1 an increase in  increases the extent of decentralization
                          ∗
                i. e. ,         0 . For         √2    1 an increase in  increases the extent of
                          α

               decentralization if and only if            , where       is decreasing in .

Proof: See Appendix A7.
           Starting from our baseline case of no correlation, Proposition 6 shows that increasing levels
of correlation between w and x do not necessarily result in more centralization of licensing
authority. Indeed, when monetary incentives are sufficiently modest, a larger                  (increased
correlation) leads to more, not less, decentralization. A higher         means that licensing deals imply
higher average rent dissipation, so that the information from the BU becomes more relevant. When
the cost of extracting this information is small (i.e.,  is small), a larger fraction of deals are
decentralized. Instead, as expected, a reduction in b, i.e., an increase in the precision, makes
centralization more appealing. Although profits for those deals whose authority is centralized do not
change (as the mean of x is independent of b), profits for those deals that are sent to the BU tend to
shrink. Thus, greater precision makes the information of the BU less relevant and licensing is more

18
   Notice that x can take negative values. This can be interpreted as cases in which licensing increases the
value of the firm’s own profits from production, for instance, by facilitating the development of
complementary products or the establishment of the firm’s technology as an industry standard.
19
   The (Pearsson) correlation between w and x is ,                        0, which is increasing in α ∈ 0,1
and decreasing in b ∈         ,1 .

                                                                                                                  20
centralized. While Proposition 6 is a local result, simulations (available upon request) confirm that
     ∗
         0 for any admissible values of α and .

          Allowing for correlation between w and x has an ambiguous effect on the probability of
licensing. The probability of licensing is driven by two forces: the extent of decentralization (more
decentralization implies relatively less licensing) and the overall size of the market for technology
(larger technology market implies more licensing). As b falls below the baseline level of b = ½, the
increase in precision increases centralization. This pushes towards more licensing. However, a
decrease in b also decreases the volume of value enhancing deals—the market for technology
shrinks  and the latter effect dominates, under the specification we have chosen. Similarly, an
increase in covariance will reduce the market for technology, which tends to reduce the licensing
                                                                             ∗
probability. Still, this can be offset by the increase in centralization (       0 , which occurs for
                                                                             α

high values of z/c and ; see Proposition 6. Appendix A8 demonstrates this conjecture more
rigorously.


6.              Conclusion
          Markets for technology have created new strategic options for firms, especially innovating
firms. As firms try to reap the benefits of markets for technology, we need a better understanding of
how they should organize internally for licensing. This is particularly true for large firms, which
typically contain many individual business units.
          One key choice in terms of organizing for the market for technology is where the decision-
making power should be vested. A business unit is typically closer to the market, can identify
potential licensees more easily, and can assess the likely rent dissipation from licensing more
accurately. However, managers of business units often have incentives to protect product market
profits, and will typically have little reason to license technology to potential competitors, even if
there are gains from trade. Thus, firms that wish to participate in the market for technology must
either provide these managers with suitable incentives or hand the licensing decision to a
specialized unit that has no vested interest in production profits. We proposed a parsimonious
model that addresses this important organizational choice.
          The model generates several findings consistent with existing empirical evidence on
licensing. For instance, it rationalizes the commonly held belief and stylized fact that firms
frequently fail to consummate licensing deals even when both parties could benefit. Our model
shows that when the decisions are given to the business units, which have all the relevant
information, it is not optimal to provide them with the appropriate incentives to license. This results


                                                                                                         21
in incentives to license always being weaker than incentives for production, so that the business unit
will turn down potentially valuable deals. Centralizing licensing decisions creates a different type of
inefficiency because, unable to assess the rent dissipation potential of a deal, the central unit may
commit both types of errors: enter into unprofitable deals as well as refuse potentially valuable
deals. Further, centralized licensing units are likely to incur greater costs in searching for potential
licensees. The firm can do better by centralizing the search for licensing deals and then selectively
delegate the authority over licensing to the business units.
        The model predicts that as markets for technology become more efficient firms will
increasingly establish specialized licensing units, which in turn will boost their propensity to license
out intellectual property. Second, firms with stronger production-based incentives are more likely to
underlicense and are more likely to centralize licensing authority when technology markets expand.
Finally, the model shows that general-purpose technologies that are broadly applicable display a
higher licensing probability and are more likely to be managed centrally.
        The model also predicts that the higher the degree of decentralization of licensing authority,
the weaker production incentives should be if the firm can adjust them. Moreover, our analysis
shows that the standard argument that intra-firm externalities calls for centralization does not
necessarily apply in our context. Under decentralization the business unit is reluctant to use its
private information regarding licensing opportunities in order to preserve production rents. If there
are two units, the units are more willing to license the technology, because a share of the rent
dissipation is borne by the other unit. This lack of internalization of the externality actually may
benefit the firm, because it makes it less costly to induce the unit(s) to act upon their private
information. Finally, we show that correlation between the revenues from licensing and the rent
dissipation does not necessarily lead to more centralization. If greater correlation implies that the
revenues from licensing constitute a more precise signal of the rent dissipation, then, as expected,
the information of the business unit becomes less relevant. Instead, when greater correlation arises
from greater covariance between licensing revenues and rent dissipation, the information of the
business unit might become more relevant and decentralization increases.




                                                                                                        22
                                          REFERENCES
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., and Violante, G. 2002. General purpose technology and wage inequality.
    Journal of Economic Growth, 7: 315–345.
Aghion, P., and Tirole, J. 1997. Formal and local authority in organizations. Journal of Political
    Economy, 105(1): 1–29.
Allen, T. J., and Katz, R. 1982. Investigating the Not Invented Here (NIH) syndrome: a look at the
    performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R&D Project Groups. R&D
    Management, 12: 7–19.
Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Rios, L. A. 2011. The organization of R&D in American corporations:
    the determinants and consequences of decentralization. NBER Working Paper No. w17013.
Arora, A., and Ceccagnoli, M. 2006. Patent protection, complementary assets, and firms’ incentives
    for technology licensing. Management Science, 52(2): 293–308.
Arora, A., and Fosfuri, A. 2003. Licensing the market for technology. Journal of Economic
    Behavior and Organization, 52(2): 277–295.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., and Gambardella, A. 2001. Markets for Technology: Economics of
    Innovation and Corporate Strategy. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Arora, A., and Gambardella, A. 2010. Ideas for rent: an overview of markets for technology.
    Industrial Corporate Change, 19(3): 775–803.
Athreye, S., and Cantwell, J. 2007. Creating competition? Globalisation and the emergence of new
    technology producers. Research Policy, 36(2): 209–226.
Davis, J. L., and Harrison, S. S. 2001. Edison in the Boardroom: How Leading Companies Realize
    Value from Their Intellectual Assets. John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ.
Dewatripont, M., and Tirole, J. 1999. Advocates. Journal of Political Economy, 107(1): 1–39.
The Economist. 2005. A market for ideas. 20 October: 48–51.
Fama, E. 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. Journal of Political Economy, 88(2):
    288–307.
Farrell, J., and Gibbons, R. 1989. Cheap talk can matter in bargaining. Journal of Economic Theory,
    48(1): 221–237.
Fosfuri, A. 2006. The licensing dilemma: understanding the determinants of the rate of technology
    licensing. Strategic Management Journal, 27(12): 1141–58.
Gallini, N. T. 1984. Deterrence through market sharing: a strategic incentive for licensing.
    American Economic Review, 74(5): 931–941.
Gallini, N. T., and Wright, B. D. 1990. Technology transfer under asymmetric information. RAND
    Journal of Economics, 21(1): 147–160.

                                                                                                     23
Gambardella, A., Giuri, P., and Luzzi, A. 2007. The market for patents in Europe. Research Policy,
    36(8): 1163–1183.
Gans, J. S., and Stern, S. 2003. The product market and the market for “ideas”: commercialization
    strategies for technology entrepreneurs. Research Policy, 32(2): 333–350.
Garricano, L., Gertner, R., and Dessein, W. 2010. Organizing for synergies. Forthcoming. American
    Economic Journal – Micro.
Jensen M., and W. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and
    ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 360–395.
Jung, T., and Walsh, J. 2010. Organizational paths of commercializing patented inventions. Paper
    presented at the DRUID Summer Conference, London.
Hoskisson, R., Hitt, M., and Hill, C. 1993. Managerial incentive and investment in R&D in large
    multiproduct firms. Organization Science, 4(2): 325–241.
Kamien, M. I., and Tauman, Y. 2002. Patent licensing: the inside story. The Manchester School,
    70(1): 7–15.
Kline, D. 2003. Sharing the corporate crown jewels. Sloan Management Review, 44(5): 89.
Mookherjee, D. 2006. Decentralization, hierarchies, and incentives: a mechanism design
    perspective. Journal of Economic Literature, 44: 367–390.
Palomeras, N. 2007. An analysis of pure-revenue technology licensing. Journal of Economics and
    Management Strategy, 16(4): 971–994.
Phelps, M., and Kline, D. 2009. Burning The Ships: Intellectual Property And The Transformation
    Of Microsoft. John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ.
Radner, R., and Marschak, J. 1972. Economic Theory of Teams. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Razgaitis, R. 2004. U.S./Canadian licensing in 2003: survey results. Les Nouvelles, December. 139–
    151.
Riordan, M.H., and Sappington, D.M. 1987. Information, incentives, and organizational mode. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2): 243–264.
Robbins, C. 2006. Measuring payments for the supply and use of intellectual property. Bureau of
    Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce: Washington.
Rockett, K. 1990. Choosing the competition and patent licensing. RAND Journal of Economics,
    21(1): 161–171.
Sterling, J., and Murray, C. D. 2007. Reaping value from intellectual property: DuPont’s strategic
    approach achieves global growth. Strategy & Leadership. 35(1): 36–42.
Teece, D. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing, and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6): 285–305.


                                                                                                     24
                                                                        APPENDIX


A1: Proof of Proposition 1.i under general distribution forms for                                                 and
Foreseeing that the BU will license only if w/γ  x, the HQ solves the following:

                                 ∞       γ
Max          1       γ                        1       θ w          1        γ x f x g w dxdw.                                              (A1)
Assuming the second order condition for a maximum is satisfied, the first-order condition is

                 ∞       γ                                              ∞
                               w f x g w dxdw                               w 1           θ        1    γ           f           g w dw         0.
  θ                                                                                                         γ   γ           γ

Since the first term is negative, the second term must be positive. Therefore, 1                                                   θ       1        γ
                                                                                                                                                        γ
                                     ∗
0, which implies that θ                       , i.e., licensing incentives are less powerful than production incentives.


A2: Proof of Proposition 3
                                              ∆ , ,                 ∆ , ,                 ∆ , ,
It is sufficient to prove that                                0,                     0,                0. First, using the envelop theorem

                               ∆ , ,                  ∗       ∗     ∗                                                                  ∆ , ,
one can show that                                                                                  0. Second, notice that

  3                                                                    . It is easy to see that                         2 and by using the fact

         ∗                                                                                                        ∆ , ,
that             z one can show that                                                               1. Hence,                      0. Finally,

 ∆ , ,
                         3 1                                                                           . Using the same arguments as

above, the last two terms are strictly less than 1 and 2, respectively. Thus for                                                small enough, the
                                         ∆ , ,                                            ∆    ,
first term dominates and                                  0. Let             , then                         3 1

                                                                                                                ∆       ,
2k 4         2 1                     1            1       5        . Figure A.1 shows the curve                                 0 in the space (k, ).

                             ∆   ,                                           ∆   ,
Above the curve,                             0; below the curve,                              0. Interesting enough, for sufficiently large

values of , at small values of c relative to z, an increment of c makes the hybrid solution more
likely (i.e. the parameter space under which it occurs in equilibrium expands); however, for c
sufficiently large, any increment in c makes the decentralized solution more likely. Notice,
however, that for less extreme values of                            (for instance, monetary incentive less than 75% of
production profits), greater c always implies more decentralization.




                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                 Figure A.1

      Difference between hybrid and decentralized payoff to HQ, , as function of  and k




Note: Π            Π          q∆ , ,        σ, thus the hybrid solution is preferred to full decentralization if ∆ , ,
            ∂∆ ,
 . Thus,                    0 implies that as c becomes larger relative to z, the set of -values for which the hybrid
              ∂
solution is preferred shrinks.



A3: Proof of Proposition 4 and Corollary 2
Using        ∼         0,      and     ∼    0,        , the objective function becomes:

max   , ,               1                                                           where      ∈ 0,      .
                   Π                              ∗                                 ∗
Notice that                  0 implies that                 . After substituting        into the profit function we obtain
                   θ

        1                                                       . Maximizing with respect to        and equating to zero we
                                                            γ

      ∗
get           min 1                           1         ,        0. Finally, maximizing with respect to         and equating

                                                                                                    ∗
to zero we obtain                1                                                 0 where              , which completes the



                                                                                                                             26
proof of Proposition 4. Finally, by evaluating (7) setting w ∗                               _
                                                                                                        close to z and 0, it is easy to

see that the optimal         is lower and higher than                  _
                                                                                    , respectively.


A4: Lemma 1: Under both the unanimity rejection rule (both BUs have to reject a deal for a deal
to be rejected) and the unanimity acceptance rule (each BU has veto power), it is a Bayesian Nash
equilibrium in weakly dominant strategies for BUi to approve a licensing deal if and only

      where j  {L, H} and i = A, B.
  

Proof. Consider the decision of BUi under the unanimity rejection rule. If BUh approves a given
deal, the decision of BUi does not matter for the outcome, h,i  {A, B} and h  i. It is thus (weakly)
                                                                      
optimal to approve the deal if and only if                                  where           is the profit dissipation experienced
                                                                       

by BUi. Suppose instead that BUj does not approve the deal. Then, it is (strictly) optimal for BUi to
                                                        
approve the deal if and only if                             . The proof for the unanimity acceptance rule is analogous.
                                                        



A5: Lemma 2: The unanimity rejection rule strictly dominates the unanimity acceptance rule.
Proof. The expected profits of the firm with two BUs are given by

                                                                                               
                        1                               1              d d                          1                 1                        .

Here,           under the unanimity rejection rule, and                                 under the unanimity acceptance rule.

Maximizing profits with respect to                      and       yields:
                              
            ∗                                   ∗
                                         and                              1               4      2       1             4        ,
                                  

                    ∗
Substituting               in , for a given                , the expected profit of the firm can be written as                      ,

  1                               1                 d d                                 , which is decreasing in  . Therefore, we
                                                                                    

                    ∗                           ∗                               ∗                             ∗
have that                  ,                              ,                      ,  . Since                    ,       is the firm’s
                                                                            ∗
profit under the unanimity acceptance rule and                                       ,     is the profit under the unanimity
rejection rule, the proof follows.


A6: Proof of Proposition 5
For a given         , expected profits with two BUs (                           ,      ≡     1                            1

          d d                             ) are greater than profits with only one BU (                               ≡    1
                                      


                                                                                                                                          27
                          1                        d d                       ), because                      . If        can be adjusted further, then profits

with two BUs can only increase. Therefore, we have that
              ∗                       ∗                        ∗                                      ∗              ∗
                                          ,                            ,          where                and                    are the optimal thresholds with
one and two BUs, respectively, and the proof follows.
The probability of licensing with two BUs under the unanimity rejection rule is:
                                                       ∗   
                                                                       ∗ 
                                                                         
                                                                                                                ∗                       ∗
                                                                                                 where                      and                  are defined in
     ∗   


Appendix A5. This reduces to                                             , which is the same probability of licensing as with one BU.

A7: Proof of Proposition 6
The HQ solves the following program:

                                                                                                                     1
          Max             1                                    1
              ,                                                                          2        2                 2


                                                               ⁄             ⁄       ⁄
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                             1                  1
                                                                                                                                            2      2              2


Maximizing profits with respect to                                       and         yields:
 ∗                                                                               ∗                                                                            ∗
                                                                       and                                                                             for                  where

 ≡                1                                4   1                     8       7                4         16       17            16         14    32             15    16     .
                                                                                                                              ∗
Part (i) of the proposition follows directly from differentiating                                                                 with respect to b and taking the
                                                                                                                                  ∗
limits. Consider now part (ii) of the proposition. Differentiating                                                                    with respect to                 and taking the
                                  ∗                                √                                      √                                                       ∗
limits yields:                                                                                                                                  . Hence,                    0⇔

     √                √       √
                                                                                                          ≡                  where                           0. Finally, as
                                      √        √


         1 by assumption,                                          for                   √2       1 .



A8: Proposition 7: For the limit case of  → 0 and b → :

         i)               The probability of licensing increases with b.




                                                                                                                                                                                    28
       ii)   There exists a decreasing function                   such that an increase in  decreases the

             probability of licensing if and only if                      .

Proof. The probability of licensing is ProbLic =
                            ∗   ∗ ⁄          ⁄       ⁄

                                                                  . Part (i) of the proposition follows directly
   ∗

from differentiating the probability of licensing with respect to b and taking the limits. Consider
now part (ii) of the proposition. Differentiating the probability of licensing with respect to           and
                                         √                                            √
taking the limits yields:                                                                                  .

                                                         √
Hence,               0⇔                                               ≡          . Finally notice
                                                     √


that            0,      0       1, and           1       0, which implies that there exist permissible values of

  both greater than and less than                for 0          1.




                                                                                                               29
